THE HISTORY OF THE LEAGUE.

Written in FRENCH By Monsieur MAIMBOVRG.

Translated into ENGLISH According to His Majesty's Command.

By Mr. DRYDEN.

-- Neque enim libertas gratior ulla est
Quam sub Rege Pio --
LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's-Head in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1684.

TO The King.
SIR,
HAving received the Honor of Your Majesty's Commands to Translate the History
of the League, I have applied my self with my utmost diligence to Obey them:
First by a thorough understanding of my Author, in which I was assisted by my
former knowledge of the French History, in general, and in particular of those
very Transactions, which he has so Faithfully and Judiciously related: Then by
giving his Thoughts the same Beauty in our Language which they had in the
Original; and which I most of all endeavored, the same force and perspicuity:
Both of which I hope I have performed with some Exactness, and without any
Considerable Mistake. But of this Your Majesty is the truest Judge, who are so
great a Master of the Original, and who having read this piece when it first
was published, can easily find out my Failings, but to my Comfort can more
easily forgive them: I confess I could never have laid hold on that Virtue of
Your Royal Clemency at a more unseasonable time; when your Enemies have so far
abused it, that Pardons are grown dangerous to Your Safety, and consequently to
the Welfare of Your Loyal Subjects: But frequent forgiveness is their
Encouragement, they have the Sanctuary in their Eye before they attempt the
Crime, and take all measures of Security, either not to need a Pardon, if they
strike the Blow, or to have it granted if they fail: Upon the whole matter Your
Majesty is not upon equal Terms with them, You are still forgiving, and they
still designing against Your Sacred Life; Your principle is Mercy, theirs
inveterate Malice; when one only Wards, and the other Strikes, the prospect is
sad on the defensive side. Hercules as the Poets tell us had no advantage on
Anteus by his often throwing him on ^he ground: for he laid him ^nely in his
Mothers Lap, which ^n effect was but doubling his Strength to renew the Combat.
These Sons of Earth are never to be trusted in their Mother Element: They must
be hoysted into the Air and Strangled. If the Experiment of Clemency were new,
if it had not been often tried without Effect, or rather with Effects quite
contrary to the intentions of Your Goodness, your Loyal Subjects are generous
enough to pity their Contrymen, though Offenders: But when that pity has
been always found to draw into example of greater Mischiefs; when they
continually behold both Your Majesty and themselves exposed to Dangers, the
Church, the Government, the Succession still threatened, Ingratitude so far from
being Converted by gentle means, that it is turned at last into the nature of
the damned, desirous of Revenge, and hardened in Impenitence; It Is time at
length, for self preservation to cry out for Justice, and to lay by Mildness
when it ceases to be a Virtue. Almighty God has hitherto Miraculously preserved
You; but who knows how long the Miracle will continue? His Ordinary Operations
are by second Causes, and then Reason will conclude that to be preserved, we
ought to use the lawful means of preservation. If on the other side it be thus
Argued, that of many Attempts one may possibly take place, if preventing
Justice be not employed against Offenders; What remains but that we implore the
Divine Assistance to Avert that Judgment: which is no more than to desire of
God to work another, and another, and in Conclusion a whole Series of Miracles.
This, Sir, is the general voice of all true Englishmen; I might call it the
Loyal Address of three Nations infinitely solicitous of Your Safety, which
includes their own Prosperity. It Is indeed an high presumption for a man so
inconsiderable as I am to present it, but Zeal, and dutiful Affection in an
Affair of this Importance, will make every good Subject a Counselor: ^Tis (in
my Opinion) the Test of Loyalty, and to be either a Friend or Foe to the
Government, needs no other distinction than to declare at this time, either for
Remisness, or Justice. I said at this time, because I look not on the Storm as
Overblown. It Is still a gusty kind of Weather: there is a kind of Sickness in
the Air; it seems indeed to be cleared up for some few hours; but the Wind
still blowing from the same Corner; and when new matter is gathered into a
body, it will not fail to bring it round and pour upon us a second Tempest. I
shall be glad to be found a false Prophet; but he was certainly Inspired, who
when he saw a little Cloud arising from the Sea, and that no bigger than a
hand, gave immediate notice to the King, that he might mount the Chariot,
before he was overtaken by the Storm. If so much Care was taken of an
Idolatrous King, an Usurper, a Persecutour, and a Tyrant, how much more
vigilant ought we to be in the Concernments of a Lawful Prince, a Father of
his Country, and a Defender of the Faith, who stands exposed by his too much
Mercy to the unwearied and endless Conspiracies of Paricides? He was a better
Prince than the former whom I mentioned out of the Sacred History, and the
Allusion comes yet more close, who stopped his hand after the third Arrow:
Three Victories were indeed obtained, but the effect of often shooting had been
the total Destruction of his Enemies. To come yet nearer, Henry the Fourth,
Your Royal Grandfather, whose Victories, and the Subversion of the League, are
the main Argument of this History, was a Prince most Clement in his Nature, he
forgave his Rebels, and received them all into Mercy, and some of them into
Favor, but it was not till he had fully vanquished them: they were sensible of
their Impiety, they submitted, and his Clemency was not extorted from him, it
was his Free-gift, and it was seasonably given. I wish the Case were here the
same, I confess it was not much unlike it at Your Majesty's happy Restoration,
yet so much ^f the parallel was then wanting, that the Amnesty you gave,
produced not all the desired Effects. For our Sects, are of a more obstinate
Nature than were those Leaguing Catholics, who were always for a King, and
yet more, the major part of them would have him of the Royal Stem: But our
Associators and Sectaries are men of Commonwealth principles, and though their
first stroke was only aimed at the immediate Succession, it was most manifest
that it would not there have ended; for at the same time they were hewing at
your Royal Prerogatives: So that the next Successor, if there had been any,
must have been a precarious Prince, and depended on them for the necessaries of
Life. But of these and more Outrageous proceedings, your Majesty has already
shown your self justly sensible in Your Declaration, after the Dissolution of
the last Parliament, which put an end to the Arbitrary Encroachments of a
Popular Faction: Since which time it has pleased Almighty God so to prosper
Your Affairs, that without searching into the secrets of Divine Providence,
it is evident Your Magnanimity and Resolution, next under him, have been the
immediate Cause of Your Safety and our present Happiness. By weathering of
which Storm, may I presume to say it without Flattery, You have performed a
Greater and more Glorious work than all the Conquests of Your Neighbors. For
it is not difficult for a Great Monarchy well united, and making use of
Advantages, to extend its Limits; but to be pressed with wants, surrounded with
dangers, Your Authority undermined in Popular Assemblies, Your Sacred Life
attempted by a Conspiracy, Your Royal Brother forced from Your Arms, in one
word to Govern a Kingdom which was either possessed, or turned into a Bedlam,
and yet in the midst of ruin to stand firm, undaunted, and resolved, and at
last to break through all these difficulties, and dispell them, this is indeed
an Action which is worthy the Grandson of Henry the Great. During all this
violence of Your Enemies Your Majesty has contended with Your natural Clemency
to make some Examples of Your Justice, and they themselves will acknowledge
that You have not urged the Law against them, but have been pressed and
constrained by it to inflict punishments in Your own defense, and in the mean
time to watch every Opportunity of showing Mercy, when there was the least
probability of Repentance: so that they who have suffered may be truly said to
have forced the Sword of Justice out of Your hand, and to have done Execution
on themselves. But by how much the more You have been willing to spare them, by
so much has their Impudence increased, and if by this Mildness they recover
from the Great Fro^t, which has almost blasted them to the roots, if these
venomous plants shoot out again, it will be a sad Comfort to say they have been
ungrateful, when it is Evident to Mankind that Ingratitude is their Nature:
That sort of pity which is proper for them, and may be of use to their
Conversion is to make them sensible of their Errors, and this Your Majesty out
of Your Fatherly Indulgence amongst other Experiments which You have made, is
pleased to allow them in this Book; which you have Commanded to be Translated
for the public benefit; that at least all such as are not wilfully blind, may
View in it, as in a Glass, their own deformities: For never was there a plainer
Parallel than of the Troubles of France, and of Great Britain; of their
Leagues, Covenants, Associations, and Ours; of their Calvinists, and our
Presbyterians: they are all of the same Family, and Titian's famous Table of
the Altar piece with the Pictures of Venetian Senators from Great-Grandfather
to Great-Grandson, shows not more the Resemblance of a Race than this: For as
there, so here, the Features are alike in all, there is nothing but the Age
that makes the difference, otherwise the Old man of an hundred and the Babe in
Swadling-clouts, that is to say, 1584, and 1684. have but a Century and a Sea
betwixt them, to be the same. But I have presumed too much upon Your Majesty's
time already, and this is not the place to show that resemblance, which is but
too manifest in the whole History. It Is enough to say Your Majesty has allowed
our Rebels a greater Favor than the Law; You have given them the Ben^fit of
their Clergy: if they can but read and will be honest enough to apply it, they
may be saved. God Almighty give an answerable success to this Your Royal Act of
Grace, may they all repent, and be united as the Body to their Head. May that
Treasury of Mercy which is within Your Royal Breast have leave to be powered
forth upon them, when they put themselves in a condition of receiving it; And
in the mean time permit me to Implore it humbly for my self, and let my
Presumption in this bold Address be forgiven to the Zeal which I have to Your
Service, and to the public good. To conclude, may You never have a worse
meaning Offender at Your feet, than him who besides his Duty and his Natural
inclinations, has all manner of Obligations to be perpetually,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, most Obedien^, and most faithful Subject,
and Servant John Dryden.


THE AUTHOR'S Dedication to the French King.
SIR,
FRance, which being well united, as we now behold it, under the Glorious Reign
of your Majesty, might give law to all the World; was upon the point of self
Destruction, by the division which was raised in it by two fatal Leagues of
Rebels: the one in the middle, and the other toward the latter end of the last
Age.

Heresy produced the first, against the true Religion: Ambition under the
Masque of Zeal gave birth to the second, with pretense of maintaining what the
other would have ruined: and both of them, though implacable Enemies to each
other, yet agreed in this, that each of them at diverse times, set up the
Standard of Rebellion against our Kings.

The crimes of the former I have set forth in the History of Calvinism, which
made that impious League in France, against the Lord and his Anointed; and I
discover the Wickedness of the latter in this Work, which I present to your
Majesty, as the fruit of my exact Obedience to those commands with which you
have been pleased to honor me. I have endeavored to perform them, with so
much the greater satisfaction to my self, because I believed that in reading
this History, the falsehood of some advantages which the Leaguers and Huguenots
have ascribed to themselves, may be easily discerned. These by boasting as they
frequently do, even at this day, that they set the Crown on the Head of King
Henry the Fourth; those that their League was the cause of his conversion. I
hope the world will soon be disabus'd of those mistakes; and that it will be
clearly seen, that they were the Catholics of the Royal Party, who next under
God, produced those two effects, so advantageous to France. We are owing for
neither of them to those two unhappy Leagues, which were the most dangerous
Enemies to the prosperity of the Kingdom: And it is manifest at this present
time, that the glory of triumphing over both of them, was reserved by the
Divine Providence, to our Kings of the Imperial Stem of Bourbon.

Henry the Fourth subdued and reduced the League of the false Zealots, by the
invincible Force of his Arms, and by the wonderful attractions of his
Clemency; Lewis the Just disarmed that of the Calvinists by the taking of
Rochelle, and other places, which those Heretics had molded into a kind of
Commonwealth, against their Sovereign. And Lewis the Great, without employing
other Arms than those of his Ardent Charity, and incomparable Zeal for the
Conversion of Protestants, accompanied by the Justice of his Laws, has reduced
it to that low condition, that we have reason to believe, we shall behold its
ruin, by the repentance of those, who being deluded and held back by their
Ministers, continue still in their erroneous belief, rather through ignorance
than malice. And this is it, which when accomplished will surpass even all
those other wonders which daily are beheld, under your most auspicious
Government.

Undoubtedly, Sir, your Majesty has performed by your Victorious Arms, your
generous goodness, and your more than Royal magnificence, all those great and
Heroique actions, which will ever be the admiration of the World, and
infinitely above the commendations which future Ages, in imitation of the
present, will consecrate to your immortal memory. I presume not to undertake
that subject, because it has already drained the praises of the noblest Pens,
which yet have not been able to raise us to that Idea (...) you, which we ought
justly to conceive: I shall only say, that what you have done with so much
Prudence, Justice, and Glory, by extending the French Monarchy to its ancient
bounds, and rendering it, as it is at present, as flourishing, and as much
respected by all the World, as it ever has been, under the greatest and most
renowned of all our Monarchs, is not so great in the sight of God, as what your
Majesty performs daily, with so much Piety, Zeal, and good success, in
augmenting the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and procuring the Conversion of our
Protestants, by those gentle and efficacious means which you have used.

This, Sir, is without exception, the most glorious of all your Conquests, and
while you continue to enjoy on earth that undisputed glory, which your other
actions have acquired you, is preparing an eternal triumph for you in the
Heavens.

It Is what is continually implored of God, in his most ardent Prayers, who
enjoying the abundant favors of your Majesty, lives at this day the most happy
of Mankind, under your most powerful Protection, and is most obliged to
continue all his life, with all imaginable Respect and Zeal,

Sir, Your Majesty's most Obedient and most Faithful Subject and Servant Louis
Maimbourg.


THE AUTHOR'S Advertisement to the READER.
SInce perhaps there are some, who may think themselves concerned in this
History, because they are the Grandchildren or Descendants of those who are
here mentioned, I desire them to consider, that Writing like a faithful
Historian, I am obliged sincerely to relate either the good or ill, which they
have done. If they find themselves offended, they must take their satisfaction
on those who have prescribed the Laws of History: let them give an account of
their own rules; for Historians are indispensably bound to follow them; and the
sum of our reputation consists in a punctual execution of their orders.

Thus as I pretend not to have deserved their thanks in speaking well of their
Relations, so I may reasonably conclude, that they ought not to wish me ill,
when I say what is not much to their advantage. I faithfully relate, what I
find written in good Authors, or in particular Memories, which I take for
good, after I have thoroughly examined them.

I do yet more; for considering that no man is bound to believe, when I say in
general that I have had the use of good Manuscripts, on whose credit I give you
what is not otherwhere to be had; I sincerely and particularly point out the
originals from whence I drew these truths; and am fully convinced, that every
Historian, who hopes to gain the belief of his Reader, ought to transact in the
same manner. For if there were no more to be done, than barely to say, I have
found such or such an extraordinary passag^ in an authentic Manuscript,
without giving a more particular account of it under pretense of being bound to
Secrecy, there is no kind of Fable which by this means might not be slurr'd
upon the Reader for a truth. An Author might tell many a lusty lie, but a
Reader, who were not a very credulous fool, or a very complaisant Gentleman,
would have a care of believing him. It Is for this reason that I have always
marked in my margents, the Books, Relations, and Memoires, whether Printed or
Manuscripts, from whence I take the substance of my Relations.

One of those Writers, of whom I have made most use, is Monsieur Peter Victor
Cayet; in his Nine years Chronology, containing the History of the Wars of
Henry the Fourth. Because he having always followed that Prince, since he was
placed in his service together with Monsieur de la Gaucherie (who was his
Preceptor) it is exceeding probable, that he was better informed of the passages
of those times, of which he was an eye witness, than others who had not that
advantage.

For what else concerns him, he was one of the most Learned and able Ministers
which our Protestants have ever had: and in that quality served Madam Catharine
the King's Sister, till about two years after the Conversion of that great
Prince, he acknowledged the true Catholic Religion, and made his Solemn
abjuration of Heresy at Paris. He also published the motives of his Conversion
in a Learned Treatise, which was received with great applause both in France
and in Foreign Countries; and his example, fortified with the strong reasons of
a man so able as he was, to which no solid answer was ever given, was
immediately followed by the Conversion of a great number of Protestants, who by
his means came to understand the falsehood of their Religion pretendedly
reformed.

This action so infinitely netled his former Brotherhood of Ministers, that
they grew outrageous against him. They ran down his reputation with full cry,
and endeavored to blacken it with a thousand horrible calumnies, with which
they stuffed their Libels, and amongst others, that which they have inserted
into the Memoires of the League, with the greatest villainy imaginable, taking
no notice of the solid and convincing answers he made them. Which proceeding of
theirs is sufficient to discover the falsity of all they have Written to Defame
him, according to the Libelling genius of Presbytery.

For, of all Heretics, none have been more cruel, or more foul-mouthed than
the Calvinists; none have revenged themselves of their pretended Enemies more
barbarously, either by open Arms, or private mischiefs, when the power was in
their hands; or more impudently with their Pens, and by their Libels, when they
had no other way to show their malice; murdering their reputations with all
sorts of injuries and impostures, who have once declared themselves against
their Party.

In effect, what have they not said to defame the memory of Monsieur de Sponde,
Lieutenant General in Rochelle, of Salette Counselor to the King of Navarre,
of Morlas Counselor of State and Superintendant of the Magazines of France,
as also of Du Fay, Clairville, Rohan, and a hundred others of their most
celebrated Ministers, who after having been esteemed amongst them for good men,
and looked on as the Leaders of their Consistory, are by a strange sort of
Metamorphosis, become on the sudden, Profligate Wretches, and the most infamous
of mankind, only for renouncing Calvinism? By how many Forgeries and Calumnies
have they endeavored to ruin the repute of all such Catholics as have the
most vigorously opposed their Heresy? History will furnish us with abundant
proofs: and we have but too many in the Fragments which Monsieur Le Laboreur
has given us of their insolent Satyrs, where they spare not the most inviolable
and Sacred things on Earth; not even their anointed Sovereigns.

For which Reason, that Writer in a certain Chapter of his Book, wherein he
mentions but a small parcel of those Libels, after he has said, that the most
venomous Satyrists, and the greatest Libertines, were those of the Huguenot
party, adds these memorable words. I should have been ashamed to have read all
those Libels, for the Blasphemies and Impieties with which they are filled, if
that very consideration had not been ayding to confirm me in the belief, that
there was more wickedness, than either error or blindness in their Doctrine;
and that their Morals were even more corrupt than their opinions.

He assures us in another place, that these new Evangelists, have made entire
Volumes of railing, of which he has seen above forty Manuscripts, and that
there needed no other arguments to decide the difference betwixt the two
Religions, and to elude the fair pretenses of these reforming Innovatours.

So, that all they have scribbled, with so much (I will not say violence but)
madness against the Sieur Cayet, immediately upon his Conversion, cannot do
him the least manner of prejudice, no more than their ridiculous prediction
wherein they foretold, that it would not be long before he would be neither
Huguenot nor Catholic but that he would set up a third party betwixt the two
Religions. For he ever continued to live so well amongst the Catholics, that
after he had given on all occasions large proofs, both of his Virtue and of his
Faith, he was thought worthy to receive the order of Priesthood, and the Degree
of Doctor in Divinity, and was Reader and Professor Royal of the Oriental
Tongues.

Now seeing in the year 1605, ten years after his Conversion, he had published
his Septenary Chronology, of the Peace which was made at Vervins in the year
1598. Some of the greatest Lords at Court, who understood his Merit and had
seen him with the King, (by whom he had the honor to be well known and much
esteemed,) obliged him to add to the History of the Peace, that of the War,
which that great Prince made during Nine years after his coming to the Crown,
till the Peace of Vervins: which he performed in the three Tomes of his Nine
years Chronology, Prin^ed at Paris, in the year 1608; in which before he
proceeds to the Reign of Henry the Fourth, he makes an abridgment of the most
considerable passages in the League, to the death of Henry the third. And it is
partly from this Author, and partly from such others, as were Eyewitnesses of
what they wrote, whether in Printed Books, or particular Memoires, that I have
drawn those things, which are related by me in this History. I am not therefore
my self the witness, nor as an Historian do I take upon me to decide the Merit
of these actions, whether they are blameable or praiseworthy; I am only the
Relater of them; and since in that quality, I pretend not to be believed on my
own bare word, and that I quote my Authors who are my Warrantees, as I have
done in all my Histories, I believe my self to stand exempted from any just
reproaches, which can be fastened on me for my writing.

On which Subject I think it may be truly said, that if instead of examining
matters of Fact, and enquiring whether they are truly or falsely represented;
that consideration be laid aside, and the question taken up, whether such or
such actions were good or bad, and matter of right pleaded, whether they
deserved to be condemned or praised; it would be but loss of time in
unprofitable discourses, in which an Historian is no way concerned. For in
conclusion, he is only answerable for such things as he reports, on the credit
of those from whom he had them; taking from each of them some particulars, of
which the rest are silent, and compiling out of all of them a new body of
History, which is of a quite different Mould and fashion, from any of the
Authors who have written before him.

And it is this, in which consists a great part of the delicacy and beauty of
these kinds of Works, and which produces this effect; that keeping always in
the most exact limits of truth, yet an Author may lawfully pretend to the
glory of the invention, having the satisfaction of setting forth a new History,
though Writing only the passages of a former Age, he can relate almost
nothing, but what has been written formerly, either in printed Books, or
Manuscripts; which though kept up in private and little known, are
notwithstanding, not the Work of him who writes the History.

As to what remains, none ought to wonder, that I make but one single Volume on
this Subject, though the matter of it is of vast extent. I take not upon me to
tell all that has been done, on occasion of the League, in all the Provinces,
nor to describe all the Sieges; the taking and surprising of so many places,
which were sometimes for the King, and at other times for the League; or all
those petty Skirmishes which have drawn, (if I may have liberty so to express
my self) such deluges of Blood from the veins of France. All these particulars
ought to be the ingredients of the General History of this Nation, under the
Reigns of the two last Henry's, which may be read in many famous Historians;
and principally in the last Tome of the late Monsieur de Mezeray, who has
surpassed himself, in that part of his great work.

I confine my undertaking within the compass of what is most essential in the
particular History of the League, and have only applied my self to the
discovery of its true Origin, to unriddle its intrigues and artifices, and
find out the most secret motives, by which the Heads of that Conspiracy have
acted, to which the magnificent Title of the Holy Union, has been given with so
much injustice: and in consequence of this, to make an exact description of the
principal actions, and the greatest and most signal events, which decided the
fortune of the League; and this in short is the Model of my Work.

As for the end which I proposed to my self, in conceiving it, I may boldly
say, that it was to give a plain understanding to all such, as shall read this
History, that all sorts of Associations which are formed against lawful
Sovereigns, particularly when the Conspiratours endeavor to disguise them,
under the specious pretense of Religion and Piety, as did the Huguenots and
Leaguers, are at all times most criminal in the sight of God, and most commonly
of unhappy and fatal Consequence to those, who are either the Authors or
Accomplices of the Crime.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOKS.
The first Book.
THe General model of the League, its Origin, its design, and the Success it
had quite contrary to the end which was proposed by it. In what it resembled
the League of Calvinism. The condition in which France was at the return of
Henry the third from Poland. The ill Counsel which he followed at the
beginning of his Reign, in renewing the War. The Commendation and Character of
that Prince. The surprising change which was found in his Carriage, and in his
Manners. The conjunction of the Politics, or Malcontents with the Huguenots.
Their pow^rfull Army Commanded by the Duke of Alanson. The Peace which was made
^y the interposition of the Queen Mother, which produced the Edict of May very
favorable to the Huguenots. This Edict is the occasion of the Birth of the
League. The League was first devised by the Cardinal of Lorrain at the Council
of Trent. He leaves the design behind him to his Nephew the Duke of Guise. The
Conference and secret Treaty betwixt that Duke, and Don John of Austria. By
what means Philip the Second discovered it, and made use of it to engage the
Duke to take up Arms. The Commendation of the Duke of Guise, and his Character.
How that Duke made use of the Lord of Humieres to begin the League. The Project
of Humieres, his Articles and his Progress. The Lord Lewis de la Trimouille,
declares himself Head of it in Poitou* The first Estates of Blois, wherein the
King, to weaken that party, declares himself Head of it, by advice of the Sieur
de Morvillier. The Commendation and Character of that Great man. What kind of
man the Advocate David was. His extravagant memoires. The Justification of Pope
Gregory the 13th. against the slander of the Huguenots, who would make him the
Author of it. The Edict of May revoked in the Estates. The War against the
Huguenots, suddenly followed by a Peace, and by the Edict of Poitiers, in their
favor, which enrages the Leaguers. The Restoration of the Order of the Holy
Ghost, by Henry the third, to make himself a new Militia against the League.
The Duke of Alanson in Flanders, where he is declared Duke of Brabant. This
occasions Philip the second to Press the Duke of Guise to declare himself. He
does it a little after the Death of the Duke of Alanson. The Conferences of the
Duke of Espernon with the King of Navarre, furnishes him with an occasion. He
makes use of the old Cardinal of Bourbon, and sets him up for a Stale. The
great weakness of that Cardinal. The History of the beginning, the Progress,
the Arts and the Designs of the League of the 16 of Paris. The Treaty of the
Duke of Guise with the Deputies of the King of Spain. He begins the War by
surprising many Towns. The general hatred to the Favorites, and especially to
the Duke of Espernon, causes many great Lords to enter into his Party. That
first War of the League hinders the Reunion of the Low Countries to the Crown,
and also the Ruin of the Huguenots. Marseilles and Bourdeaux secured from the
Attempts of the League. The generous Declaration of the King of Navarre against
the Leaguers, and the too mild Declaration of the King. The Conference and
Treaty of Nemours, and the Edict of July, in favor of the Leaguers against the
Huguenots. The Union of the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde with the
Marshal of Damville. The death of Gregory the 13th. and Creation of Sixtus
Quintus. The thundering Bull of that Pope against the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde. Discourses and Writings against that Bull. Protestation of the
King of Navarre, posted up at Rome. The War in Poitou, with the small success
of the Duke of Mayenne. The Marshalls Matignon and Biron, break his measures
underhand. The History of the unfortunate expedition of the Prince of Conde at
Angiers. The Dissolution of his Army. The Ordinances of the King against the
Huguenots. The form which they were made to sign at their Conversion. The
Embassy of the Protestant Princes of Germany, who demand of the King the
Revocation of his Edicts. The firm and generous Answer of the King, the
Conference of St. Brix, the Impostures of the Leaguers, the beginning of the
Brotherhood of Penitentiaries. The King establishes one in Paris, wherein he
enrolls himself. The Insolence of the Preachers of the League. The scandalous
Emblem which was made against the King. The Impudence of Dr. Poncet, and his
Punishment. The King uses his endeavors to no purpose for a Peace, and at last
resolves upon a War.
The Contents of the Second Book.
THe Duke of Guise complains to the King of the Infringments which he pretends
were made to the Treaty of Nemours. The Answer to those Complaints which were
found unreasonable. The Design of the King in the War which he is forced to
make. The Fortune and Rise of the Duke of Joyeuse, his good and ill qualities.
He commands the Royal Army against the King of Navarre. His Exploits in Poitou,
with those of the King of Navarre, the Battle of Courtras. The Difference of
the two Armies; how they were drawn up. The first shock advantageous to the
Duke, the general Defeat of his Army, the complete Victory of the King of
Navarre, his Heroic Valor in the Battle, and his admirable Clemency after the
Victory. He knows not how to use it, or will not, and for what reason. The
Review of the Army of the Reyters in the Plain of Strasbourgh. The Birth and
the Quality of the Baron of Dona. The Duke of Guise undertakes with small
Forces to ruin that great Army. The Spoils which it committed in Lorrain. The
Reasons why the Duke of Lorrain would not have the passage of that Army
opposed. The Description of the admirable Retreat of the Duke of Guise at Pont
St. Vincent. The Entry of the Reyters into France. The Duke of Guise
perpetually harrasses them. The Army Royal at Gien. The King goes to command it
in Person, and vigorously opposes the passage of the Reyters. Their
consternation, finding quite the contrary of what the French Huguenots had
promised them to appease them. They are led into La Beauce. The Duke of Guise
follows them. The description of the Attacque and Fight of Vimory, where he
surprises and defeats a Party of Reyters. A gallant Action of the Duke of
Mayenne. The Retreat at Mont Argis. The Sedition in the Foreign Army after that
Victory. The Arrival of the Prince of Conty, Lieutenant General to the King of
Navarre, restores them to Joy and Obedience. The Duke of Guise having reserved
to himself but 5000 men, fears not to follow the Reyters as far as Auneau. The
Situation of that Borough. The Baron of Dona Quarters there with the Reyters.
The Duke of Guise disposes himself to attacque them there. He gains the Captain
of the Castle, to have entrance by it into the Borough. The disposal of his
Army, the order of the Attacque, the Fight, the entire defeat of the Reyters
without any loss on his side. The Treaty of the Duke of Espernon with the
remainders of those Germans, their lamentable return. The Duke of Guise pursues
them to the Frontiers of Germany, he permits the County of Mont Beliard to be
plundered. The insolence of the Leaguers after that Victory. The too great
goodness of the King, of which the seditious make advantage. The horrible
flying out of Prevost Curate of St. Severin, and of Boucher Curate of St.
Bennet. The day of St. Severin. The scandalous Decree of the faction of
Doctors in the Sorbonne who were for the Sixteen. The Duke of Guise is refused
the Office of Admiral, which he demands for Brissac, and it is given to the
Duke of Espernon his Enemy. The Character and Pourtraict of that Duke. The Have
which is born him, the Indignation of the Duke of Guise for his refusal, and
for the advancement of his Enemy, makes him resolve to push his Fortune to the
utmost.
The Contents of the Third Book.
MAny Prodigies which presaged the evils to come. The Conference at Nancy of
all the Princes of the House of Lorrain. The Articles of the Request which they
present to the King against the Royal Authority. The Dissimulation of the King,
finding himself pressed to answer it precisely. The Death of the Prince of Conde,
the Encomium of that Prince, the King at length takes up a resolution to punish
the Sixteen. His preparations for it, the allarm of it taken by the Parisians,
they implore the Assistance of the Duke of Guise, who promises to give it.
Monsieur de Bellievre carries him the King's Orders to Soissons, which are that
he should not come to Paris. The Answer which he made to Bellievre
notwithstanding that Order. He comes to Paris. The description of his Entry,
with acclamations and extraordinary transports of joy of the Parisians. The
irresolution of the King, when he saw him at the Louvre. That which past at
their interview, and in the Queens Garden. The King commands all Strangers to
depart from Paris. The Leaguers oppose it, the description of the day of the
Barricades. The Count of Bris^ac begins them, they are carried on within 50
paces of the Louvre, the Duke of Guise stops the Citizens, and causes the
King's Soldiers to be Disarmed, and then reconducted into the Louvre. The true
design of the Duke, on the day of the Barricades, his excessive demands. The
King fearing to be incompast, departs out of Paris in a pityfull Equipage. The
Queen Mother negotiates an accommodation. The Duke of Guise cunningly Reingages
her in his interest, the request which he caused to be presented to the King,
containing Articles very prejudicial to his Authority, the dissimulation of the
King, the Banishment of the Duke of Espernon, the new Treaty of the King with
the Lords of the League, the Edict of Reunion against the Huguenots, in favor
of the League, the signs of the King's indignation which brake out from him,
and which he would have hidden, the Estates of Blois, the King's Speech, at
which the Leaguers are offended. The Duke of Guise is Master there, and causes
resolutions to be taken against the Authority of the King, and against the King
of Navarre, whom the Estates declare incapable of succeeding to the Crown, to
which the King will not consent. He at length takes a resolution to rid himself
of the Duke of Guise, the secret Counsel which is held concerning it. The
Advertisement which the Duke receives of it. The Counsel which is given him,
and which he will not follow. The History of his Tragical Death, the
Imprisonment of the principal Leaguers. Davila manifestly convinced of
falsehood, in the relation which he makes of the conference betwixt the King
and the Legate. The Note of the King to Cardinal Morosini. The Conference which
he had with that Cardinal, concerning the death of the Guises, the resentment
of Pope Sixtus for the same, the strong remonstrances which were made him by
the Cardinal of Joyeuse. The opinion of that Pope against the League, and
against the Guises. He suspends the expedition of all Bulls, till the King
shall send to demand absolution. What the Cardinal of Joyeuse, remonstrates to
him thereupon, the unprofitable declarations which the King makes to justify
his action, instead of preparing for War. The Duke of Mayenne flies from Lions
into Burgundy, where he is absolutely Master. The insurrection of Paris, on the
news of the death of the Guises. The furious Sermons of the Preachers of the
League, the horrible impudence of Guinces^re, Curate of St. Gervais, who
Preaching at St. Bar^holomew, Commands his Auditors to lift up their hands,
and also the first President. The horrible flying out of the Curate Pigenat, in
the Funeral Oration which he made for the Duke of Guise. The scandalous Decree
of the Sorbonne, in which it is declared that the French are released from
their Oath of Allegiance made to the King. The furious excess of rage in the
Leaguers, in pursuit of that decree against the King. They commit all sorts of
Outrages against him. The death of Queen Catharine of Medicis, her Commendation
and Pourtraict. The King sends the Duchess of Nemours to Paris, to appease the
Troubles there. The extravagance of the petty Feuillant, Bussy le Clerc carries
the Parliament Prisoners to the Bastille, the commendations of the first
President Achilles de Harley, the names of the Presidents, and of the
Counselors who followed him. The President Brisson at the Head of the new
Parliament of the League, which makes a solemn Oath to revenge the death of the
Guises. The Leaguers use enchantments against the King, at the same time that
Guinces^re accuses him of magic art in a full Congregation. The arrival of the
Duke of Mayenne, his Encomium and his Pourtraict. The King makes him great
offers in vain. His fortunate beginnings, the great number of Towns which throw
themselves into his party. His Entry into Paris. He weakens the Counsel of
Sixteen by increasing their number. He causes himself to be declared Lieutenant
General of the State and Crown of France. The King takes though too late, the
ways of force and rigor. The Reasons which oblige him to unite himself with
the King of Navarre, the treaty of that Union, the advantageous offers which
the King makes to the Lorrain Princes who refuse them, the fruitless Conference
of Cardinal Morosini with the Duke of Mayenne. The performance of the treaty of
the two Kings, their declarations, their interview at Tours. The Exploits of
the Duke of Mayenne. He assaults and carries the Suburbs of Tours. His return
without having performed ought beside. The Siege and Battle of Senlis, where
the Parisians are defeated, the defeat of the Troops of the Sieur de Saveuse by
Chastillon. The Exploits of the King, his March toward Paris, at Estampes he
receives the news of the thundering Monitory of Pope Sixtus against him, he
takes up his Quarters at St. Clou. The execrable Paricide ^ommitted on his
Person, his most Christian and most holy death.
The Contents of the Fourth Book.
HEnry the Fourth is acknowledged King of France, by the Catholics of his
Army, and on what Conditions. The Duke of Espernon forsakes him, and the Sieur
de Vitry goes over to the League, the King divides his Army into three Bodies,
and leads one of them into Normandy. The Duke of Mayenne causes the Counsel of
the Union to declare the old Cardinal of Bourbon King, under the name of
Charles the 10th. Books Written for the right of the Uncle against the Nephew,
and for the Nephew against the Uncle. The Duke of Mayenne takes the Field with
a powerful Army, and follows the King into Normandy. The Battle or great
Skirmishes at Arques, the King's Victory, and the Retreat of the Duke of
Mayenne, the Assault and taking of the Suburbs of Paris by the King. The
Intelligence held by the President De Blanc-Mesnil with the King. The praise of
that President. The Exploits of the King in the Provinces. The Propositions of
the Legate Cajetan, and of the Spaniards at the Co^nsell of the Union. The Sieur
de Villeroy, discovers the intrigue of it to the Duke of Mayenne, who resolves
to oppose them. The Commendation of that Great Minister of State. A new Decree
of the Sorbonne against Henry the 4th. The new Oath which the Legate orders to
be taken by the Leaguers. The King Besieges Dreux. The Duke of Mayenne Marches
to the releif of the Besieged, which occasions the battle of Yvry. The
description of that Battle, the order of the two Armies. The absolute Victory
of the King. His Exploits after his Victory. His repulse from before Sens, by
the Sieur de Chanvallon, he goes to besiege Paris. The condition of that Town
at that time. The provision made by the Duke of Nemours, to sustain the Siege.
The attacque of the Suburb of St. Martin by Lanoue, who was repulsed from it.
Why the King would not use force. An horrible Famine in Paris. The reasons
which made the Parisians resolve to endure all extremities, rather than
Surrender. The Fantastic Muster that was made by the Ecclesiastics, and the
Monks to encourage the people, the Legate Cajetan as he was looking on it in
danger to be killed. The Arrival of the Duke of Parma, who relieves Paris. Two
attempts upon Paris to surprise it, the one by Scalade, and the other by a
Strategem, neither of which succeed. The Retreat of the Duke of Parma. The
Siege and the taking of Chartres, by the management of Chastillon. The death of
that Count and his Commendation. The Duke of Parma renders the Duke of Mayenne
suspected to the King of Spain, who supports the Sixteen against him. Pope
Sixtus is disabus'd in favor of the King. Gregory the 14th. declares for the
League against the King, whom he Excommunicates. His Bull is condemned, and
produces no manner of effect. The conference of the Lorrain Princes at Rheims.
The President Jannin, goes for them into Spain. His praise and his artfull
Negotiation. King Philip unwarily declares his design, to cause the Infanta his
Daughter to be Elected Queen of France. Monsieur de Mayenne breaks with the
Spaniard. The Division amongst the Lorrain Princes. The Young Duke of Guise is
received by the Leaguers, who set him up against his Uncle. The horrible
violence of the Sixteen, who cause the President Brisson, and two Counselors
to be hanged. The just Revenge which the Duke of Mayenne takes for that action.
Their Faction totally pulled down by that Duke, and by the Honest Citizens. The
Siege of Roven. The Duke of Parma comes to its releif, the Skirmish of Aumale.
The brave Sally of Villiers Governor of Roven, the King raises his Siege, and
some few days after Besieges the Army of the Duke of Parma, the wonderful
Retreat of that Duke. The conference of du Plessis Mornay, and Villeroy for the
Peace, what it conduced toward the conversion of the King. The Popes, Innocent
the 9th. and Clement the 8th. for the League. The death of the Duke of Parma.
Monsieur de Mayenne at length assembles the General Estates of the League at
Paris. The History of those pretended Estates. Monsieur de Mayenne causes the
conference of Suresne to be therein accepted, in spite of the Legate. The
Speeches of the Archbishop of Bourges and of Lions, and the History of that
Conference. The Duke of Mayenne in the Estates artfully hinders the Election of
a King. The History of the conversion of Henry the 4th. The absolution which he
demands, and which at length is given him at Rome. The reduction of many Lords
and Towns of the League to the King's Service. His Entry into Paris, the
Skirmish at Fontain Francoise. The treaty of the Duke of Mayenne, and the Edict
which the King makes in his favor. The treaty of the Duke of Joyeuse, and his
second entry into the order of Capuchins, the treaty of the Duke of Merceaeur,
and the end of the League.
THE HISTORY OF THE LEAGUE.
LIB. I.
THough this work which I have undertaken is the natural sequel of the History
of Calvinism, it is yet most certain that the Subject which I treat has no
relation to that Heresy. For it was not the desire of preserving the
Catholic faith in France, nor any true motive of Religion which gave birth to
the League, as the common people who have not been able to penetrate into the
secret of that accursed Cabal, have always been persuaded. It was derived from
two passions which in all ages have produced most tragical Effects, I mean
Ambition and Hatred. It Is true, the multitude, and above all the Churchmen,
who believed they had occasion to be alarmed in matters of Religion, if he who
was called to the Crown by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, should obtain
it, these I say were seduced by that specious appearance of true Zeal, which
seemed to be the very Soul and Foundation of the League. But it will not be
difficult to discover in the process of this History, that the Authors of that
Conspiracy made use of those pretenses of Religion, to abuse the credulity, and
even the Piety of the People; and to make them impious, without their
perceiving it, by animating and arming them against their Kings, to root out
(if they had been able) the last remaining Stem of the Royal Stock; and to
plant on its Foundations, the dominion of a Foreigner.

And as none are able to execute an unjust Enterprise, but by means as
pernicious and execrable as the end it self which they propose, so will there
be manifest in the sequel and progress of the League, even yet more disorders
and mischiefs than ever Calvinism it self produced; against which alone it
seemed to have been armed: Yet in this particular, most resembling that
Formidable party which was raised against the Catholic Church, that, being
blasted as the Heresy had been by the Lord of Hosts, it was always
unsuccesfull in the Battles which it struck against the lawful power; And at
length overwhelmed with the same Engines which it had raised for the
destruction of the Government.

Truly, it is a surprising thing to find both in the design and sequel of the
League, by a miraculous order of the divine providence, revolutions altogether
contrary to those which were expected. On the one side the majestique House of
Bourbon, which was designed for ruin, gloriously raised to that supreme degree
of power in which we now behold it flourishing, to the wonder of the World; and
on the other side, that of two eminent Families which endeavored their own
advancement by its destruction, the one is already debased to the lowest
degree, and the other almost reduced to nothing. So different are the designs
of God, from those of men; and so little is there to be built on the
foundations of humane policy and prudence, when men have only passion for
their guides, under the counterfeit names of Piety and Religion.

It Is what I shall make evident, by unravelling the secrets and intrigues,
couched under the League, by exposing its criminal and ill managed
undertakings, which were almost always unsuccessfull; and by showing in the
close the issue it had, entirely opposite to its designs, by the exaltation of
those whom it endeavored to oppress. But is will be first necessary to
consider in what condition France then was, when this dangerous Association was
first formed, against the supreme Authority of our Kings.

Ann. 1574.
The ^ury of the Civil Wars which had laid the Kingdom desolate under the reign
of Charles the Ninth seemed to have almost wholly been extinguished after the
fourth Edict* of pacification, which was made at the Siege of Rochell; and if
the State was not altogether in a Calm, yet at least it was not tossed in any
violence of Tempest, when after the decease of the said King, his Brother
Henry, then King of Poland, returned to France, and took possession of a Crown
devolved on him by the right of Inheritance. He was a Prince, who being then
betwixt the years of 23, and 24, was endu'd with all Qualities and perfections
capable of rendering him one of the greatest and most accomplished Monarchs in
the World. For besides that his person was admirably shaped, that he was tall
of Stature, majestique in his Carriage, that the sound of his Voice, his Eyes,
and all the features of his Face, were infinitely sweet; that he had a solid
Judgment, a most happy Memory, a clear and discerning Understanding; that in
his behavior he had all the winning Graces which are required in a Prince, to
attract the love and respect of Subjects; It Is also certain, that no man could
possibly be more Liberal, more Magnificent, more Valiant, more Courteous, more
addicted to Religion, or more Eloquent than he was naturally and without Art.
To sum up all, he had wanted nothing to make himself and his Kingdom happy, had
he followed those wholesome Counsels which were first given him; and had he
still retained the noble ambition of continuing at least what he was formerly,
under the glorious name of the Duke of Anjou, which he had rendered so renowned
by a thousand gallant actions, and particularly by the famous Victories of
Iarnac and Montcontour.

The world was filled with those high Ideas, which it had conceived of his rare
merit, expecting from him the reestablishment of the Monarchy in its ancient
splendor, and nothing was capable of weakening that hope, but only the cruel
Massacre of St. Bartholomew, whereof he had been one of the most principal
Authors, which had rendered him extremely odious to the Protestants. And
therefore in his return from Poland, the Emperor Maximilian the Second, who
ruled the Empire in great tranquillity, notwithstanding the diversity of
opinions which divided his cares betwixt the Catholics and the Lutherans; the
Duke of Venice, and the most judicious members of that august Senate, which is
every where renowned for prudence; and after his return to France, the
Presidents, De Thou, and Harlay, the two Advocates General Pibra^ and du
Mesnil, and generally, all those who were most passionate for his greatness,
and the good of his Estate advised him to give peace to his Subjects of the
Religion pretendedly Reformed, to heal and cement that gaping wound, which had
run so much blood, in that fatal day of St. Bartholomew, and not to replunge
his Kingdom in that gulf of miseries, wherein it was almost ready to have
perished.

But the Chancellor de Birague, the Cardinal of Lorrain, and his Nephew the
Duke of Guise, (who at that time had no little part in the esteem and favor of
his Master,) and above all, the Queen Mother, Catharine de Medi^es, who
entirely governed him, and who after the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, dared no
longer to trust the Protestants. These I say, engaged him in the War which he
immediately made against them, and which was unsuccessfull to him. So that
after he had been shamefully repulsed, from before an inconsiderable Town in
Dauphine, they took Arms in all places, becoming more ^ierce and insolent than
ever, and made extraordinary progress, both in that part, in Provence, in
Languedoc, in Guienne, and Poitou.

That which rendered them so powerful, (which otherwise they had not been,)
was a party of Malcontents amongst the Catholics, who were called the
Politiques, because without touching on Religion, they pr^tested that they took
Arms only for the public good; for the relief and benefit of the people; and
to reform those grievances and disorders, which were apparent in the State: A
ground, which has always served for a pretense of Rebellion to those men, who
have raised themselves in opposition to their Kings and Masters, whom God
commands us to obey, though they should sometimes even abuse that power which
he has given them, not to destroy, or to demollish, as he speaks in his holy
Scriptures, but to edify, that is to say, to procure the good, and to establish
the happiness of their Subjects.

These Politiques then joined themselves to the Huguenots, according to the
resolution which they had taken at the Assembly held at Montpellier, in the
month of November, and year of our Lord, 1574. Henry de Montmorancy Marshal of
Damville, and Governor of Languedoc, who to maintain himself in that rich
Government, of which he was designed to be bereft, first formed this party of
the Politiques, into which he drew great numbers of the Nobles, his partisans
and Friends; and principally the Seigneurs de Thore, and de Meru-Montmorancy
his Brothers, the Count de Vantadour his Brother in Law, and the famous Henry
de la Tour d' Auvergn, Vicount de Turenne his Nephew, who was afterward
Marshal of France, Duke of Bouillon, Sovereign Prince of Sedan, and the great
Upholder of the Huguenots.

But that, Ann. 1575.
which made their power so formidable in the last result of things, was that
Monsieur, (the Duke of Alanson, only Brother of the King) and the King of
Navarre, detained at Court, and not very favorably treated, having made their
escape; the first of them, who, besides his own followers, was joined by a
considerable part of Damville's Troops, put himself at the head of the
Protestant Army, which was at the same time reinforced by the conjunction of
great Succors of Reyters and Lansquenets, whom the Prince of Conde had brought
from Germany, under the conduct of John Casimir, second Son to Frederick the
Elector Palatine. So that in the general Muster which was made of them near
Moulins in Bourbonnois, their Forces were found to consist of thirty five
thousand experienced Soldiers, which power it is most certain, the King was in
no condition to resist, in that miserable Estate, to which he had reduced
himself, by the prodigious change he had made, in his conduct and his carriage,
immediately after his succeeding to the Crown of France.

He was no longer that Victorious Duke of Anjou, who had gained in the world so
high a reputation, by so many gallant actions performed by him, in commanding
the Armies of the King his Brother, in quality of his Lieutenant General
through the whole Kingdom; but as if in assuming the Crown of the first and
most ancient Monarchy of Christendom, he had despoiled himself at the same
moment, by some fatal enchantment, of his Royal perfections, he plunged himself
into all the delights of a most ignominious idleness, with his favorites and
Minions, who were the Bloud-suckers, the Harpyes, and the scandal of all
France, which he seemed to have abandoned to their pillage by the immensness of
his prodigality. After this he rendered himself equally odious and contemptible
to his Subjects, both of the one Religion and the other, by his inconstant, and
fantastique manner of procedure. For he ran sometimes from the extremity of
debauchery into a fit of Religion, with processions and exercises of Penance,
which were taken for Hypocrisy, and then again, from Devotion into Debauchery,
as the present humor carried him away, and busied himself in a thousand mean
employments unworthy, I say, not of a King but of a man of common sense. All
which Davila the Historian, after his manner of drawing every thing into design
and Mystery, though at the expense of Truth, has endeavored to pass upon us,
for so many effects of a subtle, and over-refin'd policy. In conclusion, to
discharge himself of the burden of Royalty, which was grown wholly
insupportable to him in that lazy effeminate sort of Life, he relinquished all
the cares of Government to the Queen his Mother, who to continue him in that
humor, and by consequence to make her self absolute Mistress of affairs (which
was always her predominant passion,) failed not to furnish him from time to
time with new baits and allurements of voluptuousness, and all that was
needful for the shipwreck of virtue and honor, in a Court the most dissolute
which had ever been beheld in France.

Since it therefore pleased the Queen that War should be made against the
Huguenots, to infeeble them as much as was possible, that they might give no
trouble to her management of Business; So also when she saw them strengthened
with so formidable an Army, and her Son Alanson at their head, she began
immediately to apprehend, that at length, making themselves Masters, they might
degrade her from that Authority, which she was so ambitious to retain, by
whatsoever means, and consequently she resolved to make a peace, for the same
reasons, for which she undertook the War. And as she was undoubtedly the most
subtle Woman of her time, and had so great an Ascendant over all her Children,
that they were not able to withstand her, or to defend themselves against her
artifices, and withal would spare for nothing to compass her designs; she
managed so dexterously the minds of the Princes, and chief Officers of their
Army, in granting them with ease extraordinary Conditions, even such as were
beyond their hope; that she conjured down the Tempest which was about to have
been powered upon her head, and sheltered her self at the cost of our Religion,
by the fifth Edict of Pacification, which was as advantageous to the Huguenots
as they could desire. To whom, amongst other privileges was allowed the free
exercise of their pretended Religion in all the Cities of the Kingdom, and in
all other places, excepting only the Court and Paris, and the compass of two
Leagues about that City. This peace was infinitely distastefull to the
Catholics, because it served for a pretense, and gave a favorable occasion
to the birth of a design long time before premeditated, and hatched by him, who
was the first Author of that League whose History I write; and who began to
lay the Foundations of it, precisely at this point of time, in that manner as
shall immediately be related.

It Is certain that the first persons who were thus Associated, Ann. 1576.
under pretense of Religion against their Sovereigns were the Protestants: Then
when the Prince of Conde made himself their concealed head at the Conspiracy of
Amboise; and afterward overtly declared himself in beginning the first
troubles by the surprise of Orleans. That League, (which always was maintained
by force of Arms, by places of caution and security, which upon constraint were
granted to the Huguenots, and by the treasonable intelligence they held with
Strangers, even till the time wherein it was totally extinguished by the taking
of Rochell, and of their other Cities, and fortified places, under the Reign of
the late King of glorious memory,) obliged some Catholics oftentimes, to
unite themselves without the participation of the King in certain Provinces; as
particularly, in Languedoc, Guyenne, and Poitou, not only to de^end themselves
against the encroachments of the Huguenots, but also to attacque them, and to
exterminate them, if they had been able, from all those places, of which they
had possessed themselves in those Provinces. But he who employed his thoughts
at the utmost stretch in that affair, and was the first who invented the
project of a General League amongst the Catholics, under another Head than
the King, was the Cardinal of Lorrain, at that time assisting at the Council of
Trent.

That Prince, whose name is so well known in History, and who had a most prompt
and most piercing understanding, fiery by nature, impetuous, and violent,
endu'd with a rare, natural eloquence, more learning than could reasonably be
expected from a Person of his Quality, and which his eloquence made appear to
be much greater than it was; the boldest of any man alive in Councils, Cabals,
and in Contrivance of daring and vast designs, was also the most pusillanimous
and weakest man imaginable, when it came to the point of Execution, and that he
saw there was danger in the undertaking. But above all, it cannot be denied,
that through the whole series of his Life, he had a most immoderate passion for
the greatness of his Family. Insomuch, that when he saw the great Duke of
Guise, his Brother, at the highest point of glory after the Battle of Dreux,
where it might be said that he was the safeguard of our Religion, which
depended on that day's success, and that all the Council was filled with the
applause of that Hero, for so memorable a Victory, which he had in a manner
gained singly, after the defeat and taking of the Constable; he believed he had
found the favorable occasion he so ardently desired, to satisfy his ambition
to the full, by ^aising his Brother to that degree of Honor, in which he might
enjoy a Supreme, and Independent Authority, equal to the power of the greatest
Kings.

To this effect he was not wanting to represent to the Heads of that Assembly,
and by them to the Pope, that for the support of Religion, against which the
Heretics made so cruel War, particularly in France, there was no better
means, than to make a League into which should enter all the Princes and great
men whom they could procure, and above all the rest the King of Spain, who was
so powerful, and so zealous for the Catholic Faith. He added, that it was
necessary for the Pope, to declare himself the Protector of it, and to elect a
Head of it in the Kingdom, on whose Piety, Prudence, Valor and Experience, all
things might safely be reposed; and whom all Catholics should be under an
obligation to obey, till they had totally extirpated the Huguenots. This
proposal was received with great applause; and as their minds in that juncture
of time were wholly prepossessed with a high character of the wise conduct, the
perpetual felicity, and heroique virtues of the Victorious Duke of Guise, there
was not the least scruple remaining for them to conclude, that he alone was fit
to be the Head of ^o glorious an Undertaking. But the sad news of his Death,
arriving in the very upshot of that project, made this great design to vanish;
which the Cardinal, who never lost the imagination of it, nor the hope to make
it succeed at some other time, was not able to bring in play again till about
ten or eleven years after that accident: And then sound the young Duke of
Guise, Henry of Lorrain, his Nephew, both of age and of capacity, and entirely
disposed to its accomplishment. For at that time he proposed warmly the same
design to the Pope, and the King of Spain, who both entered without difficulty
into his opinion; though upon motives very different: The Pope, out of the
ardent desire he had to see Heresy altogether exterminated from this most
Christian Kingdom, and the Spaniard, out of a longing appetite to make his
advantage of our divisions, and those great disorders, which he foresaw the
League must inevitably cause in France.

The Duke also, on his side, who had much more ambition, and much less
affection to the public good, than his Father, embraced with all his Soul so
fair an occasion as was thereby put into his hand, of raising himself
immediately to so high a degree of Power and Authority, in becoming Head of a
Party, which in all appearance would ruin all the others, and give Law
universally to France. But the Death of his Uncle the Cardinal, which happened
at the same time, broke once more the measures of his ambitious design, which
notwithstanding he never did forsake, as being fully resolved to put it into
execution, on the first opportunity which should be offered. This he could not
find, till two years afterward, when Don John of Austria passed through
France, to take possession of his government of the Low Countries. That Prince
who traveled incognito, and had already made a secret correspondence with the
Duke of Guise, saw him at Ioinville, where after some conferences which they
had together, without other witness, than John d' Escovedo, Secretary to Don
John, they made a Treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive, mutually to
assist each other to their utmost Abilities, with their Friends, their Power,
and Forces, to render themselves absolute; the first in his government of the
Neatherlands, the second in that party, which he always hoped to form in
France, according to the project of his Uncle, under pretense of maintaining
the Catholic Religion in France against the Huguenots.

Though Historians are silent of this Treaty, I suppose, notwithstanding, that
it is undoubtedly true, considering what Monsieur de Peiresc, (a name so
celebrated by the learned) has written concerning it in his memoires; which was
grounded on what was related to him by Monsieur du Vair, who had it from
Antonio Perez.

For that famous Confident of the Amors betwixt Philip the second, and the
fair Princess of Eboli, acknowledged freely to President du Vair, that to
revenge himself of unfortunate Escovedo, who at his return to Spain would have
ruined him in the favor of the King, he gave him so well to understand, that
this Secretary of Don John was entrusted with all his most secret designs
against the State, and that having discovered the love of the King his Master,
he traversed his amorous intrigue, to serve the Prince of Eboli, on whom he had
dependence, that Philip who made not the least scruple to rid himself of any
one whom he suspected (as having not spared even his Son Don Carlos) made him
be assassinated. After which, having seized his Papers, he there found this
private Treaty, together with the memoires and instructions, containing the
whole foundation, and all the minutes of this project, with the means which the
Duke of Guise intended to make use of, to make his Enterprise succeed; of which
that King, who made advantage of every thing, most dexterously served himself
long time after, to engage the Duke so deeply in his Interests, that he was
never able to disentangle himself, as the sequel will declare. But in the mean
time, that Peace so advantageous to the Protestants, being made in the manner
above mentioned; the Duke believed, he had now a fair occasion to begin (by
making use of the discontents of the Catholics,) the forming of that League,
of which he intended a^terwards to declare himself the Head. How he managed
that affair, is next to be related.

Amongst the secret Articles of that Peace, so favorable to the Huguenots,
there was one, by which the Prince of Conde had granted to him the full
possession of the Government of Picardy; and besides it, for his farther
security, the important City of Peronne, the Garrison of which, should be
maintained at the King's expense. The Governor of Peronne, at that time, was
Jacques, Lord of Humieres, Encre, Bray, and many other places, who by other
large possessions of his own, and the Governments of Roye, and of Montdidier,
added to Peronne, was without dispute the most considerable, the wealthiest,
and most powerful Lord of all Picardy. Besides, that being of an illustrious
Birth, and Son of the Wise and Valiant John d' Humieres, (who had been
Lieutenant of the King in Piemont, and Governor to King Henry the Second,) he
was respected, loved and obeyed in that Province, where he was in a manner
absolute, both by the great Authority of his own merit, and that which was
derived to him from his Father.

This Nobleman, having formerly been ill used by the Lords of Montmorency, then
in power; and having been hindered by them, from entering into possession of a
fair Inheritance, which he claimed, as rightfully belonging to him, had put
himself into the interests of the former great Duke of Guise, a declared Enemy
of the Huguenots. And that Prince, to bind more ^irmly to his party, to the
cause of Religion, and to his Family, a Person so considerable, had procured
him to be Knight of the order of St. Michael, at that famous promotion which
was made by Francis the Second, on the Feast of St. Michael, in the year 1560.
Insomuch that the young Duke of Guise doubted not, that the concernment which
this Lord had to maintain himself in the Government of Peronne, joined in the
present posture of affairs with zeal, either true or apparent, for Religion,
and the particular obligations he had to the House of Guise, would render him
capable to be disposed of absolutely, in the execution of that high enterprise,
on which he was himself resolved; it seeming to him that he could never expect
a better opportunity, and that all things were conspiring in his favor.

In effect there was nothing wanting that could possibly concur, either of good
or ill, to make that succeed, which he had resolved so firmly for two years
together; and which in process of time was capable of raising him to a higher
pitch of greatness, than at present he could possibly conceive, how vast soever
those idea's of power and authority were, with which he flattered his ambitious
imagination. He was a Prince, at that time, in the flower and vigor of his
age, which was about thirty years; furnished with all those admirable qualities
and perfections both of Soul and Body, which are most capable of charming the
Hearts, and acquiring an absolute empire over the Souls of the people, who were
even enchanted with his graces, and almost idolized his person. For he was tall
of Stature, excellently well proportioned, altogether resembling what is
commonly attributed to Heroes; having the features of his face of a Masculine
Beauty, his Eyes sparkling and full of Fire, but whose lively and piercing
motion was tempered with a certain kind of sweetness. His forehead large,
smooth, and at all times serene, accompanied with an agreeable smile of his
mouth, which charmed even more than those obliging words, of which he was not
sparing to those who pressed about him; his complexion lively, white and red;
and which (...) honorable Scar remaining of the wound he had received by a
Pistol Bullet on his left Cheek, (when he defeated a party of the Reiters of
Casimir, which William de Montmorency, Sieur de Thore, conducted to the Duke of
Alanson,) heightn'd to much more advantage, than all the ornaments which the
vanity of Women has invented to add a luster to their Beauty. His walk was
grave and stately; yet neither Pride nor affectation appeared in it. In all his
Garb there was a certain inexpressible air of heroique greatness, which was
made up of sweetness, audacity and a noble haughtiness, without any thing of
shocking, or ungracefull in his whole composition. Which, altogether, inspired
a mixture of love, of awe, and of respect into his conversation.

This admirable outside was animated with an inside yet more wonderful, by
reason of those excellent qualities which he possessed, of a Soul that was
truly great; being liberal, magnificent in all things, sparing nothing to make
Dependents, and to gain persons of all sorts of conditions; but principally the
Nobility, and the Soldiers; civil, obliging, popular, always ready to do good
to those who addressed themselves to him; generous, magnanimous, not to be
moved to injure any man; no not to hurt even his greatest Enemies, but by
honorable ways; extremely persuasive in discourse, disguising his thoughts,
when he appeared most open; wise and prudent in his Counsels, bold, prompt and
valiant in the execution of them, cheerfully enduring all the hardships of War,
in common with the meanest Soldier, exposing his person, and contemning the
greatest dangers, to compass what he had once determined. But that which gave
the greatest luster to so many noble qualities, was the quite contrary of all
these, in the person of the King; who, by his ill conduct, rather than his ill
fortune, had lost the affection of the greatest part of France, and chiefly of
the Parisians, which by the highest disorder, that could possibly happen in a
State, was already transferred to him, who, from his subject began openly to
appear his Rival, in the thing of the World, whereof Monarchs are, and ought to
be, most jea^^^^^.

But as there is no Mine of Gold, where the precious Metal is so wholly pure,
as to be found unmixed with common Earth, so were these great natural
endowments of the Duke of Guise debased by the mixture of many imperfections
and vices; of which the principal was the insatiable desire of greatness and of
glory, and that vast Ambition, to which he made all other things subservient.
Besides which, he was rash, presumptuous, self-conceited, wedded to his own
opinions, and despising the advice of others, (though that more covertly,)
subtle, unsincere, no true friend, but centring all things in his own
interest; though he appeared the most obliging and the most officious of all
men, yet the good he did, was only in order to himself, always covering his
vast designs, by the specious pretense of public good, and the preservation
of the true Religion: too much confiding in his own good fortune, loosing and
hoodwincking himself in his prosperity, which gave him such a gust of the
present pleasure, that he could not think of taking his precautions for the
future; to conclude, giving up himself too much to the love of Women, of whom
nevertheless, without their being able to divert him from the care he took of
his great concern, he dexterously made use to advance it by their means and
without their knowing that they were his Instruments. Yet in spite of all
these vices, which were indeed most subtly managed, or disguised under the most
fair appearances, and veiled with a profound dissimulation, his virtues at the
same time glittering, and blazing over all the World, he was universally adored
and loved, particularly by the Parisians; and even they, who knowing him at the
bottom could not love him, yet could not hinder themselves from admiring him;
which doubtless is a most uncommon thing, that a man should be able at the same
time, to deserve and gain the peoples love, and the admiration of those who
were so clear sighted, as to discover his imperfections and vices.

Such was the famous Duke of Guise, whom that amiable mark of the Pistol
Bullet, which as I said he received in defeating some Troops of Calvinists and
Rebels, caused to be surnamed, THE SCARR'D. And who, in those times, of which I
Write, found all things sufficiently disposed to the execution of his
enterprise. For he found the Catholics provoked to his hand, by those
advantages which newly were granted to the Huguenots, the people dissatisfied,
and weary of the Government, not able to endure, that the wealth of the Nation
should be squandered on the King's Favorites, whom they called the Minions:
the genius of Queen Catharine, pleased with troubles, and even procuring them
to render her self necessary, to the end that recourse might be had to her for
Remedies; the Princes of the blood become suspected and odious to the three
orders of the Kingdom, either for favoring the Huguenots, or for being
publicly declared Calvinists, thereby renouncing the Catholic faith, as the
King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde had openly done; the King fallen into
the contempt of his Subjects, after having lost their love; himself, on the
contrary, loved and adored by the people, worshipped by the Parisians, followed
by the Nobility, indear'd to the Soldiers, having in his Interests all the
Princes of his Family, powerful in Offices and Governments, the multitude of
his Creatures, whom his own generosity, and that of his Father, had acquired
him; the favor of the Pope, the assistance of the Spaniard, ready at hand to
bear him up, and above all the seeming Justice of his cause, which he
industriously made known to all the world, to be that of Religion alone,
whereof, in the general opinion, he was the Protector and the Pillar; and for
the maintenance of which it was believed, that he had devoted himself against
the Huguenots, who had enterpriz'd to abolish it in the Kingdom. But the last
motive which fixed his resolution, was the extreme rancour he had against the
King, one of whose intimate Confidents he had been formerly, and who had now
abandoned him, by changing on the sudden the whole manner of his Conduct, and
giving himself entirely up to his Minions, who omitted no occasion of using the
Duke unworthily: For disdain, which is capable of hurrying to the last
extremities the greatest Souls, and the most sensible in point of Honor, made
hatred to succeed his first inclinations against him whom already he despised;
and hatred and contempt being joined with Ambition, incessantly pushed him
forwards, to make himself the head of a Party so powerful as that of the
League, which passed for Holy in the minds of the people, and to avail himself
of so fair an opportunity to form it.

For this effect, he immediately caused a project to be formally drawn, which
his Emissaries should endeavor to spread about the Kingdom amongst those
Catholics who appeared the most zealous and most simple, and those who were
known to be the most addicted to the House of Guise: in this Breviate which
they were obliged to subscribe, they promised by Oath, to obey him who should
be elected head of that holy Confederacy, which was made for maintaining of the
Catholic Religion, to cause due obedience to be rendered to the King and his
Successors, yet without prejudice to what should be ordained by the three
Estates, and to restore the Kingdom to its original Liberties, which it enjoyed
under the Reign of Clovis.

At the first there were found few Persons of Quality, and substantial Citizens
of Paris, who would venture to subscribe to that Association, because it was
not precisely known, who would dare to declare himself the Head of it: besides,
that by the vigilance of the first President Christopher de Thou, it was first
discovered, then dissipated, and at last dissolved with ease, with all those
secret Assemblies, which were already held in several quarters of the Town for
entering such persons into that infant League, whom either their Malice, their
false Zeal, or their Simplicity could engage. But the Duke of Guise having sent
his project to the Sieur d' Humieres, of whom he held himself assured, that
Lord, (who besides his obligation to the House of Guise, had also his
particular interest, and that of no less Consequence than the maintaining
himself in his Government of Peronne; which was taken from him by the Edict of
May, and that important place, ordered to be put into the hands of the Prince
of Conde,) managed the affair so well, by the credit he had in that Province,
that, as the Picards have always been zealous for the ancient Religion, he
engaged almost all the Towns, and all the Nobility of Picardy to declare
openly, that they would not receive the Prince of Conde, because as it was
urged in the Manifesto, which was published to justify their refusal of him,
that they certainly knew he was resolved to abolish the Catholic Faith, and
establish Calvinism throughout all Picardy.

It Is most certain that they would never be induced to receive that Prince into
Peronne, or any other part of that Government; and that to maintain themselves
against all those who would undertake to oblige them by force, to observe that
Article of the Peace, which they never would accept, the Picards were the first
to receive, by common agreement, and to publish in Peronne the Treaty of the
League, in twelve Articles, in which the most prudent of the Catholics
themselves, together with the Illustrious President Christopher de Thou,
observed many things which directly shocked the most Holy Laws both Divine and
Humane.

For it is obvious in the first Article, that the Catholic Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen, invoking the name of the Holy Trinity, make an Association and
League, offensive and defensive, betwixt themselves, without the permission,
privity, or consent of their King, and a King who was a Catholic as well as
they; which is directly opposite to the Law of God, who ordains that Subjects
should submit themselves, and be united to their Sovereign, as members to their
Head: even though he should exceed his bounds and be a Tyrant, provided that
there be no manifest sin, in what they are commanded to obey.

In the second, they refuse to render obedience to the King, unless it be
conformable to the Articles which shall be presented to him by the States,
which it shall not be lawful for him to contradict; or to act any thing in
prejudice of them. It Is evident that this overthrows the constitution of the
Monarchy, to establish in its place a certain kind of Aristocracy, against one
of our fundamental Laws, which ordains that the States should have only a
deliberative voice for the drawing up of their Petitions into Bills, and then
to present them with all humility to the King, who examines them in his
Council, and afterward passes what he finds to be just and reasonable. They
give not Law to him, who is their Master, and their Head, as the Electours of
the Empire, by certain capitulations do to the Emperors of Germany, who are
indeed the Heads, but not the Masters of the Empire; but, on the contrary they
receive it from their King, to whom they only make most humble Addresses, in
the Bills which they present to him.

In the third Article the Associates assume to themselves, to be Masters of the
State, while under pretense of reforming it, they ridiculously take upon them
to abrogate the Laws observed by our Ancestors, in the second and third race
of our Kings, and would establish the customs and u^ances, which were
practiced in the time of Clovis: which is just the same thing that certain
Enthusiasts sometimes have attempted in the Church, who under the specious
names of the Reformed and Primitive Church, endeavored to revive some ancient
Canons, which now for many ages have not been observed; and gave themselves the
liberty to condemn the practices, and customs authorized by the Church, of
remisness, and abuse; since it belongs only to the Church, according to the
diversity of times, and of occasions, to make new regulations, in its
Government and Discipline, without touching the capital points, that relate to
the Essentials of Religion.

To conclude, from the fourth Article to the twelfth, there are visible all the
marks, and the foulest characters of a Rebellion, formed and undertaken against
their Prince, particularly where there is promised an exact obedience in all
things, to the Head, whom they shall elect; and that they will employ their
lives and fortunes in his service; that in all Provinces they will levy
Soldiers, Anno 1577.
and raise money, for the support of the common cause; and that all those who
shall declare themselves against the League, shall be vigorously prosecuted by
the Associates, who shall revenge themselves without exception of person; which
in the true meaning, is no other thing, than the setting up a second King in
France in opposition to the first; against whom they engaged themselves to take
Arms in these terrible words, without exception of person, in case he should go
about to hinder so criminal an usurpation of his Royal Authority.

Such was the Copy of the League, in those twelve Articles which were Printed
and dispersed through all Christendom, as we are informed by an Author who was
contemporary to it; and has given it at large, in his History of the War under
Henry the Fourth: But being conceived in certain terms which are too bold, and
which manifestly shock the Royal Majesty, Monsieur d' Humieres a prudent man,
reduced them into a form, incomparably less odious, in which preserving the
Essentials of the League, of which he was Head in Picardy, he appears,
notwithstanding, to do nothing, but by the authority, and for the service of
the King.

Now as it is extremely important to understand thoroughly this Treaty of
Peronne, from which the League had its beginning, which is not to be found in
any of our Authors, and the Original of which I have, as it was signed by
almost two hundred Gentlemen, and after them, by the Magistrates, and Officers
of Peronne; I thought I should gratify my Readers by communicating to them a
piece so rare and so Authentic, which has luckily fallen into my hands. They
will be glad to see in it the Genius, the reach, and the policy of that
dextrous Governor, and Lieutenant to the King, who in declaring himself Head
of the League in his Province, and procuring it to be signed by so great a
number of Gentlemen, took so much care to make it manifest, at least in
appearance, that he intended always to give to Caesar what belonged to Caesar,
and that the Imperial rights should be inviolably preserved in that Treaty. For
they protest in all their Articles, and that with all manner of respect in the
most formal terms, that nothing shall be done, but with his good liking, and by
his Orders, though in pursuance of this, all things were managed to a quite
contrary end. But it frequently happens that men engage themselves with an
honest meaning, and are led by motives of true zeal, in some a^fairs, whereof
they foresee not the dangerous consequences, which produce such pernicious
effects, as never entered into their first imagination.

Behold then, this Treaty in eighteen Articles, together with the subscriptions
of the Gentlemen and Officers, whereof some are written in such awkward
Characters, and so little legible, that I could never have unriddled them,
without the assistence of a person very skillful in that difficult art of
deciphering all sorts of ancient writing. I mean Don John Hericart an ancient
man in Holy Orders, of the Abbey of St. Nicholas aux Bois in Picardy; who
having labored to place in their due order, and to copy out the Titles and
Authentic pi^c^s of many ancient Monasteries, applies himself at present, by
permission from my Lord Bishop of Laon his superior, to a work so necessary in
the Treasury of Chartres, and in the famous Library of the Abbey Royal of St.
Victor of Paris, where he has found wherewithal to exercise the talent of the
most knowing, on a great number of Titles, of more than six hundred years
standing, and above three thousand Manuscripts, of the rarest and most Ancient
sort, which compose the most precious part of that excellent and renowned
Library. It Is then to this man's industry that I am owing for this piece; and
to deal sincerely, so as not to pass my conjectures on the Reader for solid
truths, I have left Blanks for two of their names, because the letters which
composed them, could never be certainly distinguished.

The Association, made betwixt the Princes, Lords, Gentlemen and others, as
well of the State Ecclesiastique, as of the Noblesse and third Estate, Subjects
and Inhabitants of the Country of Picardy.
IN the Name of the Holy Trinity, and of the Communication of the precious body
of Jesus Christ. We have promised and sworn upon the Holy Gospels, and upon our
Lives, Honors, and Estates to pursue, and keep inviolably the things herein
agreed, and by us subscribed, on pain of being for ever declared forsworn and
infamous, and held to be men unworthy of all Gentility and Honor.

First of all, it being known, that the great practices and Conspiracies, made
against the honor of God, the Holy Catholic Church, and against the Estate
and Monarchy of this Realm of France, as well by some Subjects of the same as
by Foreigners, and the long and continual wars and Civil divisions have so much
weakened our Kings and reduced them to such necessity, that it is no longer
possible for them of themselves to sustain the expense convenient and expedient
for the preservation of our Religion, nor hereafter to maintain us under their
protection in surety of our persons, families, and fortunes, in which we have
heretofore received so much loss and damage.

We have judged it to be most necessary and seasonable, to render, in the first
place, the honor which we owe to God, to the manutention of our Catholic
Religion, and even to show our selves more affectionate for the preservation of
it, than such as are strayed from the good Religion, are for the advancement of
a new and false opinion.

And to this effect, we swear and promise, to employ our selves with all our
powers to restore and to maintain the exercise of our said Catholic,
Apostolic and Roman Religion, in which we and our Predecessors have been
educated, and in which we resolve to live and die.

And we swear and promise also all obedience, honor and most humble service,
to King Henry now reigning, whom God has given us for our Sovereign King and
Lord, lawfully called, by the Law of the Kingdom, to the succession of his
Predecessors, and after him to all the Posterity of the House of Valois, and
others who after those of the said house of Valois, sha^^ be called by the Law
of the Realm to the Crown.

And upon the obedience and service which we are obliged by all manner of
rights to render to our said King Henry now reigning, we farther promise to
employ our lives and fortunes, for the preservation of his Authority, and
execution of such commandments, as by him and his Lieutenant Generals or others
having power from him, shall be made to us, as well for maintaining the only
exercise of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion in France, as for
bringing to reason and full submission his Rebellious Subjects; without
acknowledging any other whomsoever, than himself, and such as shall be by him
set in command over us.

And forasmuch as by the goodness of our said King and Sovereign Lord, it has
pleased him to do so much good to all his Subjects of his Realm, as to convoke
them to a general Assembly of all the Orders and Estates of it, thereby to
understand all the complaints and grievances of his said Subjects, and to make
a good and holy Reformation of the abuses and disorders which have continued of
a long time in the said Realm, hoping that God will give us some good
resolutions, by the means of so good and great an Assembly, we promise, and
swear to employ our lives and fortunes, for the entire performance of the
Resolution of the said Estates; in that especially which shall depend on the
retention of our Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, the preservation
of the greatness and authority of our King, the good and quiet of our Country,
all of this notwithstanding, without prejudice to our Liberties and ancient
Franchises, which we understand to be always maintained and preserved fully and
entirely.

And farther to the effect abovesaid, all of us who have hereunto subscribed,
promise to keep our selves in a readiness, well armed, mounted, and accompanied
according to our Qualities, immediately upon advertisement given us, to put in
Execution that which shall be commanded on the part of the King our said
Sovereign Lord, by his Lieutenant Generals, or others having from him Power and
Authority, as well for the preservation of our Province, as for going
otherwhere, if it be needful for the preservation of our said Religion, and
service of his said Majesty.

Without its being lawful or permitted to Gentlemen, to place themselves or
take employment under other Cornets, than those of the Head, or the
Baily-weeks, in which they shall be resident, unless by permission and leave of
the King, or his Lieutenant, or at least of the Head Elect of the said
Association, who is Monsieur de Humieres, to whom we promise to render all
honor and obedience.

To the Council (or assistance) of whom shall be be called and employed, six of
the Principal Gentlemen of the Province, and others of quality and fidelity
requisite, with the advice of whom, to provide for the execution of the said
matters, for the expense, entertainment, and other charges, convenient and
necessary for such effect, according as the said Country can furnish and
supply.

For which said Country we offer for such effect, even to the number of four
Cornets, men on horseback, well mounted and armed, and eleven Ensigns of Foot,
as well for preservation of the said Province, as to be otherwhere employed as
need shall be; yet no ways comprehending the Companies of the old
establishment, in consideration that they are obliged to serve otherwhere. So
that for every of the said Companies, be they Horse or Foot, three Gentlemen of
the Country, men of valor and experience shall be named to the King's
Lieutenant, or to him who shall be empowered for that purpose from his Majesty,
out of the said three, to make election and choice of one.

And because such Levies cannot be made without great costs and expenses; and
that it is most just in such an Emergency, and necessity, to employ all means,
which are in the power of any man, there shall be levied and collected upon the
Country the sums of money convenient and necessary for this, by the advice of
the King's Lieutenant, or other empowered from his Majesty, which he shall
afterward be petitioned, to authorize and make valid, as being for an occasion
so holy and so express, as is the service of God, and that of his said Majesty:
in which levying of Money, nevertheless, no Gentlemen are or shall be meant to
be comprehended, considering that they will do personal service, or set out Men
with Horses and Arms, according as it shall be ordained for them to do by the
Head of the League, or by others deputed by him.

And for the more easy execution of the said employments, there shall be in
every Baily-wick or Seneschals Court of the said Country, deputed, one or two
Gentlemen, or others of capacity and fidelity requisite, to give information of
the means, and understand particularly upon the places, that which shall be
needful to be done, to report it afterward, and instruct concerning it, those
who shall be employed by the Governor, or Lieutenant from the King, or some
other empowered from him.

And if any of the said Catholics of the said Province, after having been
required to enter into the present Association, shall make difficulty, or use
delays, considering that it is only for the honor of God, the service of the
King, the good and quiet of our Country, he shall be held in all the Province
for an Enemy of God, and a Desertour of his Religion, a Rebel to his King, a
betrayer of his Country, and by common agreement and consent of all good men,
shall be abandoned by all, and left, and exposed to all injuries and
oppressions which can come upon him, without ever being received into company,
friendship and alliance of the underwritten Associats and Confederates; who
have all promised friendship and good intelligence amongst themselves, for the
manutention of their Religion, service of the King, and preservation of their
Country, with their Persons, Fortunes, and Families.

We promise, farthermore, to keep one another, under the obedience and
authority of his Majesty, in all surety and quiet, and to preserve and defend
our selves from all oppression of others. And if there shall happen any
difference or quarrel amongst us, it shall be composed by the Lieutenant
General of the King, and those who by him shall be called, who shall cause to
be executed, under the good pl^asure and Authority of his said Majesty that
which shall be advised to be just and reasonable for our reconciliation.

And in case it be advised for the service of the King, the good and quiet of
the said Province and to compass the ends of our intentions, that it be
necessary to hold correspondence with other neighboring Provinces, we promise
to succor and aid them, with all our power and means, in such manner as shall
be ordered by the Lieutenant of the King, or other having power from his
Majesty.

And we also promise to employ our selves with all our power and means to
preserve and keep the State Ecclesiastique from all oppression and injury, and
if by way of action or otherwise, any one attempts to do them damage, be it in
their persons or their goods, to oppose such person, and defend them, as being
united and Associated with them, for the defense and preservation of the Honor
of God and our Religion.

And because it is not our intention any ways to molest those of the new
opinion, who will contain themselves from enterprizing any thing against the
Honor of God, the Service of the King, the good and quiet of his Subjects, we
promise to preserve them, without their being any ways put in trouble for their
Consciences, or molested in their persons, goods, honors and families,
Provided that they do not contravene in any sort, that which shall be by his
Majesty ordained, after the conclusion of the General Estates, or any thing
whatsoever of the said Catholic Religion.

And forasmuch as this cause ought to be common indifferently to all persons
who make profession to live in the Catholic Religion; we the Underwritten,
admit and receive into the present Union all persons placed in Authority, and
Estate of Judicature and Justice, Corporations of Towns, and Commonalties of
the same, and generally all others of the third Estate, living Catholiquely, as
it has been said, promising in like manner to maintain, preserve and keep them
from all violence and oppression, be it in their persons or their goods, every
one in his quality and vocation.

We have promised and sworn to keep these Articles abovesaid; and to observe
them from point to point, without ever contravening them, and without having
regard to any ^riendship, kindred and alliance, which we may have to any
person, of any quality and Religion whatsoever, who shall oppose or break the
Commandments and Ordinances of the King, the good and quiet of this Kingdom,
and in like manner to keep secret the present Association, without any
communication of it, or making any person whomsoever privy to it, but only
such as shall be of the present Association; The which we will swear, and
affirm also upon our Consciences, and Honors, and under the penalties here
abovementioned: The whole under the Authority of the King; renouncing all other
Associations; if any have been heretofore made. J. Humieres. L. Chaulnes. F. de
Poix. A. de Monchy. S. de Monchy. De Payllart. Mailly. Anthony de Gouy. Loys
de Querecques. Lovis d' Estournel. Adrian de Boufflers. F. de St. Blymond. De
Rouveroy. Jehan de Baynast. L. de Warluzer. C. de Trerquefmen. Philippes de
Marle. Loys de Belloy. A. du Caurel. Pierre de Trouville. A. Ravye. J. de
Baynast. De Callonne. De Lancry. F. d' Aumalle. A. de La Riviere. A. de
Humieres. Du Biez. Lameth. F. Ramerelle. Boncourt. De Glisy. A. du Hamel. De
Prouville. L. de Valpergue. Raul de Ponquet. L. de Margival. De Lauzeray. M.
Relly. Francois Hanicque. J. de Belloy. Claude d' Ally. Loys de Festart. Du
Chastellet. P. de Mailleseu. Charles de Croy. N. Le Roy. Jehan du Bos. N. de la
Ward. V. de Brioys. Claude de Bu^y. J. Lamire. Dessosses. N. de Amerval.
Philippes de Toigny. Guy Damiette. Jehap de Flavigny. N. de Hangest. De
Forceville. P. de Canrry. Charles d' Offay. J. de Belleval. A. de La Chapelle.
Loys d' Ancbont. P. Truffier. J. de Senicourt. De Mons. Du Plassier. Nicholas
de Lontines. N. de St. Blymon. J. d' Amyens. De Forceville. De Monthomer. P. de
Bernettz. De Rambures. F. d' Acheu. Flour de Baynast. Ogier de Maintenant. F.
de Bacouel. De Pende. D. Aumalle. Montoyvry. De Sailly. Aseuillers. Francois de
Conty. O. de Poquesolle. Saint Maure. De Rambures. Claude de Crequy. Jacque d'
Ally. Adrien de Jrin. Jherosme de Fertin. Le Caron. De Montehuyot. P. de La
Roche. R. de Mailly. J. de Forceville. La Gualterye. N. de la Vieufville. A. de
la Vieufville. A. de Mercatel. De Perrin. De Milly. Josse de Saveuses. Jehan de
Bernetz. A. de Boves. Jehan d' Estourmal. E. de St. Omer. Belleforiere. Antoine
d' Ardre. De la Vieufville. A. de Monchy. J. de Maulde. J. de la Pasture. L. Du
Moulin. A. du Quesnoy. J. de Milly. Francois de Saveuses. De Lauzeray. Loys de
Moy. J. de Hallencourt. De Saint Anne. De Villers. J. de Happlaincourt. A. de
Broye. Claude de Warsusell. Jehan de Caron. Charles de Caron. A. De Lameth. A.
de Camousson. M. Destourmel. Anthoine de Hamel. Gilles de Boffles. P. de Saint
Deliz. Heilly. J. de Belloy. A. de Biencourt. Jehan de Biencourt. Claude de
Pontaine. De Nointel. Pierre de Bloletiery. Adrian Picquet. Anthoine Le Blond.
Jehan Picquet. Le Grand. De Basincourt. Augustine d' Auxy. J. de Verdellot. E.
Tassart. J. de Montain. Genvoys. Du Menil. J. Dey. J. Tassart. Assevillers.
Charles de Pontaine. Du Breulle. De Hauteville. A. de Mousquet. J. du Nas.
Sebastien de Hangre. J. de la Motte. De Hacqueville. A. Noyelle. C. de Pas.
Charles du Plessier. Saint Leu Simon. Du Castle. Francois du Castle. A. de
Ptolly. A. de Estourmel. A. de L' Orme Jehan du Bosc. Jehan de Bernetz. De
Louchart. De Warmade. A. de Guiery. Du Caurell. De Sericourt. Du Mesnis. De
Cambray. A. de Lancry. Du Puids. Domons. A. de Bithisy. De Marmicourt. Berton.
Pierre Le Cat.


This day being the thirteenth of February, in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy seven: We the Underwritten being congregated and Assembled, in
the Townhouse of Peronne, according to the appointment of the High and
Puissant Lord, Messire Jacques de Humieres, Knight of the order of the King our
Sovereign, Counselor in his Privy Council, his Chamberlain in Ordinary,
Captain of fifty men of Arms of the Establishment, Governor an^ Lieutenant for
his Majesty, of Peronne, Montdidier and Roye, and Head of the Holy League and
Catholic Association in Picardy, have to the said Lord made Oath, and Sworn
upon the Holy Evangelists, to keep inviolably and punctually the Articles here
above written, of the said Association and Holy League, and that for the Body
and Inhabitants of the said Town, representing them: Done in the Chamber of the
said Town the day, etc. abovesaid; and we have all signed it. Claude Le Fevre,
Register of the said Town. L. Desmerliers. F. de Hen. L. Le Fevre. F. Morel. De
Flamicourt. Le Caron. Le Saige. Dudel. F. de La Motte. Le Fevre, Register.


Whatsoever Resolution was taken to keep this Treaty secret, it was impossible
to be long concealed being signed by so many men who were desirous to have
Copies of it. Accordingly, there were found some both amongst the Catholics
and Protestants, who were not wanting to answer it publicly, endeavoring to
make appear in their Writings, the injustice which they said was couched under
those fair and specious protestations which they demonstrate, particularly in
this, that without the King's privity, there was made a Confederation and
Association of many persons of all the Orders of the States, who combine
themselves to reform the Abuses of it: That another Head of it was chosen, and
not the King. That they bind themselves by a new invented Oath to that Head,
and that they take upon them to make Levies of men and money. It Is without all
manner of dispute, they say, that this directly strikes at the foundation of
the Monarchy, if done without the express permission of the King, to whom only
it belongs to give out those orders which he judges to be necessary for the
safety of the State, and the well being of his Subjects.

Moreover as great evils are commonly contagious, and that a dangerous
Conspiracy is like Poison, which beginning from any little part, if Sword and
Fire and violent Remedies be not immediately applied, and if the Scorpion be
not crushed upon the place which he has envenomed, spreads it self swiftly
through the whole body: thus the example of the Picards for want of immediate
acting with force and vigor, against the Authors of that tendency to
Rebellion, was quickly followed in all the Provinces of the Kingdom, by many
persons of all ranks and conditions, who under the fair pretense of Religion,
enrolled themselves covertly in the League. But he who most openly declared for
it, was the Lord Louis de Trimouille who was afterward Governor of Poitou,
and the Pais d' Aunis. For as he was most extremely incensed against the
Huguenots, who because he was not favorable to them, took all occasions of
revenge upon him, and by frequent inrodes, had made spoil of his Estate, and
was on very ill terms with the Count de Lude, Governor of that Province, and a
faithful Servant of the King; He failed not to take advantage of the occasion
which was offered him, to be head of a powerful party against them, and to
declare himself for the League, into which he caused a great part of the Towns
and Nobility, both of Touraine and of Poitou, to enter.

Thus was the League framed, and became in a short time exceeding powerful;
while the King who could not possibly be ignorant of the designs and practices,
or the dangerous consequences of it, either durst not, or would not oppose it:
whether it were that fatal drowsiness which oppressed him, plunged as he was in
his delights, or the laziness of an unactive ef^eminate way of living, averse
from labor, and application to business; or were it that the Queen Mother who
at that time was no other ways linked to the Guises, than by her hatred to the
Huguenots, who had endeavored to ruin her, made the King believe that he
ought to serve himself of that League, to infeeble and abase them, by taking
from them all those great advantages, which they had not obtained but through
compulsion in the last Peace, so odious and insupportable to the Catholics.

It Is what was driven at and done in the first Estates, which were held at
Bloys; which began in the month of November the same year, 1576. The
Protestants had importunately demanded them, when the last Treaty was
concluded; not at all doubting as they were in conjunction with the Politiques,
but that they should be the strongest, and that consequently they should
procure the Edict of May to be confirmed, which was so favorable to them. But
they were deceived in their expectations, for it was found that by the
management of the Queen Mother and the Guises, and by the Money which was
distributed in the particular Assemblies of the Provinces, not only that
almost all the Deputies were Catholics, but that also the greatest part of
them were of the League. Insomuch that without regard to the protestations of
the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, against the States; and after the
refusal, which those two Princes, and the Marshal d' Amville, Head of the
Politiques had made, to assist in them, to which they had vigorously been
solicited by a solemn deputation; the Edict of May was finally revoked, and
prohibition made to all exercise of the pretended Reformation, and all the
Ministers, and Directours were banished out of the Realm by a new Edict, till
such time as they should be converted. Behold in what manner the Protestants,
who as yet were not apprehensive of the League, found by experience that it was
stronger than their party in the Estates according as the King had hoped it
would be.

But on the otherside that Prince, immediately perceived that it acted not with
less artifice and vigor, to w^aken his own authority, than to pull down the
party of the Huguenots. For they had the impudence to demand of him that the
Articles which should be approved by the three Estates, should pass into
inviolable Laws, which it should not be in his power to alter, and that for
other Articles, concerning which the States could not agree amongst themselves;
his Majesty might be permitted to ordain, conformably to what should be found
just and reasonable, by the advice of the Princes of the blood, and twelve of
the Deputies. Which to speak properly, was to divest the King of his Sovereign
Power in making Ordinances and Laws, and to transfer it to the States,
according to the project of the League.

This undoubtedly surpised the King, but he was yet much more amazed when at
the same time, there was shown him the Memoires of one David an Advocate, which
contained certain propositions the most villainous and detestable that can
possibly be imagined.

For that Fellow who was only a pitiful wretched Advocate, a Defender of the
worst Causes, and such as were given for quite lost, lays down at the first for
an undoubted Principle, That the Benediction of Popes, and principally that of
Stephen the Second, was bestowed on the Race of Charlemain alone, and not
extended to that of Hugh Capet, an Usurper of the Crown; And that on the
contrary, he by that Usurpation has drawn on his Descendants those Curses, the
deplorable effects of which have been seen in so many Heresies; and above all
others, in that of the Calvinists, who have laid waste the Kingdom by Civil
Wars, which after the fruitless Victories gained against them, have been
succeeded by a Peace, most advantageous to those Heretics: that, this
notwithstanding, God Almighty whose property it is to draw good out of evil,
has made use of that extreme horror which all good Catholics have conceived
for that unhappy Peace, to restore the Princes of Lorrain to their rights, who
are as that Advocate pretends, and as the people were made to believe, the true
Posterity of Charlemain. After this he makes a fulsome panegyrique of them,
extolling them infinitely above the Princes of the Blood, against whom he most
satyrically declaims. Farther, he proposes the means which ought to be
employed, to animate the people against them, and to oppress them in the
States, as well as the Huguenots; advising that the King should be obliged to
declare War against them, and to give the command of his Arms to the Duke of
Guise. Then adds, that when the Duke, who will quickly have suppressed and
rooted out the Huguenots, shall have made himself Master of the principal Towns
of the Kingdom; and that all things shall bend under the power of the League;
he shall cause the process of Monsieur, the King's Brother to be made, as a
manifest abetter of the Huguenots; and after having shaved the King, and
confined him to a Covent, he shall receive the Crown, with the benediction of
the Pope; shall make the Council of Trent to be received, shall subject the
French, without any restriction to the obedience of the Holy See, and abolish
all the pretended liberties of the Gallicane Church.

It must be acknowledged with all ingenuity, that it is not credible as some
have vainly imagined, that the Huguenots forged those horrible Memoires, and
caused them to be printed, to blacken and make odious the name of the League
amongst all good Catholics. For it is most certain that this Advocate, who
hated mortally the Huguenots, by whom he had been ill used, and upon that
account had entirely devoted himself to the League, undertook of his own head a
Voyage to Rome, to carry thither those Memoires, and to present them to the
Pope, in hopes to engage him in that party; and that having been killed by some
accident in his Journey, those papers were found in his Portmantue. Besides,
that the Lord John de Vivonne, the King's Ambassador in Spain, sent him a copy
of them, assuring him that they had been shown to King Philip. But in plain
truth, there is great probability, that those Memoires were only the product
of the foolish cracked brained Advocate, who being discomposed by his passion
discharged upon the paper all his furious imaginations and chimerique dreams,
in forming this ridiculous project, which no man can read, without discovering
at the same time all the signs of a distracted mind.

The Duke though full of ambition, was not so weak to fall into the Snare of
those extravagances; and if he were so haughty, as to soar in his imagination
to the possession of a Crown, it was not till of a long time afterward; and
when he saw that Monsieur being dead, and the King without appearance of having
any Children, the succession was of course to fall on the King of Navarre, whom
the Duke under pretense that the said King was a relapsed Heretic, believed
that he might easily cause to be excluded from the Crown, and that in his place
he might himself obtain it.

What I may lay down for a certain truth is, that there was never any piece so
black, so malicious, and so gross as was that of a certain Protestant Writer,
who has compiled the Memoires of the League, and who would have it, that those
Articles which are contained in the miserable Writings of David the Advocate,
were only the extract of a secret Council held at Rome, in the Consistory, by
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, to exterminate the Royal race, and to set the
Princes of Lorrain upon the Throne. For it is so false, that this Pope who was
always very prudent and moderate, should do any thing of that nature, that he
constantly persisted in refusing to approve the League, whatever instance was
made to him; though it was promised him, to engage him by his interest, that
they would begin the execution of this great project, by chasing the Huguenots
out of the County of Avignon and Dauphine, to take from them all means of
troubling the possessions of the Church, and of passing into Italy: Nay
farther, he replied to those who were plying him incessantly, and proposing the
welfare and security of Religion, thereby to make him countenance the League,
that it was in his opinion but a pretext, and that those who made it had other
secret designs, which they had no mind to publish in the Articles of their
Association.

In the mean time, those pernicious Memoires, with those impudent propositions
of the Associators, induced the King to a strong apprehension, that the League
was not formed more against the Huguenots, than it was for the subversion of
his Authority. And, as he wanted magnanimity of to take up a bold and generous
resolution, of oppressing so dangerous a Faction in its infancy, which he might
have performed; so to deliver himself from that formidable danger, he took
indirect courses, and much unworthy of a King, following the timorous Counsels
of the Sieur de Morvillier. That famous John de Morvillier, who was Bishop of
Orleans, and afterward Guard de Ld. Keeper.
Sceaux of France after the disgrace and retirement of the Chancellor de l'
Hospital, was undoubtedly one of the greatest men of those times; and he who
had the greatest credit and Authority in Council; generally valued, and
beloved, for his excellent qualities, and above all for the mildness of his
temper, and his rare moderation, joined with an exact prudence, and large
capacity, not only in the management of affairs, but also in all sorts of
Sciences, proper for a man of his profession, and even in the studies of
Humanity, Poetry and Eloquence.

This he frequently made appear, in those excellent Speeches which he drew up
for our Kings, and principally that which Henry the third pronounced with so
much applause, in the first Estates, at Blois. For this reason he was extremely
importuned to write the History of his times, because it was the general belief
that no man could acquit himself of so noble an employment, with so much
eloquence, judgment and politeness as himself. But, as that Subject was not
very favorable to the two last Kings, Charles the Ninth, and Henry under whom
he lived, that on the one side, he was too generous, and too grateful to write
any thing, which might dishonor and blast the memory of those two Princes his
Benefactours, and that on the other side, he was too sincere, and too honest to
betray and suppress the truth, with any shameful baseness, or to alter and
corrupt it with mean flatteries, altogether unworthy of the majesty, and noble
freedom of History, he said pleasantly to his friends, in excusing himself from
their solicitations, that he was too much a Servant of the Kings his good
Masters, to undertake the writing of their Lives. A notable saying; the sense
of which examined to the bottom ought to oblige great Princes to do great
things, thereby to furnish a sincere Historian with materials, whereby to
render their Memory immortal, and to fill the World with the glory of their
names. But on the otherside it gives an Historian to understand, that when he
is obliged to write a History, neither fear, nor hope, nor threatenings, nor
rewards, nor hatred, nor love, nor partiality, nor prejudice to any person,
ought to turn him one single step out of the direct road of truth, for which he
is accountable to his Reader, if he intends not to draw upon himself the
contempt and indignation of posterity, which will never fail to condemn him for
an Impostor and a public poisoner.

Thus you have the Character of this great Man; in whom nothing could be
censured, but that he was somewhat too timorous, and that he had not firmness
and resolution enough to give generous and bold advice in pressing emergencies,
so to have cut up by the root those great evils which threatened the Government.
Therefore, when he saw the King, (who was yet more fearful than himself,)
amazed at the audaciousness of the Associators; And likewise was of opinion,
that if he would have ventured, it was not in his power to have suppressed the
League, knowing also full well that, the Queen Mother who was his Master's
Oracle, and who underhand supported the League, would never consent, that the
ruin of it should be endeavored, and that, on the other side he was very
desirous to draw the King out of this present plunge; betwixt both, he took a
trimming kind of way, by which he thought he should be able to preserve the
Royal Authority, without the destruction of the League. To this effect, not
doubting but that in case it were not prevented, they would choose a Head, who
had power to turn it against the King himself, he advised him to declare in
that Assembly, that far from opposing the League of the Cath^liques against the
Huguenots, he was resolved to make himself the Head of it, which they dared not
to refuse him, and by that means would make himself the disposer of it, and
provide that nothing should be enterpris'd against him.

And truly this was no ill expedient, to check, and give a stop for some time
to the execution of those vast designs, which were formed by the Authors of
the League. But it must also be confessed, that by signing, this, and causing
it to be signed by others, as he did, when he declared himself the Head of it,
he authorized those very Articles, which manifestly shocked his Royal
Authority; put the League in condition, and even gave it a lawful right,
according to that Treaty which he approved, to act against himself, in case he
should disturb it, or finally break with it, which was impossible not to happen
in some time; he infringed the Peace which he had given his Subjects by the
Edict of Pacification granted to the Huguenots, and precipitated France into
that bottomless gulf of miseries, that are inseparable from a Civil War, which
himself renewed, and which was of small advantage to him.

I shall not describe the particularities of it, because they belong to the
History of France, and have no relation to the League, which on that occasion
acted not, on its own account, against the Authority of the King. By whose
orders two Armies, the one commanded by the Duke d' Alanson, the other by the
Duke de Mayenne, attacqu'd the Huguenots; from whom they took La Charity,
Issoite, Brouage and some other places of less importance; I shall only say,
that the King quickly growing weary of the Cares of War, which were not
^uitable to his humor, loving, as he passionately did, his ease and pleasures,
A new Peace ensued, which was granted to the Huguenots at the end of September,
in the same year, by the Edict of Poitiers, little different from that of May,
only with this reservation, that the exercise of Calvinism was restrained
within the limits of the former pacifications, and that it was forbidden, in
the Marquisate of Salusses, and the County of Avignon.

Farther, Anno 1579.
it was during this interval of Peace, which was highly displeasing to the
Leaguers, that the King to strengthen himself against the League, by making
himself Creatures, who should inviolably be engaged to his Service by an Oath,
more particular and more solemn, than that which universally obliged his
Subjects; established and solemnis'd his new Order of the Holy Ghost, which is
even at this day, and after the entire revolution of an Age, one of the most
illustrious marks of Honor, wherewith our Kings are accustomed to reward the
merit and service of the Princes, and the most signalized Nobility. It has been
for a long time believed, that Henry the Third, was the Institutour and Founder
of this Order; and himself used whatever means he could, to have this opinion
established in the World: But at length the truth is broken out, which with
whatever arts it is suppressed can never fail, either sooner or later, to exert
it self, and to render to a man's person or his memory, the blame or praise
that he deserves.

For it has been found out by a way, which cannot be suspected of forgery, and
which leaves no farther doubt concerning this Subject, that the beginning of
this Order is to be referred to another Prince of the Imperial blood of France,
I mean Louis d' Anjou styled of Tarento, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, who in
the year, one thousand three hundred fifty two, instituted in the Castle Del
Vovo at Naples, the Order of the Knights of the Holy Ghost, on the precise day
of Pentecost; by its constitution containing 25 chapters, and which, in the
style of those times, thus begins.

We Lewis, by the Grace of God, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, to the Honor of
the Holy Ghost, on whose day we were by Grace, Crowned King of our Realms, for
the exaltation of Chivalry, and increase of Honor, have ordaind, to make a
Society of Knights, who shall be called the Knights of the Holy Ghost, of right
intention; and the said Knights shall be to the Number of three hundred, of
which we, as beginner and founder of that said Order, shall be Prince, as also
ought to be all our Successors, King of Jerusalem and Sicily.

But seeing he died without Children by Queen Jane the first, his Wife, and
that after his death there happened strange revolutions in that Kingdom, that
order so far perished with him, that the memory of it had not remained, if the
Original of that constitution of King Lewis, had not by some accident fallen
into the possession of the Republique of Venice, who made a present of it to
Henry the third, at his return from Poland, as of a piece that was very rare,
and which coming from a Prince of the blood Royal, of our Kings deserved well
to be preserved in the Archives of France, which was not the intention of King
Henry.

For finding this Order to be excellent, and besides, that it was exactly
calculated for him, because being born on Whitsunday, he had been Crowned
afterward on the same day King of Poland, and some time after King of France,
as Lewis of Tarento, had received his two Crowns of Jerusalem and Sicily, on
the like day before, he took a fancy to renew that Order, four years after his
Coronation. But desiring to be esteemed the Author of it, he changed the
Collar, where he placed certain Ciphers, to which has been substituted in
following times, the Coat of Arms in manner of a Trophy, as it is at present to
be seen. And after he had transcribed, what best pleased him, from the Statutes
of that Order, he commanded Monsieur de Chiverny to burn the Original, thereby
totally to extinguish the m^mory of it.

But that Minister though most faithful to his Master, believing not that he
was bound to be the Executioner of that Order, this rare piece descended to the
Bishop of Chartres, his Son; from whom by succession of time, it fell into the
hands of the late President de Maisons, as it is related by Monsieur le
Laboreur, who has given us the Copy at large, in the second Tome of his
Additions to the Memoires of Monsieur de Castelnau. In this manner, this famous
Order was rather restored than instituted, by King Henry the Third, to combine
a new Militia of Knights, which he might oppose against the Leaguers, who were
much dissatisfied with the Peace, which he had given to the Huguenots.

Nevertheless this Peace was not so well observed, but that from time to time
they created new disturbances, which two or three years afterward kindled the
seventh War, after the refusal they had made, to surrender those cautionary
Towns which had been granted them for a certain time, which was then expired,
and by their surprisal of some other places. But this War was ended in the
second year after the conferences of Nerac, and Fleix, by a peace which lasted
four or five years till the League, which from the time wherein the King had
made himself their Head, had not dared to attempt any thing, all on the sudden
declared it self against him, under another, the occasion of which I am going
to relate.

Immediately after the peace was made, the Catholics and Huguenots, whom the
Civil War had armed against each other, joined themselves to serve in the Army
of the Duke d' Alanson, who being declared Duke of Brabant, by the States of
the United Provinces of the Netherlands, entered as it were in Triumph into
Cambray, after he had raised the Seige, which the Duke of Parma had laid to it.
And after having been proclaimed a Sovereign Prince in Antwerp, and been
received at Bruges and Ghent, in the same quality, he continued the War,
assisted underhand by Succors from France, and openly by the Queen of England,
that he might drive the Spaniard out of all the Low Countries. On the other
side, the Queen Mother, who had pretentions to the Crown of Portugal, had also
sent a gallant Navy to the Tercera Islands, under the Command of her Kinsman
Philip Strozzi, and openly protected Don Antonio; who after having lost the
Battle before Lisbonne, was fled for refuge into France, and yet ceased not to
dispute that Crown against King Philip of Spain. For which reason that Prince,
who followed the Steps of his Father, and of Ferdinand, his great Grandfather
by the Mother's side, in this as in all other things, thought of nothing more
than how to greaten himself at our expense, and applied himself with his utmost
vigor, to foment new divisions amongst us, to hinder us from giving him
trouble in his own Estates.

To this effect he used his best endeavors, and employed all his arts to
engage the King of Navarre and Damville, who after the death of his elder
Brother, Ann. 1581.
was now Duke of Montmorancy, to break the peace, and renew the War in favor
of the Huguenots; making not the least scruple on that occasion, to act against
the true interest of Religion, at the same time when he upbraided for the same
thing, those who in reality made the war in Flanders, out of no other
consideration, but the relief of an oppressed people of which even the greatest
part were Catholics. But seeing that design of his could not possibly
succeed, for certain reasons which belong not to this History, he turned his
thoughts toward the Duke of Guise, and gave orders to his Ambassador Mendoza,
to omit nothing which might oblige him, to make the League take Arms, which was
already exceeding powerful, and of which he might absolutely dispose, as being
the principal Author, and the very Soul of it.

The Duke who was intrepid, and bold even to rashness, when he had once
resolved upon his Business, was notwithstanding very subtle, and
clear-sighted, wary, and prudent enough to take just measures, and not to
engage in any Enterprise, of which he was not as much assured as man could be,
to have all the means of making it succeed. From thence it proceeded, that he
resisted for a long time the temptation of great Sums that were offered him,
and held out against the threatenings of the Ambassador, to discover the secret
treaty he had made with Don John of Austria, the Original of which was in the
King of Spain's possession; nay even against the pressing solicitations of his
Brothers, and the rest of the Princes of his House, who being more impatient
and less discerning than he, thought every minute an age till he declared
himself. But at last arrived the fatal moment, in which, after having well
examined all matters, he thought that every thing concurred not only to favor
the design he had always had, to make himself Head of the Catholic League,
but also to carry his hopes much farther than his ambition, vast as it was, had
yet led him to imagine.

In Effect, on the one side, the King was reduced to a lower condition than he
ever was before: Ann. 1582.
his immense prodigality in a thousand things, altogether unworthy of the Royal
Majesty, and of no profit to the State; Anno 158^.
the pomp, the pride, and the insupportable insolence of his Favorites; his
fantastique way of living, which hurried him incessantly from one ext^eme into
another, from retirement and solitude to a City life, from Debauchery into
Devotion, and such a Devotion as passed in the peoples minds for a mere
Mummery, into those Processions of Penitents, habited in Sackcloth of several
colors, where he walked himself with his disciplining whip at his Girdle
against the Genius of a Nation, which loves to serve God in spirit and in
truth; these and a thousand such like things wholly contrary to our customs,
and to the use of his Predecessors, had drawn upon him such a detestation, and
so great a contempt from the greatest part of his Subjects, that against the
ordinary practice of the French, who adore their Kings, there were given a
thousand public marks, and principally in Paris, of the aversion which they
had for him.

On the other side, all things conspired in favor of the Duke of Guise, to
raise him to that high degree of power, which seemed to equal him with the King
himself, who in effect already looked on him as his Rival; and as such hated
him, without daring as yet to enterprise ought against him to prevent his
designs, or to shelter himself against the mischief which he apprehended from
him. The people united themselves to him, as to their Protector, and the
pillar of Religion.

Most of the great men at Court, discontented at the Government, threw
themselves into his party; the Ladies, from whom the Minions could hold
nothing, disclosed to him all the secrets of the Cabinet, to revenge themselves
of the King whom they hated mortally, for certain reasons not so fit to be
divulged. He was offered to have the Dukes of Lorrain and Savoy in his
interests, who both hoped to draw great advantages from the League, and
principally so powerful a Prince as the King of Spain, who (...) him two
hundred thousand Livres of ^ension, besides the Sums he would furnish for the
levying of his Troops.

These were indeed strong temptations to a Prince of his humor, and who was
inclined to throw at all. But that which gave the last stroke to his
determination, was the death of Monsieur the King's only Brother: who after
his unsuccessfull Enterprise on Antwerp, having been constrained to return
dishonourably into France, died at Chateau de Thierry, Anno 158^.
either of Melancholy, or of his old Debauches, or as the common report was of
poison. For about that time it was, that believing the King would have no
Children, and that the King of Navarre might be excluded with ease from the
succession, for more than one reason, (which he hoped to make authentic
rather by force of Arms, than by the Writings of the Doctors of his Faction)
and that the Queen Mother who hated her Son-in-Law Navarre, had the same
inclination to exclude him, thereby to advance her Grandchild the Prince of
Lorrain to the Kingdom, he raised his imagination to higher hopes than what he
had formerly conceived, when first the Cardinal of Lorrain his Uncle, had drawn
the platform of a Catholic League, whereof he might make himself the Head.
And on these grounds, without farther balancing the matter, he resolved to take
up Arms, and to make War against the King. But to make so criminal an
enterprise more plausible, there was yet wanting a pretense, which in some sort
might justify his actions to the World; And fortune produced it for him to as
much advantage as he could desire, almost at the same time when he had taken up
so strange a resolution.

As it was impossible that so great a Conspiracy should be managed with such
secrecy, that the King should not be advertised of it, (which in effect he was
from many hands.) That Prince (who had suffered his natural courage to be made
effeminate by the laziness of a voluptuous retired Life, was become exceeding
timorous, and incapable of coming to any resolution within himself, to stifle
in its birth so horrible a mischief by some generous action, and some Master
stroke,) had a desire to have near him his Brother-in-Law the King of Navarre,
whom he acknowledged according to the Salique Law, for the Heir presumptive of
the Crown, and knew him to be the man, who was most capable of breaking all the
measures of the Duke of Guise. But foreseeing that in order to this, it was
necessary that he who was Head of the Huguenots, should first renounce his
Heresy, and be reconciled to the Catholic Church, he dispatched the Duke of
Espernon to him in Guyenne, to persuade him to a thing of so much consequence,
to the ree^tablishment of his fortune, and his true interest both Spiritual and
Temporal. As that Prince had always protested with much sincerity, that he was
of no obstinate disposition, and that he was most ready to embrace the truth,
when once it were made to appear such to him, he received the Duke with
exceeding kindness; to whom he gave a private audience in his Closset, in
presence of the Lord of Roquelaure his Confident, of a Minister of his own
Religion, and of the President Ferrier his Chancellor; who had always leaned
to the opinion of the Huguenots, of which at last he made profession in his
extreme old age, and some little time before his death.

In plain terms, that Conference was not managed very regularly, nor with
extraordinary sincerity; for Espernon and Roquelaure, who were no great
Doctors, proposed nothing but human^ reasons for his Conversion; and alleged
no stronger arguments, than what were drawn from the Crown of France, which
they preferred incomparably beyond the Psalms of Marot, the Lords Supper, and
all the Sermons of the Ministers. But on the other side, the Minister and the
President, who were much better versed in disputation than the two Courtiers,
to destroy those weak reasons of secular interest, produced no motives, but
what they affirmed to be altogether spiritual and Soul saving, and the word of
God, which they expounded to their own meaning, to which those Noble Lords who
understood nothing of those matters, had not the least syllable to answer.
Insomuch that the King of Navarre, who piqu'd himself extremely upon the point
of generosity, looking on it as a most honorable action, for him to undervalue
so great a Crown at the rate of selling his Conscience and Religion for it; the
Duke was constrained to return as he came, without having obtained any thing
toward the satisfaction of the King. But what was yet more displeasing in that
affair, was that Monsieur du Plessis Mornay, a Gentleman of an ancient and
illustrious Family, a great wit, whose Learning was extraordinary for a man of
his Quality, and who besides made use of his Pen, as well as of his Sword; but
above all, a most zealous Protestant, put this conference into writing, which
he also published; in which having exposed what was urged on both sides, he
pretends to manifest the advantage which his Religion had against the
Catholic, and that the King of Navarre being evidently convinced of the
weakness of our cause, was thereby more than ever confirmed in his own opinion.

This was the reason why the Factious and the Catholics, who were heated with
a false Zeal, began to fly out immoderately against the King, whom they charged
with a thousand horrible calumnies, publishing in all places that he kept
Correspondence with the King of Navarre, to whom he had sent Espernon, not with
intention of converting him, but rather of confirming him in his Errors, as it
appeared sufficiently by the proceedings of that conference, where nothing was
urged to the advantage of Religion, but on the contrary, all things in favor
of Huguenotism. And it happening almost at the same time, that the King (in order
to hinder the Huguenots from resuming their Arms against the Leaguers, who had
provoked them by committing many outrages against them without punishment,)
thought himself obliged to grant them that prolongation which the King of
Navarre demanded, of the term prescribed them for the surrender of those
cautionary places which they had allowed them for their security by the last
Edict of Peace: upon this pretense, the Factious cast off all manner of respect
to him. They clamoured publicly on all occasions, the Preachers from their
Pulpits, the Curats from their Desks, the Confessors from their Seats, the
Professors in their Lectures, and the Doctors in their Resolutions which they
gave, that they were obliged to oppose themselves with all their power against
the King, who supported the Navarrois, and resolved, that Heretical and
stubborn as he was, he should nevertheless succeed to the Crown, which ought
never to be suffered, they being assured that this Prince, if ever he should
mount the Throne, would abolish the Catholic Religion in France.

This was that terrible machine, of which they made use to stir up the people;
over whom there is nothing has so great a power as the motive of Religion, when
once they are persuaded that it will be forceably taken from them; And to bind
them inseparably to the interests and party of the Duke of Guise, whom they
believed to have no other aim in all his undertakings, than the maintenance and
defense of it against Heretics, and the favorers ^ of Heresy. But because
that Prince, who was extremely dextrous, had no mind that it should be
perceived he acted for himself, under so specious a pretense; besides that he
believed not that it was safe for him, as yet to attempt the exclusion of the
other Princes of the blood from the Succession, they being good Catholics, he
endeavored to draw subtilely into his party, the good old Man Charles,
Cardinal of Bourbon. And indeed having with great Presents gained the Sieur de
Rubempre who absolutely governed him; he persuaded him without much trouble,
that he being by one degree of kindred nearer to the King, than was the King of
Navarre his Nephew, it was to him that the Kingdom belonged of right, in case
the King should dye without Children, and that the whole Catholic League
would stand by him in his claim with all their power, were it only to hinder
an Huguenot Prince from succeeding to the Crown.

There needed not more to shake a Soul, so weak as was that of the Cardinal de
Bourbon; who devout as he was, yet suffered himself to be seduced with the vain
hopes of Reigning. He was so much dazzled with the false glittering of an
imaginary Crown, that without considering he had already one of Cardinalship,
that threescore and ten came fast upon him, and that the King was not yet
thirty five, he quitted his Habit of Cardinal, and appeared in public, like
the General of an Army; which gave men occasion to believe, that his great age
had at least crazed his understanding, if it had not quite destroyed it. Yet
this opinion of the world hindered him not, from calling himself the Heir
presumptive of the Crown, nor from declaring himself openly the Head of the
League, against his Nephew the King of Navarre; especially when he saw that
party, in which he thought himself already so firmly rooted, become every day
more powerful and formidable, by the conjunction of the particular League of
the Parisians, which caused such furious disorders, under the famous name of
the sixteen; and which was framed in Paris, about this time, in that manner
which I am ^ow going to relate.

After that, by the vigilance of the ^^rst President, Christopher de Thou, and
some other Magistrates, the course of the League was stopped at Paris, where it
had begun to make some impression, after it had been signed by the Picards, all
things were in a peaceable condition there, none daring to hold any secret
Cabals against the State; till such time as on occasion of the Conference
betwixt the King of Navarre and the Duke d' Espernon in Guyenne, a malicious
report was raised, that the King protected the Huguenots, who so soon as their
Head should mount the Throne, which he pretended to be his right, would not
fail to abolish the Catholic Religion in France. For then it was, that a mean
Citizen of Paris called La Roche Blond, a man rather weak and silly, than
wicked, prejudiced by the calumnies, which the factious published against the
King, got it into his head, through a false zeal of Religion, that the good
Catholics of Paris should unite themselves together, and oppose with all
their force the King's designs, (who, as it was imagined, favored the
Heretics) and hinder the King of Navarre, from his Succession to the Crown.
To this purpose, he addressed himself immediately to one Mr. Matthew de Launoy,
who having first been a Priest was afterward the Minister of Sedan, from
whence he had escaped in his own defense, being there taken in Adultery, and
thereupon renouncing his Calvinism, was made Canon of Soissons, and at that
time preached at Paris. He also communicated his design to two noted Doctors,
and Curats; the one of Saint Severin, named John Prevost, and the other of
Saint Benet, who was the famous Mr. John Boucher, one of the most followed
Preachers of Paris; but whose talent chiefly consisted in his extreme boldness,
which stretched even to impudence, a man more proper, as it appeared, to raise
a great Sedition, by his violent and furious declamations, than to preach the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which inspires only humility, obedience, and
submission to the higher Powers.

These men being united all four in the same opinion, which the Spirit of
Division and Rebellion, disguised under the specious appearance of Zeal,
inspired into them, communicated to each other the names of all their several
acquaintance in Paris, who were most proper to enter into Society with them,
and to lay the foundations of an Holy Union of Catholics in that great City;
which without farther deliberation they coucluded to be of absolute necessity,
to preserve Religion in France, and to extinguish Tyranny: for by that name it
was that those factious Bygots took the license to call the Government. But for
fear of being too soon discovered by their multitude, as it had happened
formerly in Paris, when the project of the League was first broached, they
agreed each of them to name two Associats, of the most con^iding men they knew,
to whom they should communicate the whole secret of their enterprise. Upon
which, La roche Blond chose the Sieur Lewis d' Orleans, a famous Advocate, and
the Sieur Acarie, Master of the Accounts, who was afterward ironically called
the Lacquay of the League, because, that being lame, he was one of those who
went and came, and acted with most earnestness, for the interest of his party:
The same man, who was Husband to that pious Mary of the Incarnation, of whose
good example he profited so ill. The Curat of St. Benet, named Mignager, an
Advocate, and Cruce a Procureur of Parliament. He of St. Severin, gave his voice
for the Sieur de Caumont an Advocate, and a Merchant, called Compan. Matthew de
Launoy, who was not yet so well acquainted in Paris, could name but one, which
was the Sieur de Manaevre, Treasurer of France, of the House des Hennequins.
But to complete the number of eight, they Associated with him the Sieur d'
Essiat, a Gentleman of Auvergne, who was very well known to the Curat of St.
Severin, who made himself answerable for him.

These twelve (as I may call them) false Apostles, were the Founders of the
League in Paris, who admirably counterfeiting zeal for the public good, and
discoursing of nothing else amongst their friends in private, but of the
oppressions of the people, of the avarice and insolence of the Favorites, the
correspondence which the King held with the Head of the Huguenots, and the
manifest danger in which they were of losing their Religion, had immediately
made many Churchmen Proselytes of their opinion, as also Lawyers, and
Shopkeepers, as for example, John Pelletier, Curat of St. Jacques de la
Boucherie, Guincestre Curat of St. Gervase, La Morliere a Notary, Rolland a
Collector of the King's Revenue, the Commissary Louchard, the Procureurs,
Emmonot and La Chapelle, and Bussy Le Clerc, the most Factious of all the
Leaguers, besides many others whose names are of little consequence to the
History, and who would do their posterity but small credit to be mentioned.

But to maintain at least some kind of order, in a design which tended to the
confusion and ruin of the State, and to take care that their Conspiracy might
take no vent, there was immediately established a Council of Ten, who were
selected out of that great number, to meet together, sometimes at one man's
house, sometimes at another's, very secretly; but most commonly they met at his
lodgings who was the most desperate of them all, and who during the greatest
part of that time was the leading man in all deliberations, I mean the Curat of
St. Benet, in his chamber at the College of Sorbonne, and afterward at the
College of Forteret, whither he retired, and which afterward on that account
was called the Cradle of the League. Out of these Ten, there were appointed
Six, which were, La Roche Blond, Compan, Cruce, Louchart, La Chapelle and
Bussy, amongst whom the sixteen Wards of Paris were distributed, for them to
observe in their respective Divisions, all that occurred, either to the
furtherance, or the disadvantage of their Plot, and to pick up those, whom they
could draw into their Faction with most ease: as also there to put in
execution, by their Accomplices, whatsoever they had resolved in their Cabal;
which not long after was enlarged to the number of Forty Men, the most
considerable amongst them. It Is upon this account that the first Union of the
Parisians, was called the Sixteen, from the number, not of the persons but of
the Wards.

And, since nothing spreads with so much ease, and so suddenly, especially
amongst the Common People, as that disease which is taken by contagion; so by
the conversation, which these men, infected with the Spirit of Rebellion, had
by themselves and their Emissaries, with the false Zealots, the simple, the
Malcontents, the factious, the greatest part of the populace, and the meanest
sort of Citizens, that evil, which was infinitely contagious, was multiplied
with ease, and spread it self in little time through all the Quarters of the
Town. And it encrea'sd with so much vigor, that those Mutineers, who at their
beginning durst not openly appear, but held their meetings as privately as they
could, out of their fear to be discovered, now believed themselves so
formidably strong, and so very numerous, that none would dare to make head
against them.

They had even the boldness to send their Deputies into all the Provinces, to
invite into their new Association those who had declared for that of Peronne,
who signed at this time to a Paper more pernicious than the first. For whereas
in the other, they promised by their second Article to employ their lives and
fortunes for defense of King Henry the Third, in his Authority, and to cause
due obedience to be rendered to him; They swear in this other, that they enter
into the Union with the Parisians, not only to exterminate the Heretics, but
also to destroy Hypocrisy, and Tyranny, that is to say, in their execrable
meaning, to pull down the Authority of Henry the Third, whom they accused of
those two crimes with all injustice imaginable. This is that, which was called
the League of Sixteen, which after the former League was joined to it, by its
secret Agents residing in Paris, acknowledged in reality the Duke of Guise for
their Head, and the Cardinal of Bourbon only in appearance.

In the mean time, that Duke finding himself to be so powerfully supported, and
all things well disposed for his enterprise, as he could possibly desire,
resolved at last on execution. To this effect, being retired from Court into
his Government of Champaign, under pretense of some discontent, he went to
Ioinville, where (as matters had been laid before) there met him, at the same
time, the Envoyes of the King of Spain, and those of the Cardinal of Bourbon,
who had taken on himself the quality of first Prince of the Blood, and Heir
presumptive of the Crown. And there, (the Duke acting for himself, and for the
Princes his Confederates,) was concluded a perpetual League, both Offensive and
Defensive, for them, their Allies, and their Descendants; by which it was
covenanted, That to preserve in France the Catholic Religion, the Cardinal of
Bourbon, in case the King should die without Children, should succeed him, as
nearest Heir to the Crown, from which all the Heretic Princes, should for
ever stand excluded; as also such of them as were favorers of Heretics, and
above all, those who were relapsed, so that any of them, who had ever made
profession of Heresy, or who had only given toleration to it, should never be
judged capable of Reigning. That the Cardinal, when King, should banish out of
the Realm all those Heretics; should cause all the Decrees of the Council of
Trent to be observed, and should solemnly renounce the Alliance made with the
Turk. That the King of Spain should furnish every month fifty thousand
Pistoles, for the charges of the War, which by obligation was to be made
against the Huguenots, and against the King himself, in case he should not
abandon them. That also the Cardinal, and the other Princes of the League,
should mutually assist His Catholic Majesty with all their Forces, in
reducing his Rebellious Subjects of the Low Countries, under his obedience, and
cause the Treaty of Cambray to be punctually observed.

After this, the Duke receiving immediate payment of one half of the money
stipulated for his Pension, ordered some levies of Swisses, and Reiters to be
made by the Colonels Phiffer, and Christopher de Bassompierre, who were
entirely at his Devotion. But before he could draw those Forces together, the
Deputies from the States of the Low Countries, about the same time, coming to
make tender of themselves to the King, and pressing him extremely on behalf of
their Superiors, to accept the Sovereignty of those Provinces; the Spaniards
toward that fatal blow, and to hinder him from sending a powerful Army into
Flanders against them, resolving to make a present diversion, obliged the Duke
of Guise, who by reason of his engagement could refuse them nothing, to begin
the War against the King.

Accordingly he began it with the surprise of Toul, and of Verdun, and
possessing himself of Chaalon and Mezieres, of the most considerable Towns of
Picardy by his Cousin the Duke d' Aumale, of Dijon and the greatest part of
Bourgogne by the Duke of Mayenne his Brother, of Orleans by the Sieur d'
Entragues, of many other places by his Dependants, and of the City of Lions it
self, by the Soldiers of Captain Le Passage, whom the Duke of Espernon had
placed there, and who being corrupted by the Emissaries of the Guises, turned
out their Commander who held the Citadel which they themselves demolished, and
declared openly for the League, saying maliciously in their own excuse, what
they had been taught by the Leaguers, that they would not be damned for serving
the King, who was a favourer of Heretics, and adding falsely, that the
Jesuits whom they had consulted upon that point, had absolved them from the
Oath which they had made him.

Now as all the Favorites, and principally Espernon, were as generally
abhorred, as the Duke of Guise was beloved, those two passions love and hatred
joined with hopes of raising themselves by Civil Wars, engaged a great number
of the most considerable and bravest of the Court, to take part with the
Leaguers; And amongst others Charles de Cosse, Count, and afterward Duke of
Brissac, Son to the great Marshal de Brissac Viceroy of Piedmont, and Brother
to the brave Timoleon, Colonel of the French Infantry, Claude de la Chastre,
Bailiff of Berry, Francis d' Espinay de Saint Luc, the Count of Randan, the
Marquis of Bois Dauphin, the Marquis de Rane, Claude de Baufremont Baron of
Senecey, who allured into it Anthony de Brichanteau, Beavais Nangis his
Brother-in-Law; Son to the Valiant Marquis de Nangis, Nicholas de Brichanteau,
Knight of the Order, who died of his wounds received at the Battle of Dreux,
bravely fighting for his King and his Religion; This generous Son of his having
served the King very gallantly, both in Poland and in France, having also been
esteemed by him, and admitted into the favor of his Confidence, was retired
from Court, because the Duke of Espernon, after he had carried from him the
Command of Colonel of the French Infantry which had been promised him by the
King, caused also to be taken from him that of Maistre de Camp, of the Regiment
of Guards: in the just resentment of which injury, he was not able to resist
the pressing solicitations of those two Lords, de Rane, and de Senecey, who to
draw him along with them into the Duke of Guise's party, made him a promise
from the Duke, which was never performed to him, (viz.) that no peace should be
concluded but upon condition, that Espernon his Enemy should be turned out of
Court, and that his charge of Colonel of the French Infantry should be
restored; farther assureing him, that he should exercise the same Command in
the Army of the League.

Thus it may be seen how much the haughty and injurious proceeding of that
Favorite, was advantageous to the Duke of Guise. Therefore whenone of his
Captains, who had heard him make great complaints of the Duke of Espernon
offered himself to murder him, as he passed through Chaalons in his return
from Metz, by no means (replied he) I should be very sorry he were dead; for he
gives us many gallant men, who would never engage in our party, if the desire
of revenging so many intolerable affronts, as are daily put on the worthiest of
the Court, by that little Cadet of Gascony, did not bring them over to us.

In this manner the Duke of Guise made himself every day more powerful, both
by the peoples love to him, and their hatred to the Favorites. Insomuch that
the King seeing so formidable a party armed against him, was forced to answer
the Low Country Deputies, with tears in his Eyes, that in his present
condition, he was not able to accept their offers, as he would certainly have
done in a more favorable conjuncture, which never afterward befell him.
Observe now the first Exploit of the League, which if it had never occasioned
any other mischief, than this to have hindered the reuniting of the Low
Countries to us, which were the first Conquest of our Crown, and the most
ancient Patrimony of our Kings, it is most certain that for this only reason,
it ought to be had in detestation by all good Frenchmen.

But that which ought to render it yet more odious, is that they did not only
take up Arms in manifest Rebellion against their King, but also timed it so
unluckily and mischievously, that far from exterminating the Huguenots, which
they made a show to desire, they hindered by that War the ruin of Huguenotism,
which was mouldring insensibly by the Peace. And truly all things were disposed
in such a manner, that had they continued never so little longer in that
peaceable Estate they then enjoyed, there is hardly any doubt to be made, but
that Heresy which grew every day weaker, would in the end have crumbled into
nothing. Most certainly the King who mortally hated the Huguenots, which
appeared but too visibly in the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, and who was not
able to destroy them by force, had taken his measures so surely, by changing
that manner of proceeding, that he had infallibly compassed his ends by the
Peace he gave them, had it continued a while longer.

For at that very time, when the Duke who was so long in demurring, ever he
came to a resolution, at last took Arms, under pretense of abolishing Heresy
in France; it is well known, that there were not remaining above twenty
Ministers in all the Provinces on this side the Loire: none of them writ any
thing against the Catholic Religion, neither was there any Huguenot in Office
or Employment. The King of Navarre, who was Head of that Party, at that time
was desirous of nothing more, than to return into the King's favor, and that
he might deserve that Honor, he had not long before advertised him, that the
same Philip King of Spain, who affected to appear with so much ostentation, the
great Defender of the Catholic Faith against the Protestants, had proffered
him large Sums of money, and promised to assist him in reducing Guyenne under
his Command, on condition that he would break the Peace, which the King had
given to the Huguenots, and cause them to resume their Arms, to which he would
never give consent. In like manner the King, who held himself assured of him,
failed not to advise him, that he should beware of some secret practices
amongst the Huguenots, who began to be suspicious of his conduct, and that by
no means he should permit any other but himself to be Head and Protector of
that Party. Thus it was to have been hoped, that under favor of this Peace
which had disarmed the Huguenots, they would have been reduced insensibly, if
the Leaguers by taking up Arms to force the King, as in effect they did, to
break the Peace which he had given them, had not necessitated them to
recommence the War, which in the progress of it was favorable to them.

In the mean time, amidst the many good Fortunes which happened to the League
in the overture of the War, they had the displeasure of failing in their
endeavors to possess themselves of two very considerable Cities in the
Kingdom; and such as had rendered them absolute Masters of Provence and
Guyenne. The one was Marseilles, which the second Consul, feigning to have
received Orders from the King to invade the Huguenots, had put into commotion,
and was just ready to have delivered it into the hands of the Guisards; but
being circumvented and taken, by some honest Citizens who had discovered his
Treason, he was immediately hanged, and appeased by his death the Sedition,
which he had raised to have betrayed them. Lodowick de Gonzaga Duke of Nevers,
was accused as Author of that Enterprise, in hope to have seized the
Government of Provence, but he most constantly denied it. And as about that
time he renounced the League; the Duke of Guise his Brother-in-Law upbraided
him, that he had never done it, but out of shame and vexation to have missed
his blow. He on the other side protested, that he changed Parties only for the
satisfaction of his Conscience which obliged him so to do. On which Subject to
justify his procedure, he affirmed, that he had never entered into the League,
but that it was confidently told him, that the Pope had licensed and approved
of it; But that having some reasons to suspect the contrary, he had sent three
several times to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, to be satisfied of his doubts,
and named the Messenger, who was Father Claude Matthew a Jesuit, called the
Post of the League, because he was in continual motion betwixt Rome and Paris,
employed in the Business of the Holy Union, of which he was a most ardent and
zealous Factour. And that Duke positively affirmed, that after all, he could
never draw from the Pope any kind of approbation, not so much as by word of
mouth, much less in writing, for he always answered, that he could never see
into the depth of that affair, Ann. 1585.
and therefore would not be engaged in it.

The other Town which the League missed of surprising was Bourdeaux, where the
most zealous Catholics, who were enraged against the Huguenots, endeavored
to have made themselves Masters for the League, and had already advanced their
Barricades to the very Lodgings of Marshal de Matignon their Governor, a
faithful Servant to the King, and a declared Enemy to the Guises: But that
Lord, equally Wise, Valiant and Resolute, knew so well by address to manage the
minds of those Citizens, that opening for himself a passage through the
Barricades, without other Arms than a Sword by his side, and a riding Rod in
his hand, he seized on one of the Gates, through which causing some of his
Troops to enter, who were not far from thence, he not only assured himself of
the Town, but also got possession of Chateau Trompette, after having seized the
Governor, who was suspected by him, and who was so very silly, to come out of
the Castle and take part of an Entertainment, to which the Marshal had invited
the chiefest of the Town.

To proceed, at the same time when the League took Arms, and began the War,
with surprising by Strategem, or taking by force so many places from the King,
they published their Manifest, under the name of the Cardinal de Bourbon, who
by the most capricious weakness that can be imagined, had got into his head, at
the Age of threescore and so many years, that he should succeed a King, who was
yet in the flower of his Youth. That Cardinal in that paper, having bespattered
the King, and the King of Navarre, with all the venom, which the factious
ordinarily threw upon those two Princes, to make them odious to the people,
concludes that his party had taken Arms, only to preserve Religion,
exterminate Heresy, to Banish from the Court those who abused the King's
Authority, and to restore the three Orders of the Realm, to their primitive
Estate.

The Proclamation of a King against his rebellious Subjects, ought to be no
other but a good Army, which he may have in a readiness long before them, and
reduce them to reason ever they have time and means to gather Forces sufficient
to oppose their Sovereign. This was what the King was advised to have done, by
his best Servants, and especially by the Lord John d' Aumont, Count of
Chateau-Rou, and Marshal of France: He, whose inviolable fidelity in the
Service of the Kings his Masters, and his extraordinary Courage, tried in so
many actions, joined with a perfect knowledge of all that belongs to a great
Captain, have rendered him one of the most illustrious persons of that Age.
This faithful Servant, not able to endure either the insolence of the Rebels,
or the too great mild^^ess of his Master, advised him resolutely, that with his
Guards, and the old Regiments which he might suddenly form into an Army, he
should immediately March into Champaign, and there fall upon the Leaguers, who
were yet in no condition to oppose him.

And truly it appeared but too plainly that this was the Counsel which ought
to have been followed. For at the beginning of this first War of the League,
the Duke of Guise (to whom the Spaniards, after such magnificent promises of so
many thousand Pistoles, had not yet paid one besides his Pension,) was not able
with all his credit, and his cunning, to raise above five thousand men, the
greatest part of which were of Lorrain Troops, who came straggling in by a File
at a time, and whom the King, had there yet remained alive in his Soul but one
spark of that Fire, which once so Nobly animated him, when being Duke of Anjou,
he performed so many gallant actions, might have easily dispersed with his
Household Troops, and such of the Nobility as were about him, who had been
immediately ^ollow'd by the bravest of the Nation, had they once beheld him but
on Horseback.

To this purpose, Beavais Nangis, who was infinitely surprised to find the Duke
of Guise at Chaalons, so thinly attended by his Troops, having demanded of him
what were his intentions, in case the King should fall upon him before he had
assembled greater Forces, he answered him coldly, that then he had no other way
to take, but to retire into Germany with what speed he could. But the Queen
Mother, who held a Correspondence at that time with the Guises, and that fatal
love which the King had to a lazy quiet life, which he could not quit without
extreme repugnance, and which immediately replung'd him into his pleasant
dreams, wherein he seemed to be enchanted, rendered fruitless so wholesome an
advice. Insomuch that he satisfied himself with making a feeble and timorous
Declaration, wherein answering the Conspiratours in a kind of a respectfull
way, as if he feared to give them any manner of offense, he seemed rather to
plead his Innocence before his Judges, than to speak awfully to his Rebels like
a King; and in the mean time gave leisure to the Duke of Guise to form a Body
of Ten or twelve thousand Foot, and about Twelve hundred Horse.

The King of Navarre, at whom the Leaguers particularly aimed, did indeed make
his Declaration, which he addressed to the King, and to all the Princes and
Potentates of Christendom; but he made it in a manner, which was worthy of the
greatness of his courage, by the masculine and eloquent Pen of Du Plessis
Mornay; who particularly understood how to serve his Master according to his
Genius. For, after having generously refuted the calumnies, with which the
Factious charged him, he made protestation that he was no ways an Enemy to the
Catholics, nor to their Religion, which he was most ready to embrace,
whenever he should be instructed by another method, than what was used to him
after St. Bartholomew, by holding the Dagger to his Throat. After which, he
declared, that all those who had the malice, or the impudence, to say that he
was an Enemy to Religion and to the State, and that he designed to oppress
either of them, by an imaginary League, which was ^al^ly supposed to have been
made to that intent at Madgburg, with respect to the King's Honor, Lied in
their throats, and above all others the Duke of Guise; and humbly begged his
Majesty's permission, without regard to his being first Prince of the blood,
that for once he might level himself to an equality with him, to the end that
they might decide their quarrel, by the way of Arms, singly betwixt themselves,
or by a Duel, two to two, ten to ten, or twenty against twenty, to spare the
effusion of so much blood, as must inevitably be shed in a Civil War.

But though he did his uttermost to excite in the King a generous resolution of
Arming himself against his Rebels; though he offered to Combat them in his own
person, and with all his Forces, in conjunction with those Catholics who were
Enemies to the League, and that he assured him of powerful Succors from
England and from Germany, which had been promised, yet could he never strike
more fire out of that irresolute soul, than only some faint sparks of a
languishing and impotent anger, which his fear and effeminacy soon quenched;
like those weak motions which men seem to make in frightfull dreams, when they
rowze themselves a little but immediately yield to the force of sleep.

It Is acknowledged that he made Edicts against them, injoyning them to lay down
Arms, and commanding all his Subjects to ring the Larum Bells against them, and
to cut them in pieces if they disobeyed. He summoned the Nobility, and Princes
of the blood to attend him: he gave Commissions, and issued out Orders, to make
a great Levy of Reiters and Swisses, and commanded his Guards to be in a
readiness to march to the rendesvouz, which should be appointed them. But after
all, the insuperable passion which he had for quiet and the soft pleasures of
the Cabinet, and the fear of the League with which he was possessed by the
Queen Mother, who held intelligence with the Duke of Guise, and magnified his
Forces incomparably beyond the life, together with the advice of some of his
Council, who had rather he should arm against the King of Navarre his faithful
Subject, than against Catholics though Rebels, brought the matter to that
pass at length, that he grew colder than ever, and left all things to the
management of his Mother, to whom he gave full power of treating with the
Associated Princes, and even of concluding as soon as possibly she could with
them, on what conditions she should please.

Thus, after a Conference begun at Epernay, and afterward finished at Nemours,
on the Seventh of July 1585. a Peace was concluded with the Leaguers, granting
them whatsoever they could demand, either for Religion, or for themselves.

For what concerned Religion, an Edict was made, by which revoking all those
that had formerly been granted in favor of the Huguenots, all exercise of the
pretendedly reformed Religion was prohibited: The Ministers were all commanded
to depart the Kingdom a month after the publication of the Edict, and all the
King's Subjects enjoined to make public profession of the Catholic Faith
within Six months, on pain of banishment. And, for the interest of the
Confederate Princes, who affected above all things to have it believed, that
their principal aim was the preservation of the Catholic Faith, a
ratification was made of all which they had done, as only undertaken for the
maintenance of Religion, and service of the King: and besides, there was a
promise made them, that they should command the Armies which were to put this
Edict in Execution; and to make War against the Huguenots, in case they refused
submission to it. And for places of Caution, besides Thoul and Verdun, of which
they had possessed themselves at first, there were granted them three Towns in
Champaign, Rheims, Chaalons and St. Dizier; Rue in Picardy, besides those of
which they were already Masters in that Province, which had declared first of
all others for the League. Soissons in the Isle of France: in Bretagne Dinan,
and Concarneau; and Dijon and Beaune in Bourgogne. Yet more, there was money
given them to pay the Soldiers they had Levied; and to the Cardinal of
Bourbon, to the Duke of Guise, his two Brothers, and their Cou^ns the Dukes of
Mercaeur, of Aumale, and of Elbeuf, to each of them a Company of Arquebusiers
(or Dragoons) on Horseback, maintained for their Guard, as if they resolved by
so glaring a mark of honor to make ostentation of their triumph over the King,
against whom they had newly gained so great a victory without combat, only by
the terror of their Arms; which contrary to the order of Nature, made, of a
Master and a Sovereign, the Slave, and Executo rof the good will and pleasure
of his Subjects.

Such was the Edict of July, which was extorted from the weakness of the King;
who immediately perceived, that instead of securing Religion, and his own
repose, by granting all things to the League, as he was made to believe he
should, he had plunged himself into a furious War, which might have been
extremely dangerous to Religion, if the Huguenots had overcome the Catholics.
It Is what he himself took notice of when amidst the acclamations and cries of
Vive le Roy, which resounded from every part, when he went in Person to the
Parliament, to cause the Edict to be enrolled, he was not able to hold from
saying to some about him, with a sigh, I much fear, that in going about to
destroy the Preachments, we shall hazard the Mass; which afterward he repeated
more than once upon several occasions.

And truly as he had foretold, immediately upon the publication of the Edict,
the War was kindled throughout all France. For, when the King of Navarre had
notice that the King had verified the Edict, which was in reality a solemn
declaration of War against him, he united himself more firmly than ever with
the Prince of Conde and the whole Huguenot Party, in an Assembly which was held
for that purpose, at Bergerac. And these two Princes going from Guyenne into
Languedoc, to the Marshal Duke of Montmorancy, who was Governor of that
Province, gave him so well to understand, that it was not only his particular
interest to oppose the Guises, who loved him not, but also for the service of
the King, whose Authority was struck at, and for the preservation of the
Monarchy, whose foundations the Leaguers were undermining, by open breach of
the Salique Law, that they brought him over into their Confederacy, with the
whole party of the Politiques, who had ever acknowledged him their Head.

Thus, instead of the Catholics being united against the Huguenots, as they
had always been, during the preceding Reigns under Henry the Third and his
Successor, they were divided into two parties; whereof one was the Leaguers,
and the other the Politiques; who by another name were called the Royalists.
And at that time it was manifestly visible, that the War had no reference to
Religion, as those of the League pretended, but was a War purely of State
Interest; since the Duke of Montmorancy, Head of those Catholics who were
united with the Huguenots, to maintain the Authority of the King, and the Royal
Family, as was declared in their Manifest of the Tenth of August, showed
himself on all occasions a most zealous Defender of Religion; therein following
the example of the Great Constable his Father.

It Is certain, that he protected it so well in his Government, that the King of
Navarre could scarcely bring the Huguenots to confide in him; because he always
opposed the progress of their designs in that Province. He also extended his
Zeal into the County of Avignon, and hindered Heresy there from taking root:
For which Pope Gregory the thirteenth, thought fit to make him great
acknowledgments in many Letters. It was not therefore with any design of
ruining Religion that the King of Navarre, as Head of the Huguenots being
united with one part of the Catholics, made that War; but for preservation of
the King and State, which the League endeavored to oppress; as the King
himself understood it to be, not long time after, declaring that he had not a
better servant than the Marshal of Montmorancy. And such indeed did he always
continue, so firm to the interest of that Prince, and of his Successor the
King of Navarre, that the latter of them honored him as a Father, by which
name he first called him, and afterward being King of France, made him
Constable in recompense of his great deserts and service to the State: And from
that time forward, that he might treat him with the same kindness which Henry
the Second used to Anne de Montmorancy, the Father of this Duke, he never
called him by any other name, than that of Partner. Thus, by the joining of
those Forces which so great a Man brought over with him to the King of Navarre,
that generous Prince was in a condition to defend himself at least against the
Party of the League; who were not only countenanced by the authority of the
King, whom they had as it were dragged into that War, but also drew great
advantages from those Spiritual thunderbolts which the Pope darted the same
year against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde.

Those of the League had more than once already employed their utmost interest
with Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, to obtain of him, that he would approve the
Treaty of their Association; a thing they passionately desired: And being on
the point of declaring themselves more openly than they had yet done, and to
take Arms, after the death of the Duke of Alanson, they renewed their
solicitations to his Holiness more earnestly than ever, to obtain from him that
Declaration, thereby to authorize their attempts, and insinuate themselves the
more into the hearts of those people, who were obedient to the Holy See. To
this effect they dispatched once more to Rome, Father Claude Matthew, who,
according to his custom, failed not to apply himself to the Cardinal of
Pelleve, the most stiff Partisan which the League ever had, and the Eternal
Solicitour of their Cause in the Court of Rome.

This Cardinal was descended of an ancient and illustrious house in Normandy,
(as it is delivered to us by the Sieur de Brantome) from whence are issued the
Marquesses de Beury, and the Counts de Flers. Which ought to mortify those hot
Writers, who in hatred to the League, have traduced him as a man of mean
Parentage, who from a Scullion of a College, came to be a Servitour, or Sizer,
to the Cardinal of Lorrain. It Is true indeed, that because there was not much
to be had out of a Patrimony, which was to be divided in shares amongst eight
Brothers, he put himself into the service of that Cardinal, who made him
Steward of his House. But it is not to be inferred from thence as some have
maliciously done, that he was of low Extraction; neither is it to be denied,
that he had many good qualities, which being supported by the credit of the
House of Guise, to which he was entirely devoted, gained him the esteem of
Henry the Second, who made him Master of Requests, and bestowed on him the
Bishopric of Amiens, from whence, sometime after, he was translated to the
Archbishopric of Sens, by the favor of Lewis Cardinal of Guise, who also
procured the Hat for him. So many benefits received from that powerful family,
bound him so firmly, and with so blind a passion to the interest of the Guises,
that he used his utmost endeavors, in favor of the League against Henry the
Fourth, even after the conversion of that Prince; till seeing at Paris, where
he then resided, the entry of that victorious King, to the incredible joy of
all the Parisians, he di'd of anguish and despite.

Now this Cardinal and Father Matthew, well hoped, that his Holiness seeing the
League become so powerful, that it was in a condition of making War, would
declare for it, at that time. On this expectation, they renewed with great
warmth the Solicitations which they had often before made to him; and continued
to ply him till his death; which happened the same year, without their
obtaining from him any part of their pretensions.

He had for Successor that famous Cordelier, Felix Peretti, Cardinal of
Montalto, when he was created Pope, called Sixtus the Fifth. He who from the
most miserable way of living, to which he was reduced by the wretched meanness
of his birth, as being no better than a Hogherd in his Youth, raised himself
step by step, by his merit and his industry, to the Triple Crown; which he wore
more haughtily during the five years of his Pontificate, than his Predecessors
had done for many Ages. As he had been a great Inquisitour, and one of the most
severe who had ever exercised that office, those Agents of the League, in
conjunction with the Spaniards, believed they should easily obtain his
approbation, and that joining his Spiritual Arms with their Temporal, he would
thunder out his Anathema against the King of Navarre.

But they mistook the Man with whom they had to deal: for as he was of an
humor extremely fierce, haughty, imperious, and inflexible, and would give the
World to understand, that he was governed by no reasons but his own, and least
of any by the Spaniards, whom he hated, he immediately took up an air of
Majesty in his discourse with them, which made them find to their cost, that he
suffered not himself to be deluded with appearances, and that he was a Master
as discerning as he was absolute. In effect, they were infinitely surpised to
find they had not the least power upon a Soul, which they then understood to be
of quite another make, than what he formerly appeared* so moderate, so humble,
so soft and so complying, when he was Cardinal, with his head stooping toward
the earth, and looking there (as he owned afterward himself) for the Popedom,
which finally he found.

In the mean while, as on the other side he thought he had a fair occasion, to
make an ostentatious show of the Supreme power of the Popedom, which he coveted
to make formidable to the whole World, by some extraordinary manner of
procedure, he made a little time afterward of his own mere motion, and when no
body importuned him, a most thundering Bull against the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde. For after he had in it exalted infinitely the Power and
Authority Pontifical, above all Kings and Potentates of the Earth, so far as to
affirm, that he could overturn their Thrones, by pronouncing irrevocable
judgment upon them, whenever they should be wanting to their duty, and
trample them under his feet as Ministers of Satan; and after having railed at
large, in the rudest and most contemptuous words he could invent against those
two Princes, he deprives them at last of all their Estates and Demeans, of
which they then stood possessed, and declares them incapable, both in their own
persons and in their posterity, for ever to succeed to any Estate or
Principality whatsoever, and particularly to the Kingdom of France, absolves
from their Oath of Fidelity all their Vassals and their Subjects, whom he
forbids most strictly to obey them; and gives notice to the King of France to
assist in the execution of his Decree.

As much as this Bull, which was signed by five and twenty Cardinals, and sent
by the Pope into France, rejoiced the party of the League, who took care to
publish it, so much did it afflict those Catholics and good Frenchmen, who
were opposite to that Faction: They were not able to endure, that the Popes
(who had formerly been in subjection to Kings and Emperors, whom they thought
themselves bound to obey, as St. Gregory the Great protests to the Emperor
M^urice, and the Popes Leo the fourth and Pelagius, to our Kings Lothaire and
Childebert,) should now dare to think of deposing them, and absolving their
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, against the declared Law of God, which
enjoins Obedience in so many places of the Scripture, even when Kings should be
wanting to their Duty.

God, (said they) has so divided those two Powers, the Temporal, and the
Spiritual, amongst Kings and Princes on the one side; and on the other betwixt
the Pope and Bishops, who are Princes of the Church, that as it is not lawful
for the secular Power to interfere with that of the Spiritual, nor to lay hands
upon the Censer, so neither is it lawful for the Spiritual to attempt any
thing against the Secular, by abusing that Ghostly Authority which was
bequeathed to them by Jesus Christ, only to exercise in those affairs which
are not of the World; in the Government of which, they have no manner of
concernment, to intermeddle either directly or indirectly; much less have they
the power of deposing Princes, and of hindering (by the censures, and
fulminations of the Church,) the due obedience of Subjects to their Sovereigns.
They added, that the Doctrine opposite to this, sustained by some Writers on
the other side of the Alps, to flatter and sooth the Court of Rome, had always
been condemned by the decisions of the Gallicane Church, by the decrees of
Parliaments, and by the protestations which our Kings have often made against
this Invasion of their Prerogative, unheard of in the Church of God, during
more than eleven Ages, and never admitted in the French Nation.

And while I am writing this part of my History, on this instant twenty third
day of March, I am informed that there is a perpetual and irrevocable Edict
enregister'd in the Parliament; by which Louis the Great, who well knows how to
maintain with so much power the rights of his Crown, and with so much piety
those of the Church, ordains that the absolute Independence of Kings, in
Temporal affairs, (which no Authority whatsoever shall presume to shock, either
directly or indirectly on whatsoever pretense,) shall be maintained and taught
in his Dominions by the professors of Divinity, Seculars and Regulars,
conformably to what the general Assembly of the Clergy, representing the
Gallicane Church, has solemnly declared in expounding the opinion, which both
it self and we are bound to receive on that Subject.

To pursue our History, the Bull of Sixtus no sooner appeared in France,
through the care of the Leaguers to divulge it, but a multitude of Writers
answered it, both of the one and the other Religion, who agreed in one and the
same Doctrine, of the independence of Kings on any other power but that of God
alone in reference to their Crowns: showing the invalidity of that pretended
Authority of Popes, some quietly contenting themselves with the force of
reason, without mixing Gaul and Passion in their Writings, and others in the
declamatory Style, abounding with furious ^nvectives. The sharpest, and most
splenetique of the latter sort, though (...) the weakest and least knowing, is
the Author of the Treatise called Bru^um Fulmen, which some have fathered on
Francis Hoffman a Civilian. But that Writer whoever he were, had more strongly
maintained the rights of Sovereigns, had he written with a more moderate Zeal,
without giving the reins to his passion against Popes, toward whom, even when
we blame their failings in some particulars, we are never permitted to be
wanting in respect.

The Parliament which is always vigorous in opposing such Attempts, failed not
to make their most humble Remonstrations to the King, worthy of the Wisdom,
and Constancy, which that August Body makes appear on all occasions relating to
the defense of the rights of the Crown, and the privileges of the Realm. The
King of Navarre added his own to these, wherein he represents to the King, that
His Majesty was more concerned than he, not to suffer this insolent and
unmaintainable attempt of Sixtus. And as he thought himself obliged, by some
extraordinary and high manner of proceeding, to revenge the affront which was
put upon him in that Bull, wherein he was treated so unworthily, He both had
the courage, and found the means, of fixing even upon the Gates of the Vatican,
his solemn Protestation against it. In which, after having first appealed, as
of an abuse, to the Court of Peers, and to a general Council, as superior to a
Pope, he protests the Nullity of all Sixtus's procedure: And farther adds, That
as the Princes and Kings his Predecessors have well known how to repress
Popes, when they forgot themselves, and passed beyond the bounds of their
Vocation, by confounding Temporals with Spirituals, so he Hopes that God will
enable him to revenge upon Sixtus the injury which is done in his Person to the
whole House of France, imploring for this purpose the succor and assistance of
all the Kings, and Princes, and Republiques of Christendom, who as well as
himself are assaulted in that Bull.

Though Pope Sixtus, following the bent of his own temper, which was naturally
violent and inflexible, revoked not his Bull for this; nevertheless, as he had
a Soul that was truly great, he could not but acknowledge that this action was
extremely generous; nor could he hinder himself from telling the French
Ambassador, that he wished the King his Master had as much courage and
resolution against his real Enemies, as the Navarrois had made appear against
those who hated his Heresy, but not his Person.

But that wish of his was very fruitless: for that poor spirited Prince was in
such awe of the League, that whatsoever Remonstrances were made him, and though
the example of the late King his Brother was proposed to him, who had acted
with much more vigor on the like occasion, on behalf of the Queen of Navarre,
whom they endeavored to have deposed at Rome, that he durst never permit any
opposition to that Bull. Insomuch that he contented himself barely, with not
allowing it to be judicially published in France, without so much as once
demanding of the Pope that he would revoke it, as Charles the Ninth had done,
who by a manly protestation constrained Pope Pius the Fourth to recall that
Bull, which he had made against Queen Jane d' Albret. This was the effect of
that fear, so unworthy of a King, which Henry the Third had of the League;
which taking advantage of his weakness, became more arrogant and more
audacious to oblige him, as in effect it did, in spite of his repugnance, to
infringe that Peace which he had given to France, and to make War against the
King of Navarre, who had at all times most punctually obeyed him, even when he
forbad him to take Arms, and to March in defense of him against the League. All
he could obtain of that party was by gaining a little time to keep matters from
coming to extremity, (the dangerous consequence of which he well foresaw.) And
to this purpose Messire Philip de Lenoncour, who was afterward Cardinal, and
the President Brulart, with some Doctors of the ^orbonne, were sent by him to
the King of Navarre, to persuade him to return into the Communion of the
Catholic Church, and to suspend the Exerci^e of Calvinism, at least for the
space of six Months, during which, some expedient might be found to accommodate
all things amicably.

A better choice could not possibly be made, for the treating an Affair of that
importance, than was the person of that famous Nicholas de Brulart, Marquis of
Sillery, whose approved fidelity in the Service of our Kings, and whose Wisdom
and ripe experience, in the management of affairs, were at length recompensed
by Henry the fourth, by conferring on him the highest Honors of the Robe, in
which Office he gloriously ended his days, under the Reign of the late King.
It Is the distinguishing character of that illustrious House, to have the
advantage of being able to reckon, amongst the great men who are descended from
it, two Chamberlains of Kings, one Master of the Engines and Machines, one
Commandant of the Cavalry, killed at the Battle of Agincourt, in fighting for
his Country, one Procureur General, and three Presidents of the Parliament of
Paris, two Premier Presidents of the Parliament of Bourgogne, and above all a
Chancellor of France, to consummate the Honor of their House, and one of the
most splendid titles of Nobility, which the Sword or long Robe can bestow.

'Twas then this excellent Person, who was joined in Commission with the Sieur
of Lenoncour, for this important Negotiation. Because it was hoped from his
address, and the mildness of his behavior, which was insinuating and
persuasive, that he above all others, would be able to win the King of Navarre
to a compliance with his Majesty's desire, that he might not be constrained
against his own inclinations, to bring a War upon him. But as that happy hour
was not yet come; And that it was an ill expedient to procure the Conversion of
a Man, and especially of a Great Prince, who has wherewithal to defend himself
when he is attacqu'd, to bring Faith to him with threatening, like a Challenge,
and to show him the Arms which are in a readiness to constrain him; he only
answered that he had always been disposed, as he then was, to receive the
instructions which should be given him, according to the Decisions of a free
General Council, and not with a Dagger at his Throat, which was the Argument
they used to him, after the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

There was therefore a necessity at last of coming to a War, according to the
wishes of the League; which believed it was able to overwhelm at one push, both
that Prince and his whole party, before he could be recruited with Foreign
Forces: But it was extremely deceived in that expectation.

For of the two Armies, which the King was obliged, according to the treaty of
Nemours, to give to the Command of two Lorrain Princes, the one to the Duke of
Guise, in opposition to the Germans, if they should attempt an entrance into
France, to which they had been solicited by the Huguenots, the other to the
Duke of Mayenne, for his expedition into Guyenne against the King of Navarre,
whose defeat and ruin the Leaguers concluded to be inevitable; the last of the
two, after a Campaign of ten Months, without performance of any thing, but
only the taking in some few places of small importance, which afterward were
easily retaken, was in a manner wholly ruined, and dissipated for want of
Money, of Provisions, and Ammunition, of a train of Artillery, and other
Supplies, which were always promised them, but never sent them; and especially
by the ill intelligence, which was betwixt the Duke of Mayenne and the Marshals
of Matignon and Biron; the first Governor of Guyenne, and the last Commander
of a little Army in Poitou, which was to have covered that of the Duke.

For those two faithful Servants of the King, well knowing the secret of their
Master, who was wholly averse from the destruction of the King of Navarre, for
fear himself and the whole Royal House should be left at the mercy of the
League, which he knew would never spare them, artfully broke all the measures
of the Duke of Mayenne; Insomuch that he found himself constrained, to return
to the King without bringing along with him the King of Navarre Captive, as he
had boastingly promised him to do, and without performing any thing of that,
which the League expected from his Zeal to the party. As for the Duke of Guise,
finding no Germans upon the Frontires of Champagn to combat, and besides not
being accompanied with any great Forces, his whole expedition was terminated,
in taking Douzy and Raucour, two small Towns belonging to the Duke of Bouillon,
against whom the Duke of Lorrain made War, concerning which I shall say
nothing, because it has no relation to the History of the League.

On the other side, the Huguenots managed their affairs not much better; It Is
true, that the Sieur of Lesdiguieres had some advantage over the League in
Dau^hine, that he made himself Master of certain places, and amongst others of
Montelimar with the Castle, which he took by a regular formed Siege, and Ambrun
which he surprised; and where the rich Ornaments of the Metropolitan Church,
were plundered by the Soldiers, according to the custom of the Huguenots,
which, though he was a man of strict Discipline, and moderate in his Nature, he
was no way able to oppose. But, besides that, they were roughly handled in
other Provinces, and that all which could possibly be done by the King of
Navarre, who had not yet drawn together all the Troops which he expected, was
only to stand upon the defensive; they received a great blow, by the memorable
defeat which was given to the Prince of Conde who was like to have perished, in
that unhappy attempt which he made upon the Castle of Angers. That Prince who
had made up a little body of an Army about the Skirts of St. Iean d' Angely,
which he held in stead of Peronne, had successfully begun his Campaign in
Poitou; having driven out of that Province the Duke of Mercaeur, who was come
from his Government of Bretagne, to the assistance of the League. And as after
that gallant action, he had re-inforc'd his Army, with Troops which swarmed to
him, from the neighboring Provinces, upon the report of his Victory, he
undertook the Seige of Brouage in favor of the Rochellers, who supplied him
with Money and Ammunition.

He was accompanied with a great number of brave Gentlemen, and Lords of great
Quality, amongst others by Rene Vicount of Rohan, Francis Count of
Rochefoucault, Montguion Lieutenant to the Prince, George Clermont d' Amboise,
Louis de St. Gelais, and Claude de La Trimouille who was afterward Duke of
Thouers, and whose Sister he then sought in Marriage, whom he espoused not long
after; and there is great appearance of probability, that it was rather on that
account, than any motive of Conscience and Religion, that this young Lord, far
from ^ollowing the example of his Father, who declared himself Head of the
League at Poitou, gave into the other extreme and turned Huguenot, together
with his Sister Charlotte Catharine de la Trimouille to have the Honor of
being Married to the Prince of Conde. How strong is the Power of Ambition, over
minds that are dazzled with the deceiptfull Splendor of wordly Greatness, that
it should be able to oblige a Brother and Sister issued from Louis de
Trimouille and Jane de Montmorancy Daughter of the great Constable both of them
firm Catholics, as were all their illustrious Ancestors, to turn Calvinists,
one to be Brother in Law to a Prince of the Blood, and the other to be his Wife!

From this Marriage there was Born on the first of September, in the Year 1588,
the late Prince Henry de Bourbon, who by a most happy Destiny, directly
opposite to that of his Mother, being issued from a Father and Mother so
obstinate in Calvinism, became one of the most Zealous Princes for the
Catholic Faith, that this Nation could ever boast, and he, who declared
himself the greatest Enemy of Calvinism. So also has he left to Posterity a
most glorious remembrance of his name, which shall never perish amongst all
good Frenchmen, for having constantly defended Religion with all his power,
exercising in that Holy and Divine Employment, both his Valor and his Wit,
which he had in perfection, as he made appear on all occasions, and principally
in the Counsel whereof he was chief, when he died of such a death, as the Acts
of all the most solid virtues, wherewith it was accompanied, rendered precious
in the sight of God. I believe my self obliged in point of gratitude to do
justice in this little Panegyrique to the great Merit of that Prince, who has
formerly done me the Honor, on many occasions, to give me particular marks of
his esteem and his affection; and hope, that they who take the pains to peruse
this work, will not blame me for this short Digression, taken occasionally by
writing of the Prince his Father, to whose actions I now return.

The Nobility who were come to attend and serve him in that important Siege of
Brouage, had brought along with them a considerable number of Huguenot
Gentlemen, as also some Catholics, who were Enemies to the League. And with
these Recruits he had almost reduced the place to terms of yielding, when
changing his design all on the sudden, like an unexperienced Captain, he lost
the fruit of his former labors, and plunged himself into extreme danger. For
having understood, that Captain Roche-Mort, one of his best Officers had
surpised the Castle of Angers, in the absence of the Count de Brisac, who
being made Governor of it after the death of the Duke of Alanson, had declared
himself for the League, he left before Brouage the Sieur de la Roche Baucour
St. Meme with the Infantry, to continue the Siege, and marched himself with all
the Cavalry, consisting of two thousand Horse, to relieve that Captain, who
with Seventeen or Eighteen Soldiers only held the Castle of Angers against
the Burghers who besieged him. But the Prince setting out somewhat of the
latest, and marching too slowly, when the fortune of his Enterprise depended on
celerity, he had no sooner past the River of Loyre in Boats, betwixt Saumur and
Angers, but he received advice that Roche-Mort being killed with a Musket
shot, as he was looking through a Casement, the Castle had been surrendered two
days since.

Notwithstanding this Misfortune, which the greatest part of his Soldiers
would not believe, having joined fifteen hundred men, whom Clermont d' Amboise,
a little before the Siege of Brouage, was gone to raise for his service in
Anjou, he took a resolution to attaque the Suburbs: But was vigorously repulsed
by the good Troops which the King had sent thither to assist the Citizens, who
had retrenched themselves against the Castle which they held besieged. After
which, intending to repass the River, he found that not only all the passages
were guarded, but that also he was ready to be compassed round by the Troops of
the King and of the League, who were gathering together from all parts, both on
this side the Loyre and beyond it, to enclose him. Insomuch that, not being
able either to advance or to retreat, without being taken or cut in pieces with
all his men, they were at length forced to disband, and dividing themselves
into small companies of Seven and Eight, or Ten and Twelve together, every man
being willing to save one, marched only by night through bye passages out of
the common Road, and through Woods for fear of being met with, either by
Soldiers or Peasants, who killed as many of them as they could find, and
pursued them, as they would so many Wolves, when they caught them entering into
a Sheepfold. The Prince himself had much ado to escape, the tenth man, and
disguised, into the Lower Normandy, from whence he passed in a Fisher's Barque
betwixt Auranche and St. Malo into the Isle of Guernsey, and from thence aboard
an English Vessel into England; where he was very well received by Queen
Elizabeth, who sent him back to Rochelle the Year following with a considerable
supply.

In the mean time St. Mesme, (who during this unhappy expedition of the Prince,
continued the Siege of Brouage, ^inding himself too weak to resist the Marshal
de Matignon, who advanced by order from the King, to force his Retrenchments,
with an Army of experienced Soldiers,) trussed up his Baggage, and retired
with what speed he could, but in so much fear and disorder, that he lost great
numbers of his men in his hasty^ march, and particularly in passing the
Charante, where St. Luc, Governor of Brouage who always showed himself as
brave in War, as he was agreeable at Court in Peace, having charged him in the
Rear, cut it entirely off: Thus the League, and the Calvinism, lost on that
occasion, the one the Castle of Angers, wherein the King placed a Governor, on
whose fidelity he might rely, and the other almost all its Forces, which after
that shock, durst no longer keep the Field.

This furnished the King with an opportunity to publish new Ordinances, by
which he commanded the Good^ of Rebels to be seized; and particularly of those
who had followed the Prince of Conde, with promise nevertheless of restoring
them, when they should return into the Catholic Church, and give good
security of remaining in it; Ordaining farther, in execution of the Edict of
July, that all such should be forced to depart the Realm, who refused to make
abjuration of Calvinism, into the hands of the Bishops; and it was enjoined
them to make it according to the Form which was composed by William Ruze Bishop
of Angers. It was thus practiced because it had been observed, that the
greatest part of the Huguenots, had invented a trick, neither to lose their
Goods, nor to leave the Kingdom; but thought it was lawful for them to
accommodate themselves to the times, and so deceive men by making a false
profession of Faith, only for form sake, and in external obedience to the
Edicts: which they expressed by these words, Since it has so pleased the King,
with which they never failed to preface the Oath of Abjuration when they took
it.

Now this prudent Bishop having observed that intolerable abuse, which was
followed by an infinite number of Sacrileges, and most horrible profanation of
the Sacraments, which those false Converts made no scruple to receive,
betraying by that damnable imposture both the one Religion and the other, would
admit none into the Communion of the Church, who had not first made his
profession of Faith according to his form, which much resembled that of Pius
the Fourth, and which from that time forward was and is presented to be signed
by all those who abjure Heresy.

It Is most certain that these Edicts, joined with the extreme weakness in which
the Huguenot party then was, made in a little time many more converts, true or
false, than had been made by the Massacre of St. Bartholomew. But also on the
other side, they occasioned the Protestants of Germany, whom the King of
Navarre could never draw to his party against the Leaguers, now to incline to
his assistance. Two years were almost past since that King, who desired to
shelter himself from the Conspiracy which the League had made principally
against him, with purpose to exclude him from the Crown, against the
fundamental Law of the Realm, had solicited those Princes, by the Sieur de
Segur Pardaillan, and de Clervant to raise an Army for his assistance; and
elsewhere by the intermission of Geneva, he pressed the Protestant Cantons of
Swisserland, to make a Counter-League with the Germans, for the same purpose.
Queen Elizabeth, who besides the interest of her Protestant Religion, had a
particular esteem and love for that Prince, the Duke of Bouillon a declared
Enemy of the Lorrain Princes, and the Count de Montbeliard, Frederick de
Wirtemburg, a most zealous Calvinist, used their utmost endeavors with those
German Protestants to stir them up: all which notwithstanding, they were very
loath to resolve on a War with the King of France their Allye; saying always
that they would never engage themselves in it, till it was clearly manifest,
that the War which was made against the Huguenots, was not a War of the
Government against its Rebels, but purely, and only against the Protestant
Religion, which they intended to extirpate. But when they saw before their eyes
those Edicts and Ordinances of the King, who was absolutely resolved not to
su^^er any other Religion beside the Catholic in his Kingdom, and that
otherways they had given them all the security they could desire for the
payment of their Army; Ann. 1586.
then they took a Resolution of Levying great Forces, and of assisting the King
of Navarre powerfully, after sending a solemn Embassy to the King, to demand of
him the Revocation of his Edicts, and an entire liberty of Conscience for the
Protestants.

The King of Denmark, the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, the Prince
Palatine John Casimir, the Dukes of Saxony, of Pomerania, and of Brunswick, the
Landgrave of Hesse, and John Frederick, Administrator of Magdeburg, were the
Princes who As^ociated themselves with the Towns of Francford, Vlmes,
Nuremberg, and Strasburg, to send this Embassy to the King; who, not being
resolved what to answer them, for fear of provoking the League, in case he
should grant them their demands, or of drawing on himself the united Forces of
almost all the Protestants of Germany, in case of a refusal, to gain time, took
a Progress as far as Lions, while the Deputies of those Princes were at Paris:
which caused the Count of Montbeliard, and the Count of Isembourg, who were the
chief of that Embassy, to return. But so did not the rest, as being obstinately
set down to wait the King's return, who was at last constrained, being overcome
by their extreme persistance, whom he well hoped to have tired first, to give
them the Audience which they demanded. He who was spokesman for the rest,
loosing all manner of respect, made a blunt and haughty Speech, reproching him
in certain terms which were but too intelligible, that against his Conscience
and his Honor, he had violated his faith so solemnly given to his most
faithful Subjects of the Protestant Religion, to whom he had promised the free
exercise of it, they remaining, as since that time they had always done, in
that perfect obedience, which is due from Subjects to their Sovereigns.

That Prince, who at other times was but too meek and patient, or rather too
weak and timorous, was so much offended at this brutal insolence, that he was
not able to curb himself from breaking out into choler on this occasion. For he
replied smartly, to them, with that air of Majesty and fierceness, which he
knew well to take up, whenever it pleased him, that as he had not taken the
liberty to give Laws to their Masters of ruling their Estates according to
their own liking, and changing the Civil and Religious constitution of their
Government, so neither on his side would he suffer them to intermeddle in those
alterations which he thought fit to make in his Edicts; according to the
diversity of times and of occasions, for the good of his People, of whom the
greatest part depended on the true Roman Catholic Religion, which the most
Christian Kings his Predecessors had ever maintained in France, to the
exclusion of all others. Afterward, retiring into his Cabinet, where after he
had revolved in his mind, what had been said on either part, he was of opinion,
that his Answer had not been sharp enough, he sent them by one of the
Secretaries of State a Paper written with his own hand, which was read to them;
and in which he gave the Lie in formal terms to all those who said he had done
against his Honor, or violated his Faith, in revoking the Edict of May, by
that of July; after which it was told them from him, that they had no more to
do, than to return home; without expecting any farther Audience.

This was certainly an Answer worthy of a great Monarch, had he maintained it
by his actions as well as by his words; and had he not shown by his after
conduct, the fear he had of this irruption of the Germans. For, in order to
prevent it, he seemed to descend too much from that high and Supreme Majesty of
a King, by treating almost upon terms of equality with the Duke of Guise, and
offering him, besides whatever advantages he could wish, in Honors and in
Pensions, and many Towns for his security, which had made him a kind of
Independent Royalty in the Kingdom on this only condition, that he would be
reconciled to the King of Navarre, and give him leave to live in quiet; as if
it were the Duke, and not the King, who had the power of giving Peace.

Though these advantageous proffers, were sufficient to have tempted the Duke's
ambition, nevertheless he would not accept them, because he hoped to satisfy
it much better by continuing the War in which he had engaged the King; who was
not able to recall his promise: besides, he was not willing to destroy the
opinion which the people had conceived of him, that he acted by no motive of
self-interest, but only for the Cause of God and of Religion. This expedient
of Peace therefore failing the King, who had ardently desired it, he employed
another, which was to entreat Q. Katharine de Medices, to confer with the King
of Navarre, her Son-in-Law; to try if by her usual arts, she could induce him
to some accommodation, which might be satisfactory to the League, and stop the
Germans, of whose Succors, his peace once made, that King would have no
farther use. The Queen Mother, who at that time desired the peace at least as
much as he, because she feared to be left at the discretion of either of the
two parties, by whom she was equally hated, willingly accepted that Commission;
grounding her hopes on those tricks, and artificial ways, by which she had so
often succeeded, on the like occasions.

Having then advanced as far as Champigny, a fair house belonging to the Duke
of Montpensier, she managed the matter in such sort, by the mediation of that
Prince, who went to visit the King of Navarre from her, that it was agreed
there should be a Conference. After many difficulties which were raised
concerning it, and which, with much canvasing, they got over; the place was
appointed to be St. Brix, a Castle near Cognac, belonging to the Sieur de Fors,
who was of the King's party. She came thither attended by the Dukes of
Montpensier and of Nevers, Marshal Biron, and some other Lords, who were no
friends to the Guises or the Leaguers, to the end that Conference might be the
more amicable. The King of Navarre came also thither, with the Prince of Conde,
Vicount de Turenne, and some others the most considerable of their Party.

It appeared manifestly at this Enterview, that the Queen held no longer that
Authority, which had been yielded to her in the former Conferences, wherein she
had carried all things according to her own desire, by the wonderful
Ascendant, which she had over their minds; And she understood, but too well
from the very beginning, that she had to do with such as were distrustful of
her subtilties, and who would not suffer themselves to be surprised easily, as
some of them had been, on St. Bartholomew's day, whereof they had not yet worn
out the remembrance. For they would never adventure themselves all three
together in the Chamber appointed for the Conference; when the King of Navarre
was there, the Prince and Vicount, well accompanied, made a guard at the door;
and when either of the other two entered, the King of Navarre and the other did
the like for him: that they might not put themselves unwarily into her hands,
on whose word they had no reason to rely; and who dared not to arrest any of
them singly, the two remaining being at liberty, and in condition to give
themselves satisfaction on the Aggressours.

Thus, being too suspicious, and their minds too much embitter'd, to act calmly
and reasonably in this Conference, it went off in three Enterviews; which were
made in resenting terms, and mutual reproaches, without coming to any amicable
conclusion. The Prince of Conde, according to his lofty and severe humor,
spoke always more sharply than the other two: rejecting all methods of
reconciliation, and saying, with an air extremely fierce, that there was no
belief to be given to those who had so basely falsified their Faith, in
violating the Edicts of the King, to satisfy the Seditious and the Rebels. The
King of Navarre, of a temper much more sweet and complaisant, though with a
becoming noble boldness, he gave the Queen to understand that he had no great
reason to commend her proceedings in reference to himself, yet he never forgot
the respect which was due to her Character. And upon occasion of her
remonstrating to him, that the peace of France depended on his conversion;
since the only fear of falling under the dominion of an Huguenot Prince, had
made and armed the League, which had no quarrel to His person, but only to his
Heresy: his answer was no more than this; That Religion was only a pretense,
which the Authors of the League had taken up, to cover their ambition, which
manifestly designed the total ruin of the Royal family; and as to his
conversion, he was always disposed to it, on condition he might be instructed
in the truth by a free Council, which he had oftentimes demanded; and in the
definitive judgment of which, both he and his party would wholly acquiesce. He
consented even to a Truce of twelve days, during which, the King's good
pleasure should be consulted, by proposing to him that condition; though it was
known beforehand, that he would never consent to it. And in the mean time, the
Vicount of Turenne coming to wait on the Queen at Fontenay, whither she was
retired, the Conference was resumed for the last time.

For, after they had amplifi'd their Forces on either side, and both had set
forth the advantages of their own party, which could not be done without some
sharpness, and even menaces; the Queen losing patience, and taking up that air
of haughtiness and Majesty, which she had often assumed at the like Conferences
in the Reigns precedent, and at the beginning of this, said in an imperious
tone, that there was no more room left for deliberation; and that the King, who
would be absolutely Master in his Realm, had fixed his positive resolution, to
have but one Religion in France: It Is well, Madam, replied the Vicount, with a
disdainful kind of smile, we join issue with you in the same resolution; Let
there be but one Religion, provided it be ours; if otherwise, we must hack it
out on both sides. On which, without staying for a reply, he made a low bow,
and immediately withdrew. Thus the Conference was ended, to the extreme
displeasure of the King, who to gain covert from that Tempest of the Germans,
which he foresaw to be pouring upon France, had passionately desired a Peace,
which he could neither obtain from the King of Navarre, nor even from the
League, in whose quarrel he was engaged to make War against that King.

For the Leaguers, whose number was prodigiously incr^as'd, especially in
Paris, grown jealous of those frequent Treaties with the king of Navarre, let
loose their tongues, more brutally than ever against the King: as if he had
held a secret correspondence with the Huguenots, and played booty with the
League, by a counterfeit show of ruining its En^mies. There are those who have
gone so far as to report, that at this very time they had laid a terrible Plot
against the King, in which they engaged the Duke of Mayenne, who had made
himself their Head, in the absence of his Brother; and that the Conspirators
had resolved to put all the Guards of his Majesty to the Sword; to seize his
Royal Person, and afterward, either to confine him to a Monastery, or to
imprison him in a Tower; to cut the throats of the Chancellor, the first
President, and all the Principal Officers, to put others in their places, and
to create a new Council consisting wholly of their own party; to possess
themselves of the Bastille, the Arsenal, the Chastelets, the Palace and the
Temple; to give entrance to the Spanish Armada, which was then prepared against
England, by Boulogne; and a hundred other part^cularities of that Conspiracy,
which the President de Thou thought fit to insert in his History, upon the
credit of one Nicholas Poulain, Lieutenant in the Provostship of the Isle of
France; who having been of the Council of the League, revealed, as he relates
himself, the whole secret to the Chancellor de Chiverny, Monsieur Villeroy,
chief Secretary of State, and also to the King. But, besides that no credit
ought in reason to be given to a man of double dealing, who has betrayed both
sides, and who to set himself right with that party he had forsaken, may affirm
a thousand things which he cannot prove; which is a crime that has often
brought the informer to the Gallows; there is nothing of all this matter to be
seen in those Papers, which were written at that time, either for or against
the League; especially in those of the Huguenots, who would be sure to omit
nothing that could possibly make against their Enemies, or for themselves,
neither in the Memoires of the Chancellor de Chiverny, nor of Monsieur de
Villeroy, who in all probability, would not have forgotten a thing of that
importance, if they had had it from the mouth of the Informer, or indeed if
they had believed it true.

And certainly there are many things so very improbable, in that verbal process
of Nicholas Poulain, which I have most exactly read; and even so many notorious
falsities, and those so opposite to the nature and genius of the Duke of
Mayenne, that it is a prodigious thing in Monsieur de Thou, that he would take
the pains to transcribe it almost word for word in a History, so elegant and
serious as that of his. This in reason should give a caution to such as
undertake the writing of a History, not to trust all sorts of Writers, and not
ambitiously to swell their Works with all they find written in certain
Unauthentique Memoires, without giving themselves the leisure to examine their
merit, and their quality. That which is certain in that affair is, that the
Leaguers of Paris interpreting maliciously, and in the worst sense, those
Negotiations and Conferences, which were made with the King of Navarre, were
not wanting to make the people understand, that the King held intelligence with
him, and protected the Huguenots. It was also in order to destroy that belief
and false opinion which ran of him to his disadvantage among the people, that
the King renewed with more apparent fervor and solemnity, those extraordinary
devotions which he practiss'd from time to time, and above all his Processions
of Penitents, which, far from serving his design, rendered him yet more
despicably odious.

As evil, by the abuse of the best and most holy things, often proceeds from
that good which insensibly is degenerated into corruption; it sometimes also
happens that good is produced out of evil, which is rectified, by taking from
it that which is ill in the practice of Devotion, and leaving only what is
wholesome. This is what has been observed in our present Subject, the
Brotherhood of Penitentiaries. More than four hundred years ago, a certain
devout Hermit finding himself to be strongly inspired from God, to Preach in a
Town of Italy, as Jonas did at Nineveh, began to threaten the Inhabitants, that
in a short time they should be buried under the Ruins of their Houses, which
should fall upon their heads and overwhelm them, if they appeased not the wrath
of God, by an immediate, severe and public penitence. His Auditors after the
example of the Ninevites, touched with so powerful a Sermon, and fearing to
feel the effects of so terrible a threatening, clothed themselves in Sackcloth,
and armed with Whips and Disciplines, walked in procession through their
Streets, lashing themselves severely on their Shoulders, to expiate their
Crimes by their tears, and by their Blood. This sort of Penance which sprung
out of a good principle, and an ardent desire of appeasing the Divine Justice,
may be very laudable; and was afterward practiced in other Countries,
particularly in Hungary, dureing the rage of a great Pestilence, which made
havoc of that poor Kingdom. But not long after, it degenerated into the
dangerous sect of the Flagellants, who running in great Troops naked to the
middle, through most of the Provinces of Europe, made themselves all over
bloody, by the vigorous handselling of their Disciplines, saying, with horrible
impiety, that this new Baptism of blood was more available than that of Water,
in that it expiated for all their future Sins, which from thence forward they
might commit with all impunity.

There was much difficulty in abolishing so pernicious an abuse; and therefore
with mild usage to reduce those wandering Souls into a regular Penance, it was
permitted them to retain what ever was good, in so austere a Practice. From
thence are sprung up the fraternities of Penitents, which are at this present
seen in Italy, in the Patrimony of the Church, in the County of Avignon, and in
Languedoc, who have their Chapels where they assemble, and practice the
Exercises of their Devotions, and who make their Processions where they go,
particularly on Holy Thursday, clothed in Sackcloath, with Whips at their
Girdles, which nevertheless are not for any great execution, but for Ceremony,
to mark out the public profession which they make of being Penitentiaries,
and the love they have for Christian Penance.

When therefore the King, who was naturally inclined to Devotion, had in his
return from Poland, beheld the Procession of the white Penitents of Avignon,
and was even then desirous of showing himself a zealous Catholic; he
commanded himself to be enrolled in that Fraternity, and about seven or eight
years after, he established another of the same kind at Paris, in the Church of
the Augustines, under the title of the Annunciation of our Lady. The most part
of the Princes, and great men of the Court, and the principal Officers were of
it; and all his Favorites never failed to assist at those Processions, wherein
he went without his Guards, or any mark whereby he might be distinguished from
the rest, Clothed in a long white Habit of Holland, shaped like a Sack,
reaching below his Feet, somewhat large, with two long Sleeves, and a Cowl or
Monk's Hood over his Head piqu'd on the Crown, and having two great holes in it
right against his Eyes, sowed behind to the Collar, and coming down before in a
sharp point, half a foot below the Girdle, which was woven of the finest white
Thread, and little knots in it, hanging down below the Knee; in the Girdle was
hung a jolly little Discipline of the same materials, nothing proper to give
the penitent a smarting lash: On his left shoulder he had a Cross of white
Satin, upon a ground of tawny Velvet, almost wholly circular.

For the rest, he made profession to observe exactly the Rules and Statutes of
that Fraternity, which Fath^^ Edmond Auger a famous Jesuit, who was then his
Confessor and Chaplain, had drawn up by his own Order. That good Father
entertained him with great care, in these sorts of Devotions, though not
altogether so proper for the practice of a great King, to whom much more solid
instructions should be given, of which the principal consists in advising him
to apply himself vigo^ously to that charge of Government, which God, to whom he
must render an Account, has committed to his trust, as his Minister and
Lieutenant.

To this purpose it is said (as Busbequius writes from Paris, to the Emperor
Rodolphus his Master) that the Que^n Mother (seeing the prejudice which this
fantastique carriage did to the reputation of the King her Son, and to the
State, the care of which he abandoned, to give himself up to these cloysterly
Processions,) spoke sharply to the Jesuit, upbrayding him, that he was an ill
Guide to his Penitent, and that of a King, as God had made him, he made a
Friar, to the great prejudice of all his Kingdom. And for that very reason,
time and experience having made it manifest, that much disorder had crept into
these Fraternities of white Penitents, as well as those of the blew and black,
and that under pretense of practicing holy Exercises, most dangerous Plots were
hatched against the Government, they were totally abolished at Paris, about ten
or twelve years afterward.

It was especially that year 1586, that the King willing to make appear, that
he had more zeal than ever for the Catholic Faith, renewed these ostentatious
Devotions of his Fraternity, with so much fervor, that not being satisfied
with his ordinary Processions, which he made in the Habit of a Penitent,
through the Streets of Paris, he made one very extraordinary, going on foot in
the same Habit, with the greatest company he could get together of his most
devout and fervent Brothers, from the Chartreux, quite to our Lady of Chartres;
from whence he returned in the same manner, in two days to Paris. In truth,
it is credible that this proceeded from a great Foundation of Piety in this
Prince, whose nature was infinitely sweet, if he had not suffered it to be
corrupted by his pleasures. But as the Leaguers were not thoroughly persuaded of
this truth, and that through the hatred which they bore him, they interpreted
his best actions in the worst Sense, they decri'd this with all imaginable
spite; saying, it was nothing but mere Hypocrisy, and a ridiculous Mascarade
which he had invented, to mock God and deceive men, by covering his Vices and
his no Religion with the veil of Piety.

Yet the Leaguers were not the only men, who were scandalized at these new
forms of Processions, which are not much to the humor of the French. They were
almost generally blamed by all the World, and those who spoke the least harm of
them, could not hold from open Laughter. The most ridiculous part of them, and
which made a kind of Tragicomedy, wherein there was matter of Mirth and
Mourning, was that the Lacquies of these Courtiers, who in compliance to the
King, had enrolled themselves in this Brotherhood of Penitents, had the
insolence to mimick it, in derision of their Masters, even in the Court of the
Louvre, making show of lashing themselves lustily, as if they had been
Flagellants in earnest. But the King having heard of it, before the Farce was
quite played out, caused fourscore of them to be seized, whom they drew into
the Cour des Cuisines, where they were so well belabour'd with Whips, that they
were left in a way representing to the Life, that condition into which the
ancient Flagellants put their bodies by their bloody penance.

This, notwiths^anding, hindered not others, from doing somewhat much more
criminal, than the poor Lacquies had attempted. For some malicious Wits there
were amongst the Leaguers, who had the impudence to expose publicly, a
Picture where the King was seen clothed in his penitential Robes, pulling the
Honey combs out of an Hive, saying these words, which were written over his
Head, as the Motto of the Emblem, Sic eorum aculeos evito, It Is thus I cover
my self from their Stings. As if they desired to be understood in this witty,
but very spightfull expression, That as a man who intends to rob a Hive, must
cover his Face and Hands to avoid Stinging from the Bees, who Associate
themselves against the Thief: So the King, who drew the vital nourishment of
his Kingdom to lavish it prodigally on his Minions, and who endeavored to
ruin Religion, by the secret intelligence he held with the King of Navarre and
the Huguenots, disguised himself in this Habit of a Penitent, to cheat the
League, and to shelter himself from the just indignation of the Catholics
united against him. But they who were more clamorous than all the rest, were
certain Preachers of the League, who profaneing their Sacred Function of
Preaching the Gospel, by their Seditious Tongues, and dealing out a thousand
impostures from the Chair of Truth, declaimed venemously against the Lord's
Anointed, all whose actions they bespattered, even those which were adorned
with the greatest Piety.

Of all those Satyrists, he who roared the most insolently against those
Devotions of the King, was Doctor Poncet, Curate of St. Peter des Arsis, who
was accustomed to relate blunderingly in his Sermons, the sillyest things,
which the most violent Leaguers used to say, and preached them without fear or
wit to his Congregation, as if they had been as true as Gospel. 'Twas not that
he wanted good natural parts, as once he made it sufficiently appear, when the
Duke of Ioyeuse, the King's Favorite, having told him that he was glad to know
a man, who had so noble a Talent as to divert the people, and set them on the
merry pin of Laughing at his Sermons: He drily answered him, it is but
reasonable that I should make them laugh sometimes, since you have made them
cry so often, for the extraordinary Subsedies which were imposed for the
defraying of the excessive charges of your sweet Marriage. For the report went,
that the King had expended on them more than twelve hundred thousand Crowns.

Now this Seditious Preacher declaimed so outragiously against those
Processions, and told so many scandalous lies of the King himself, and the
fraternity of Penitents, whom he called the Brotherhood of Hypocrites and
Atheists, that the King clapped him up in Prison for some days, after which he
set him at liberty, thinking that this light Correction would teach him better
manners. But it was to little purpose; for the Fellow having heard it reported,
that he ^ad cha^^^^ his note, after having smarted for it, had the impudence to
say publicly in the Pulpit, that he was no Parrot to be taught his Lesson;
and thereupon, he fell to his old trade of railing more violently than ever.
Yet it was not long ever he inflicted on himself the punishment which he had so
well deserved.

As the License of speaking evil of the Higher Powers, was now become the
common practice of the Leaguers, a certain Advocate of Poitiers called Le
Breton, who had lost his Suit at Poitiers and at Paris, in pleading for a
Widow, enraged that the Duke of Guise and Mayenne, the King of Navarre, and the
King himself to whom he had made his addresses, going from one to the other,
and making so many fruitless Journies to complain of his hard Usage, had always
shaken him off, and treated him like a Fool or Madman, made a Libell full of
Villainous reproaches and calumnies against the King, and the Members of the
Parliament. The Writing having been seized together with the Author, it was
thought fit to make an example of him, to stop the fury of that licentious way
of Writing and of Speaking. Upon which, short work was made in the process of
this audacious Advocate, he had Justice roundly done him, and was fairly hanged
before the Steps of the Palace. None are so wretchedly fearful and cowardly at
the point of danger, as those who are the most foolhardy in railing, when they
believe they are out of reach: When our noble Doctor Poncet was told of this
Execution on the Lawyer, and that he saw by this terrible example, they were
punished with death who dared to affront the Sovereign Majesty with Scandalous
and Seditious Invectives, he was taken so violently with a sudden fright and
apprehension, that it seized on his Heart, and stopped the circulation of his
Blood; he betook himself immediately to his Bed, from whence this tongue Bravo
did never rise, for he died some few days after of pure imagination, that the
same distributive Justice would reach him, which had overtaken the miserable
Advocate.

In the mean time, the King who had always earnestly desired to have peace in
his Kingdom, made another attempt, though without Success, to oblige on one
side the Duke of Guise, to accommodate matters with the King of Navarre, on
Conditions more advantageous than he had yet offered him: and on the other
side, to cause the King of Navarre to return into the Catholic Church,
promising him in case he would, to declare him Lieutenant General in all the
Realm, to empower him yet with more Authority, than he himself had possessed
when he Commanded the Armies of the late King his Brother, to make him
President of the Council, and even at last, (which that King most passionately
desired,) to Dis^olve his Marriage with Queen Margaret, and to give him the
Princess of Lorrain, Granddaughter to the Queen Mother, who was willing to
consent to this Marriage, which might one day make that Princess Queen of
France, whom she always loved with so much tenderness.

These undoubtedly were most advantageous offers, and very capable of tempting
a man of that King's Character; who to say the truth, was none of the most
bigoted Huguenots, nor any bitter Enemy to the Catholics. But as he could
not believe after what had been done against him, that he had reason to rely on
these fair promises, that he feared to fall to the Ground betwixt two Stools;
nay, if once he was perceived to Waver, to be soon abandoned by his party,
which already leaned extremely toward the Prince of Conde, who was Known to be
a much better Protestant than himself, and moreover, that he thought himself
secure of great Succors from the Germans, he would not lend an Ear to any of
those Proposals, and gave a quick dispatch to the King's Envoys, with an answer
worthy of his ingenuity and of his Courage; That his Enemies desired nothing
less than his Conversion, because they took Arms for no other reason, than to
Exclude him from the Succession of the Crown; and to cantonize the Realm
amongst themselves, under pretense of preserving the Catholic Religion, which
he would maintain in it, much better than themselves; That he most humbly
besought his Majesty, to permit him to decide that Quarrel with the Princes of
the League, without his Majesty's giving himself the trouble to interpose in
it; and in three Months time he should have Fifty thousand Men, with which he
hoped Almighty God would do him the favor, to reduce the Leaguers in a short
time to their Duty, and to bring those Troublers of the public Peace, and
those Rebels, to the terms of Obedience which they owed their Sovereign.

This answer put the King into an extreme Agony of Spirit, not knowing where to
fix his Resolutions, nor which of the three Parties he should Espouse. For, in
case he should stand Neuter betwixt the King of Navarre and the League, he ran
the risque of being at the disposal of the Conqueror; if he ranged himself
with the King of Navarre's Party against the League, (as some time after he was
constrained to do,) he feared to pass for an Heretic, or for a favourer of
Heretics, as the League endeavored already to make it be believed by their
Calumnies against him; and in the sequel, to draw upon himself the power of
Spain, and all the Thunderbolts of Rome, which in that conjuncture he dreaded
more than the League and the Spaniard put together. Ann. 1587.
Thus as he believed not himself to be singly strong enough, to force both
parties to Obedience, that latter fear determined him though contrary to his
Inclinations against the King of Navarre's Party, as judging it to be the
juster, excepting only their Religion, which that Prince had solemnly
protested, was no ingredient of the present Quarrel. Insomuch that following
the advice of the Queen his Mother, and some few of his Council, who out of
their hatred to Heresy, were favorable to the League; he joined himself with
those whom he regarded as his greatest Enemies, to make War with his
Brother-in-Law, whose good intentions he well knew for the public welfare. A
War which drew from both parties both much Blood, and many Tears: the various
events of which will be the Subject of the following Book.

THE HISTORY OF THE LEAGUE.
LIB. II.
THE King, Ann. 1587.
according to his Custom, passed the Winter of this Memorable Year 1587,
partly in Feasts, Gaming, Ballets and Masquerades, and such other
divertisements; and partly in his Processions, his Fraternities, his
Retirements and his Penances, among the Feuillants, whom he had founded at the
Fauxbourg St. Honor, among the Capuchins, and especially in his little Cells
of the Monastery of Bois de Vincennes, wherein he had placed the Ieronimites
who were come from Spain, and wherein afterward were placed the Minimes. But
to his great grief, at the beginning of the Spring, he was forced to quit the
Pleasures and Exercises of that sort of Life, with which he was infinitely
satisfied, and rowze up himself to make War in conjunction with the League
against the King of Navarre, and the Germans, who were coming to join their
Forces with him.

To this effect, the Duke of Guise, who till that time had been making War with
the young Duke of Bouillon la Mark, without any considerable advantage,
returned to the Court, which was then at Meaux; and after having assured the
King that there was a great Army of Germans in readiness to take their March
toward our Frontiers, and demanded Forces which might be capable of stopping
them, he made great complaints of the Breach which he pretended to be made of
some Articles, in the Treaty of Nemours. Those of the League maintained that
these complaints were just, the others on the contrary made it evident, that
they were altogether unreasonable.

He complained amongst other things, that the Count of Brissac was not restored
to his Government of the Castle of Angers. But to that it was answered, that
the King had retaken it from the King of Navarre's Forces, by whom Brissac, who
held it for the League against his Majesty's intentions, had suffered it to be
surprised. He added that such as were his Dependants, and in his interests,
were not treated so favorably at Court as others; as if the King had been
obliged not only to forgive, but also to bestow particular favors on those
who had taken Arms against him, and to reward them for having discharged their
Cannon against his faithful Servants, as Francis de Balsac d' Entragues had
done against the Duke of Montpensier whom his Majesty had sent to Orleans. In
conclusion, he took it exceedingly ill, that the temporal Estate of Cardinal
Pelleve, Archbishop of Sens had been seized into the King's hands; as if the
World were not satisfied that this Prelate, a Pensioner of Spain, and who was a
declared Enemy to the King, was not then at Rome, doing him all manner of ill
Offices with the Pope, eternally decrying his conduct, and blasting him with
his sinister interpretations, and venomous aspersions.

Nevertheless, the King had the goodness not long time after, to grant him
Possession of his Revenues, and that to gratify His Holiness, who had desired
it of him by his Nuncio Morosini, but at the same time he desired the Pope to
admonish the Cardinal in private, that he should beware of relapsing into so
heinous an Offense, which if he should, he then hoped his Holiness would hold
himself obliged to punish him with the same Severity, as if the crime were
committed against his own person. For the present, he was content to mollify
the Duke of Guise with a parcel of fair words, assuring him that he would take
such order, that he should have reason to be satisfied in all things. After
which, having again exhorted him to make Peace with the King of Navarre, and
finding him still obstinate in the Negative, he took at last the resolution, to
dispose of the Forces he had already on foot, and of those he expected from the
Catholic Cantons of Swisserland, in such manner that he might find a way to
make himself Master of all, by weakening the King of Navarre and the League, and
by dispersing the German Army.

To this effect, he determined to have three Armies; The first very strong,
under the Command of the Duke of Ioyeuse in Poitou, against the King of
Navarre, who was not yet in a condition, as he believed, to oppose him. The
second in show, and upon the paper, at least as strong, but in reality much
weaker, under the Duke of Guise against the Germans, by whom considering their
great Numbers, he might reasonably hope the Duke might be oppressed, which he
had occasion enough to wish: And the third, incomparably stronger than the
other two, he was resolved to command in person, to hinder the Strangers, who
by that time would be harrass'd with so long a March, from passing the River of
Loire, and from joining the King of Navarre, and afterward to oblige them by
Treaty to return into their own Country; After which he should be in condition,
easily to reduce the two Parties to the obedience which they owed him.

Undoubtedly this design was not ill laid; but by the prudent Conduct and
Valor of the King of Navarre on the one side, and on the other of the Duke of
Guise, this specious project happened quite after another manner, than he had
imagined. And this is my present Business to discover, by describing exactly
and in order, the Exploits of these three Armies, which had all of them such
different Success.

The first of them who was obliged to take the Field, was the Duke of Ioyeuse,
to oppose the Progress which the King of Navarre began to make in Guyenne and
in Poitou. This Duke was that famous Favorite, whom the King, to comfort
himself for the loss of his other Minions Quelus and Maugiron, who were killed
in Duel, and St. Megrin who was Murdered as he went out of the Louvre, took
pleasure to raise to the highest Honors of the Realm, so far as even to make
him his own Brother-in-Law by Marrying him to Margaret Princess of Vaudemont,
Sister to the Queen, and loading him with Wealth and Favors, which he lavished
upon him with a full hand, without Rule or Measure; Insomuch that he seemed as
if he would share the Kingdom with him, and make him equal to himself: which
things are not compatible with the Dignity, nor consequently with the
Friendship of a King, as they are with that of a private person.

It Is true, that amongst all that Crowd of Favorites and Minions, who made
themselves insupportable under this Reign, especially to the Princes and the
Nobility, by the insolence of their Carriage, and abusing the favor of their
Prince, this man was the least hated of the whole Number: for, besides that he
was of a Birth much more illustrious than any of the rest, he was also without
comparison the most well-Natur'd, being Courteous, Obliging, Civil, pleased
with doing good Offices, and above all things Magni^icent, even beyond what can
be expressed, as if he had endeavored to equalize the greatness of his
Fortune, by that of his Bounty, which in a manner bore proportion with the
prodigality of the King his Master: Insomuch that one day finding at his
Chamber Door the four Secretaries of State, who had waited long for his coming
out, after having excused himself to them with all manner of civility, he
presented them with an hundred thousand Crowns, which just before he had
received from the liberality of the King.

But, as with all these good Qualities, he was extremely vain, opinionated of
his own capacity for all things, though as yet he had gained no manner of
experience; the Duke of Espernon his Rival, who endeavored to make his
advantage of the other's absence from Court, and to get the upper hand in the
King's favor, infused into him with great artifice the desire of Commanding
that Army, which was to be sent into Guyenne against the King of Navarre. In
effect he sued for it, and failed not to obtain it of the King, who was not
able to refuse him, though he had promised it before to Marshal d' Aumont, who
being endued with Conduct, Valor, Experience and Fidelity, had certainly
acquitted himself much better of that employment.

At first he had indifferent good Success, in Auvergne, in Givaudan, and in
Rouergue, which he had order to cleanse of the Huguenots; from thence to pass
into Languedoc, and afterward into Guyenne. He took some little Places which
were tolerably strong; amongst others Maleziou, Marenghol, La Peyre in
Givaudan, and Salvagnac in Rouergue; from whence he Marched, and presented
himself in Battaglia, before Toulouse, intending thereby to give notice to the
Parliament, that he was come to join himself with the Marshal of Ioyeuse, his
Father, Lieutenant of the King in Languedoc, to deliver that great Town, from
the troublesome neighborhood of the Huguenots. After which, his Army being
much diminished by Sickness, and by the retiring of many Gentlemen to their own
Houses, he left there the Marquis of Lavardin, John de Beaumanoir, his Marshal
de Camp, and returned in Post to the Court, there to pass the Winter.

The year following he had almost the same Fortune; for as he had been
informed, that the King of Navarre who had taken the Field about the beginning
of April, had already made himself Master in Poitou of Talmont, Chizay, Sasay,
St. Maixant, Fontenay and Mauleon, he returned to the Army with great speed,
bringing with him a recruit of six or seven thousand Men, with whom he
recovered St. Maixant, possessed himself of Tonnay-Charente, and of Mallezays,
made incursions even to the Gates of Rochelle, and cut in pieces two or three
Regiments of the King of Navarre, whom he forced in their Quarters: But, after
two Months of Campaign, the Plague and the Deserters, who were many, having
extremely weakn'd his Army, he the second time returned to Court, leaving his
Army as before, under the Command of the Marquis of Lavardin, who had not the
good fortune to preserve it, so well as he had done the year before.

For the King of Navarre, who was Marched out of Rochelle, with all the Forces
he could make, to distress the Army of Lavardin, having heard that he was
making his Retreat toward the River of Loire, followed him so close, that on
the twenty eighth, and the twenty ninth of April he surprised him, and cut in
pieces one half of his Cavalry, and even the Duke's Gensdarms, consisting of
threescore and ten Horsemen, were all killed or taken, together with his own
Standard. All that the Marquis of Lavardin could do, after this defeat, was to
retire at full speed to La Hay upon the Creuse.

It was before this place, which was not assaulted for want of Cannon, that the
King of Navarre received a Reinforcement of six hundred Horse, and two thousand
Arquebusiers, which the Vicount de Turenne brought him from Perigord and
Limousin; and almost at the same time, the Prince of Conde came to join him
with the greatest part of the Gentry from Saintonge. And it being then
reported, that the young Count of Soissons, (whom he had drawn into his party
by large promises, as well as the Prince of Conti that Count's Brother,) was
approaching to the Loire with three hundred Gentlemen, and five hundred
Dragoons, he advanced as far as Monsoreau upon that River, whither the Vicount
of Turenne, who went to receive him at Lude, with a convoy of seven hundred
Horse, brought him without the loss of one single man.

This being done, it was resolved in their Council to pass no farther in the
direct way toward the Germans whom they were to meet; because they were not
yet strong enough, and that they should have upon their hands both the King's
Army, and that of the Duke of Ioyeuse, who would certainly beat them, which by
consequence would prove the defeat of the Foreign Army. For which reason they
returned into Poitou with design to fetch a large compass, and to gain the
passage of the River more upward toward Roan, and afterward to march into
Bourgogne, there to receive the German Army, to whose principal Commanders the
King of Navarre dispatched away Morlas, to desire them that they would take
that way. But that King had not the leisure to execute his intended Enterprise,
because he was followed so hastily by the Duke of Ioyeuse, that there was a
necessity of coming to a Battle, which was given in the manner that I am now
going to relate.

The news being already spread at Court of the late successes of the King of
Navarre, the Duke of Ioyeuse, to whom the King had given a very considerable
recruit of Soldiers, and who was accompanied by all the young Gallants and
sprightly Noblemen of the Court, who according to custom attend the Favorite,
received orders to repair immediately to the Troops he had left with the
Marquis of Lavardin, to follow the Navarrois, which way soever he bent, and to
hinder his conjunction with the Germans. In order to this he came to Tours,
where having understood, that the King of Navarre being gone from Monsoreau,
was upon his retreat in Poitou, and hasting into Guyenne, he pursued his Army
with so much speed, that he got before it at Saintonge, insomuch, that having
passed the River of Charente, at Chasteauneuf, coasting always on the left
hand, he came by the way of Barbesieux to Chalais, very near the River Drogne,
the same day, being the Eighteenth of October, that the King of Navarre, who
had taken more on the right hand, by Taillebourg, quartered at Monlieu,
somewhat farther off on this side the River, having received some small
recruits, and Cannon, which he had from Rochelle.

At some little distance from that place, the small River of Drogne casts it
self into that of Lisle, which is somewhat the larger of the two: The latter
has its source in Limosin, near St. Irier, and the former in Perigord near
Brantome; and after having been mixed for three or four Leagues, they
disembogue themselves into the Dordogne, overagainst Libourne. A little below
the place where these two Rivers meet, is situate the Bourg of Guitre, and
somewhat above it that of Coutras, with a reasonable strong Castle upon the
Drogne betwixt the two Rivers. Now the King of Navarre being of necessity to
pass them, that he might follow his intended way to Guyenne, the Marshal of
Matignon, Governor of that Province, one of the most faithful, most valiant
and most prudent Captains which France has ever had, and who had orders from
the King to assist Monsieur de Ioyeuse, writ him word, that he advised him to
possess himself speedily of those two Bourgs, and there to entrench, assuring
him that he would not fail to be at Libourne, by the 22d day, with all the
Forces he could draw together from Gascogne, Quercy, Perigord and Limosin.
'Twas prudently considered by him; for there was nothing more wholesome than
this counsel, because in following it, the King of Navarre had easily been
stopped; without daring to attempt the passage either above the conflux of
those two Rivers or below it; or in case he had attempted it, he had been shut
up betwixt two Armies, each of which could not be engaged with more than half
of his, when the other half had passed the River of Lisle.

But the foresight, the celerity and the resolution of the King of Navarre on
the one part, and on the other the rashness, the presumption and the vanity of
the Duke of Ioyeuse, broke those just measures which the Marshal of Matignon
had taken. For the next morning, Lavardin, Marshal de Camp to Ioyeuse, who had
advanced the night before with 120 light Horse to possess himself of Coutras,
found that La Trimouille had prevented him an hour before, and seized that
Post, with greater numbers than he had with him. Insomuch that he was forced to
return to the Duke, who was gone to pass the Drogne somewhat higher at Roche
Chalais; where he lodged himself while the King of Navarre who had followed
Trimouille very close, passed over his Army at the Ford of Coutras. Thus these
two Armies were enclosed at the same time betwixt the two Rivers, at the
distance of two short Leagues from one another, without any thing betwixt them,
that was capable of hindering them to engage, in case they were so resolved.

It Is true, that both parties had strong reasons to avoid the Battle; for the
King of Navarre, if he should lose it, was irrecoverably ruined, because he
should be left without any possibility of recruiting, at the mercy of two
powerful Armies, in pursuit of him; and if he gained it, his affairs would not
be in a much better posture than they were already: because he had yet upon his
hands the Marshal of Matignon, a General of much better conduct than Ioyeuse;
and the King had three other Armies on foot, which might unite themselves to
get betwixt him and the Germans, and to hinder his conjunction with them.

As for the Duke of Ioyeuse, he ought to have considered, that he had to do
with old Soldiers, more experienced, and better disciplined than his own;
which consisted for the most part of new raised men; that the young Gallants
who accompanied him were indeed men of Courage, but who had gained no more
experience than himself: considering which, if he had acted prudently, he
should have stayed for the Marshal of Matignon, who in four time at the
farthest, would have been at Libourne, from whence he might easily have joined
him. And if the King of Navarre had endeavored to have hindered it, he had
been enclosed betwixt the two Armies, one of which had charged him in the
front, and the other in the Rere: For thus in all reasonable probability it
must have happened. But the Duke was so blinded with his eagerness of fighting,
(as being infinitely desirous to redeem his reputation at Court, and to regain
the advantage, which his Rival had got over him in the King's favor, by an
eminent victory which his vanity had assured him was indubitable) that his
opinion of success hurried him beyond those weighty reasons, the rules of War,
and even those of common sense.

In pursuance of this, he first of all others having resolved upon the Battle,
and giving only this for his reason, that the Enemy, whom he held enclosed
betwixt two Rivers, could not possibly escape, in case they marched directly to
him before he had time to get away, all the young Nobless who surrounded him,
gave such loud applause of his opinion, crying out, Battle, Battle, that they
drew the rest into the same resolution; no man being able, or daring to resist
the torrent. And there was so much of presumption in this Council, which was so
hastily concluded, that the Duke, as if he were assured of victory, fearing
nothing but that the Enemy should escape his hands, before he could come up to
him, began, even before midnight to march his Army toward Coutras, that he
might attack the King of Navarre at break of Day. But that Prince being
informed of his intentions by his Scouts, and foreseeing that he should be
constrained to come to a Battle, unless he would incur the manifest danger of
being beaten, if he should make his retreat in the face of the Enemy, was
resolved, for that reason, to march toward him, and spare him the pains of
half his way.

In effect, having heard the account of a rough Skirmish, which happened in the
Night betwixt the Scouts and the Light Horse of the two Armies, without any
considerable advantage on either side; he got on Horseback a little before Day,
and advancing toward the Enemy, he went to possess himself of the Place he had
designed for the Field of Battle, which was a Plain betwixt six and seven
hundred paces of Diameter, on the far side of a little Wood, about half a
League distant from Coutras, having that Town on his Back, on his left hand the
Drogne, which bounds the Plain on that side, and on his right hand a Warren, a
Copse, lopped the year before, a kind of little Park bending toward the Enemy,
and fenced only with an Hedge and Ditch. There it was that he drew up his Army
in Battalia, which consisted in the whole of about four thousand five hundred
Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horse.

He placed on his right Wing, the biggest of the two Battalions of his
Infantry, made up of the Regiments of Castelnau, Parabere, Salignac, and some
other Companies, who extended themselves in the Warren, advancing even to the
Hedge and Ditch which fenced the little Park that covered them. These were
sustained on their left by the Squadron of Light Horse, which had at their Head
La Trimouille, Vivans, Arambure and Vignoles, who Commanded them; and before
them an hundred and twenty Arquebusiers for their Forlorn Hope. There followed
them sloping always to the left, the whole Gendarmery divided into six
Squadrons: the first, consisting at most of two hundred Gentlemen, almost all
Gascons, Commanded by the Vicount of Turenne, accompanied by Pardaillan,
Fontrailles and Choupes.

There came after them at the distance of sixty Paces, the Squadron of the
Prince of Conde, who had with him Louis de Saint Gelais, Marshal de Camp, des
Agueaux, Montaterre, the Vicount of Gourdon, the Vidame of Chartres, and more
than two hundred and fifty Men at Arms. There was an Interval of an hundred and
fifty Paces, betwixt the Prince and the King of Navarre, who Rode at the Head
of his Squadron of three hundred Gentlemen, amongst whom were the Lords de la
Force, de Ponts, de la Boulaye, and de Foix Candale who bore the Standard. At
last followed the young Count of Soissons, having after him the famous Captain
Favas, and two hundred Horse in his Squadron, distant from the King two hundred
Paces, and sustained, on his left, along the River side, by another gross
Battalion, composed of the very flower of the Regiments, which were Commanded
by Charbonniere, the young Montgomery, de Preaux, de la Borie and de Neuvy.

All these Squadrons made up a large Front, and were of little Depth, that they
might take up the more in Breadth. And the King of Navarre, as he had formerly
seen it practiced by the Admiral of Coligny, had cast into their Intervals, on
both sides of his Horse, small Parties of Dragoons, by fifteen and twenty in a
Company, who some of them with one Knee on the Ground, some of them half
Stooping, and some of them standing upright, that they might not mischieve one
another, should discharge upon the Enemy at fifteen foot distance, for
certainty ^o Execution. And his Artillery, which the Night before he had left
beyond the River, that he might pass it more speedily to gain Coutras, being
come up to him, just in the nick, under the Convoy of George Clermont d'
Amboise, Master of the Ordnance, was advantageously placed on a small ascent,
at the right hand of the Count of Soiss^ns. Thus was this Army ranged in form
of a Crescent, whose two Battalions of Infantry, more advanced than the
Squadrons toward the Enemy, made the two Horns, and betwixt both of them the
Squadrons of the Prince of Conde, and the Vicount of Turenne formed the hollow
of the middle part.

In the mean time the Duke of Ioyeuse, having passed through certain narrow and
troublesome ways, which lay betwixt his last Nights Lodging and the Plain, and
that with difficulty enough, which was caused by the disorderly March of his
young Gallants, whose eagerness was not to be commanded; the Marquis of
Lavardin his Marshal de Camp a great Soldier, on whom chiefly he relied, drew
up his Army into Battalia, as well as the disorder would give him leave; his
whole Forces, at that time, not amounting to more than nine thousand men, and
those ill Disciplined. Over against that gross Battalion which enclosed the
right Wing of the Enemy, he placed on his left Wing the Regiments of Picardy
and Tiercelin, which formed a Battalion of eight hundred Musketeers, covered
with about a thousand Corslets. These had on their right hand the Light
Horsemen and the Albanois, Commanded by their Captain Mercurius Buat, and
another Squadron of four hundred Lances, whom Lavardin himself chose to Lead in
the room of Monsieur de Souvre, who lay dangerously hurt of a fall. Montigny
who Commanded another of five hundred Lances, was placed on the same hand, in
opposition to the Vicount of Turenne; after which, bending still toward the
River which they had on their right Hand, there was extended on both sides the
way right over against the three Princes, a gross of twelve hundred Lances,
wherein was the Person of the General, and the Standard, born by the Sieur de
Maillay Bressay.

The whole body of the young Gallants who were Volunteers, with the greatest
part of the Noblemen and Gentlemen, were in this gross, the first Rank of which
was composed only of Counts, Marquesses and Barons, having at their Head the
Duke of Ioyeuse, accompanied by his younger Brother the Marquis of Saint
Sauveur, and the brave St. Luc; and to close the Right Wing, there was placed
betwixt the Standard and the Drogne another gross Battalion, made up of the
Regiments of des Clus^aux, and de Verduisant, sustained by seven Cornets of
Dragoons, which might make in all a gross of near three thousand men. The
Artillery which like the King of Navarre's consisted only of a few
Fieldpieces, was planted advancing a little toward the right hand, betwixt
the gross Squadron of the Duke of Ioyeuse, and that of Montigny.

The two Armies, which continued in presence of each other for the space of
almost an hour, without moving, made two very differing Prospects* For on the
one side, there was nothing to be seen but gilded Armor, gloriously
damasqu'd, glittering in the Sun; painted Lances covered over with Ribands,
with their Banderolles dancing in the Air, rich Coats of Velvet, with broad
Lace and Galoon of Gold and Silver, wherewith every Troup was Habited,
according to the Colors of his Captain; large and beautiful colored Plumes,
waving on their Crests, and shadowing them in large Bunches; Scarfes
magnificently embroidered, and edged with long Gold Fringe, and all these young
Cavaliers carrying the Ciphers and Colors of their Mistres^es, as proudly
adorned as if they were Marching in a Carrousel, and not upon the point of
giving Battle. To conclude, we may say it was an Army equipped after the
Persian mode, where so much luxury and pomp was seen, and so much Gold and
Silk, in the Habits of the Men and the Caparisons of the Horses.

But the contrary side afforded no such Spectacle; old Soldiers inured to toil
and labor, whose meens were ^ierce and menacing; uncomb'd, ill clothed, with
their long Buff-Coats all bespawl'd, over their course threadbare Clothes,
having no other Ornament than trusty Bilbo by their sides, and sound Armor on
their Breasts, Mounted on traveling Horses, without Housses, or any other part
of bravery besides the Horsemen on their backs; in fine, the Army of another
Alexander, in opposition to that of another Darius.

These two Armies so very different, having looked each other in the Face, long
enough to take their Measures, the King of Navarre somewhat before Nine of the
Clock, commanded Prayers to be made, to ask the assistance of Almighty God,
making loud Protestations that he was not going to fight against his King, but
against the Leaguers who had enterpris'd the destruction of the Royal House, by
depriveing of his Birthright the Heir presumptive of the Crown. This example
was not imitated in the Army of the Duke of Ioyeuse: on the contrary, when they
perceived a kind of motion in the other Army when they were at Prayers, some
who were about the Duke of Ioyeuse cried out aloud in derision of them, they
are our own, the Cowards tremble: But the Sieur de Vaux Lieutenant to Monsieur
de Bellegarde, Governor of Saintonge told him plainly in these words; No, no,
Monsieur, believe it not, I know those people better, they are now at their
Devotions, but you shall see them fight like Lions.

Immediately upon this, the Cannon began to play; the first discharge which was
made from the King of Navarre's Ordnance, took place in the very Standard of
the Duke, which was an ill omen to him, and all the other Vollies, thundering
athwart the thick Forest of their Lanciers, into the gross Battalion which
closed their le^t Wing, put all the Regiment of Tiercelin into a vast disorder,
sweeping away whole ranks of them at once. On the contrary the Duke's Cannon,
did little or no Execution; for besides that it answered not the roaring of the
other, till some time after, it killed b^^ only one Horse of the Prince of
Conde's Squadron; because their Guns were so unadvisedly planted, and the
Cannoniers took their aim so very low, that the Bullets were grounded in a
little rise of Earth, which intercepted their passage to the Enemy.

Then Lavardin, crying out to his General that all was lost, if they gave time
to their Enemies to fire again, immediately sounded the Charge, and joining to
his own Squadron, those of the light Horsemen and the Albanois, gave in so
furiously on the gross of the Enemies light Horse, that having at the first
onset overturned la Trimouille and Arambure with his Lance, and dangerously
wounded Vivans, their whole Squadron was broken, routed, and pursued into
Coutras, where the Albanois fell to Plundering the Baggage, which the King of
Navarre had left behind him in that Town. At the same time Montigny who was
directly opposite to the Vicount of Turenne, perceiving the Flank of his
Gascons to lie bare, by the flight of the light Horsemen which they had on
their right hand, pushed them so vigorously on that part, that he broke into
them, and opened without any trouble from one side to the other, that whole
Squadron, which thus disordered, were put to the rout, as their ^ellows the
light Horse had been before them.

There were some of them, and even of those who had the reputation of the
bravest, so thoroughly seized with this sudden fright, that they took the River,
and flying for their Lives, as fast as they could Spur, carried as far as Pons
the false report of their Armies being wholly routed, for which they had
afterward so much regret, that they died for shame and sorrow of it. This
^light of the light Horsemen was so precipitate and so general, that at first
there were only remaining in the Field Turenne and Choupes, with one other
Gentleman, to whom la Trimouille and Arambure joined themselves, who having
been remounted, and seeing they were abandoned by their Soldiers, cast
themselves into the Squadron of the Prince of Conde, to combat by his side.

It Is true, that the greatest part of these Runaways, immediately ralli'd, and
put themselves in order behind the squadrons of the Princes, to repair their
fault by Fighting, as afterward they did most Valiantly. But this could not
save them from the severe raillery of their own party. For as it is commonly
seen, that there is a kind of jealousy, and we may almost call it enmity
betwixt neighboring Provinces, those of Saintonge and of Poitou, who had no
great kindness for the Gascons, and who besides were somewhat picqu'd, that the
King of Navarre was used to praise them a little too extravagantly, seeing them
first disordered and then routed, cried out as loud as possibly they could,
after the example of Monsieur de Montausier, At the least it cannot now be
said, that these are either Poitevins or of Saintonge. This made the Gascons
ready to burst with extremity of choler; but all the revenge they took, was to
strain their Forces to the utmost as they did, by a noble emulation, to behave
themselves yet better than those Valiant men.

To proceed, this first disorder was so far from drawing on a greater, as it
ordinarily happens, that it only served to augment the Courage and Valor of
the rest. For on the one part, the foot of the left Wing, which had bravely
advanced to push o^ Pike, against the Regiment des Cluseaux, having beheld the
rout of the light Horsemen and the Gascons, and hearing the shouts of Victory
which were already Echoed from the Duke's Army, were not discouraged from
passing on, and discharging furiously at a very small distance; after which
changing hands with their Muskets, and taking to their Swords, they cried out
to each other with a generous despair, let us run to our death in that
Battalion; they opened their passage through the Enemies Pikes, which they
either cut asunder, or struck aside, they broke in upon them, they scattered
them, and made a terrible Execution.

On the other part, the Gentlemen and Cavaliers of the Prince's Squadron,
seeing those of their Companions who fled, and their Enemies pursuing at their
Heels, with shouts of Joy cast on them a fierce disdainful look, and told one
another laughing, these People have their Business yet to do, we are they that
must abate their pride. And it fell out as they desired; the Enemy came up to
them: For the Duke of Ioyeuse, swelled with the happy success of the first
Encount^r, and believing he went to a Victory as good as gotten, spurs on
before his Troops, making a pompous show, his rich Armor glittering with Gold
and Silver and ennammell, almost hidden under his Plumes and Ribands, and
making a sign, both with his Voice and Hand, for all his Braves to follow him,
the whole Squadron together take their carrier of four hundred paces, and
giving the Reins to their Horses, with their Lances in the rest, run at full
speed against the three Princes.

In the mean time the King of Navarre, who that day was only habited like a
private Soldier, in a plain gray Suit of Arms, with a Headpiece of the same,
barefaced to be known in the thickest of the throng, rode through every rank,
in few words exhorted the nearest to him, and with his Gesture and his Eyes the
more remote, to Fight like men of Honor, for the rights of the Royal House,
and only to behave themselves like him: After which placing before him eight
Gentlemen, of such as were the surest armed, with strong Lances to overturn the
first who made head against him, and to open his passage into the Squadron, he
commanded his men to advance only ten paces, and to expect the shock of the
Enemy, ordering his Horsemen, who for the most part were Armed but with Sword
and Pistol, not to Fire but at a very near distance, that every shot might
certainly take place.

These Orders being well executed, were the gaining of the Battle; for that
gross of Horse which came up to the Charge at full Gallop, was well cleared by
the furious discharge that was made by the first Ranks of the Dragoons, which
the Princes had divided amongst their Squadrons. Many of those Counts and
Marquesses and young Courtiers, who had taken that Post of Honor, were beaten
from their Horses; and for the rest, who had taken their carrier too far, they
were out of breath, when they should have given the blow with their Lances,
their strokes were so feeble, that they had little or no effect, and the
Princes broke in upon them with so much Vigor and promptitude, that they gave
them not leisure to let their Lances descend, which therefore they were forced
to throw away, and betake themselves to their Swords and Pistols. By this means
they were reduced to an equality of Arms, but with very different success.

For the three Squadrons of the Princes being at a just distance from each
other, and in excellent order, attacqu'd that of Ioyeuse on three sides; The
King of Navarre charging him in Front, the two Princes in the Flanks; the Count
of Soissons on the right side, and the Prince of Conde on the left. All three
of them in that bloody medley performing what could possibly be expected from
Valiant men; But the King of Navarre conspicuous above the rest, that he might
animate his Soldiers, who beheld him exposing himself to danger like the
meanest man amongst them, gave admirable proofs of his courage in every place.
He came even to shouldring in the Press such of the Enemies whom the ardour of
combating, or the crowd of the combatants drove by chance against him; and
finding himself engaged betwixt two Valiant men, the Baron de Fumel, and
Monsieur de Chasteau Renard, who was Guidon to Sansaac, who made up to him with
their Swords on high, while at the same instant, a Gendarme struck on his
Headpiece with the Truncheon of his Lance, he fired his Pistol on one of them,
collard the other whom he took Prisoner, crying out to him, yield Philistin;
and disengaged himself from the third, who was immediately taken by one of his
Esquires. In conclusion, all that great body of Gendarmery, in which consisted
almost the whole strength of the Duke's Army, having been so vigourously
charged and broke on every side, was overthrown, cut in pieces, and entirely
defeated in less than half an hour, without being able once to Rally, and that
not out of Cowardice, but on the contrary, (what never or very rarely happens,)
by the too great courage of the vanquished Party. For the greater part of them
being Lords of the highest Quality, and Gentlemen almost all young, full of
bravery and fire; they thought so little of dispersing, or of betaking
themselves to Flight, that there were not ten of them killed or made Prisoners
out of the Field of Battle, where they rather chose to perish, than to yield
one foot of ground.

After this defeat, the Conquerours having joined their own Battalions, who
encouraged by the example, fought with almost equal advantage against the
adverse Infantry, it was no longer a Combat, but a most horrible Slaughter of
that miserable Foot; to whom they gave no manner of Quarter, because Ioyeuse
had given none to the two Regiments, which he had defeated near St. Maixant. As
for that Duke, when he beheld that all was lost, instead of taking on the right
hand, to save himself at La Roche Chalais, he turned upon the left, with
intention to go to his Cannon, and Fighting beside it to end his days: saying
to St. Luc, (who asked him what he resolved to do.) To live no longer,
Monsieur de St. Luc, but to die generously after my Misfortune. But even that
last Happiness was denied him; for he had not made twenty or thirty Paces
toward his Artillery, when he fell into the hands of two Captains, St.
Christopher, and la Viole: and as he was offering them for his Ransom an
hundred thousand Crowns, a Sum which those two Captains had not been very sorry
to receive, there came up two others, Bourdeaux and des Centiers, who whether
out of hatred or revenge, or out of spite, that they had not taken him
themselves, to have shared so great a Ransom, basely discharged their Pistols
on him; Shot him into the Head, and overturned him dead upon the place.

The Valiant St. Luc, who took upon the spot a resolution as generous as his,
and much more daring, was also much more fortunate in the execution of it: For
having perceived the Prince of Conde at a distance, and distinguishing him from
the rest, while that Prince was eagerly pursuing his Victory, he comes up to
him at a round Gallop, and couching his Lance, overturns him to the Ground with
a great stroke, which he gave him full in the middle of his Cuirasse, after
which, immediately throwing himself from his Horse, he presented him his hand
with extreme respect, to lift him from the Earth, and at the same time, begged
him to receive him as his Prisoner; which the brave Prince, admireing the
courage and prudence of his Enemy, performed, embracing him with all the
generosity of which he made profession.

This Victory was complete: the Colors, the Cannon, the Baggage, remained in
possession of the Conqueror; and with these, the Field of Battle, covered with
betwixt four and five thousand Soldiers, and four hundred Gentlemen of the
Dukes Army, who lay extended on the Plain; amongst whom, besides the Duke of
Ioyeuse, and his young Brother Monsieur de St. Sauveur, were the Counts de La
Suze, d' Avaugour, d' Aubijoux, the Sieurs de Neuvy, du Bordet, de
Mailly-Bressay, de Roussay, youngest Brother of Piennes, Guidon to Ioyeuse, de
Vaux, Lieutenant to Bellegarde, d' Alluin de Fumel, de Roche fort de
Croissotte, de Tiercelin, Saveuse, who was Mestre de Camp, and the Sieur de St.
Lary-Bellegarde, Son to the Marshal of the same Name, and Governor of
Saintonge and of Angoumois, who being mortally wounded, died not long after of
his hurts. Almost all the remainders of the Army were made Prisoners, excepting
only the Albanois, who forsaking the pillage, about which they were busied at
Coutras, preserved themselves by flight, and the Marquis of Lavardin, who not
being able to Rally his men, who had pursued the Runnaways too far, retired
almost alone to Roche-Chalais, with one Ensign which he saved out of the
Regiment of Picardy. This retreat way very Honorable to that Valiant
Gentleman, who having renounced Calvinism, which his Father had embraced,
combated that day against the King of Navarre, as against the Head of the
Huguenots; but not long after, casting himself into his party, for the defense
of the State and the Rights of the Crown, he always fought for him against the
League, with so much Valor, Conduct, and Fidelity, that at length he received
in Recompense of his long Services, the Baston of Marshal de France.

To conclude, this memorable Victory cost not the Conquerours above five or six
Gentlemen, and what added to the luster of it, was the wonderful Clemency of
the King of Navarre. By his own presence he stopped the fury of the Soldiers,
who were putting all the Infantry to the Sword. He received all Prisoners of
Quality with infinite Courtesy, he cheered them for their loss by extolling
their Courage; he sent almost every man home without paying Ransom; he
re^^or'd to the Parents and Relations, the Bodies of such as had died
Honorably in the Field of Battle, and beyond all this, the Corpse of the Duke
de Ioyeuse, for whom the King, in continuance of his favor even after Death,
performed a most magnificent Funeral with Royal Pomp. In ^ine, this Generous
Conqueror, had so much moderation that he sent his immediate protestations to
the King, that aft^r this advantage he demanded nothing more, than the Honor
of his favor, and the restoring of that Peace which his Majesty had graciously
given him, and which their common Enemies had broken.

But after all, it must be ingenuously acknowleg'd, that as he had the conduct
and valor of Hannibal, in this Battle, so he had his misfortune too, in not
understanding the art of managing his Victory, or in his unwillingness to use
it. For were it that the Conquerours enriched with the Spoils of their Enemies
longed for Quiet, that they might enjoy their Booty at their ease, or that the
Noblesse who had served under him as Volunteers, had not obliged themselves to
longer Duty than till that time; or that having weakened by his Victory the
party of the League, he desired not that the Huguenots, who confided more in
the Prince of Conde than himself, should increase their strength, or to speak
more plainly, that certain amorous engagements, somewhat unworthy of a
Victorious Hero recalled him into Bearne; most certain it is that he dissolved
his Army, and licensed them to the time he had appointed, then, repassed the
Garonne speedily, with part of the Ensigns and Colors he had taken from the
Enemy, which he was ambitious to present to the fair one whom he loved, instead
of putting himself into a condition, of reaping that Fruit which he might
reasonably expect from so great a Victory, and of going speedily to join the
great Army of Germans, which was Marching to his Assistance; and concerning
which, it will now be necessary that I speak.

For while these things were acting in France, the Protestant Princes of
Germany, who were furiously incensed against the King, for that disdainful and
rough answer, which he had made to their Ambassadors, set on foot a more
powerful Army, than ever they had sent into this Kingdom, for the succor of
the Huguenots. There were in this Body which was raised, eight thousand five
hundred Reyters, betwixt five and six thousand Lansquenets, and sixteen
thousand Swissers, whom the Sieur de Clervant had obtained from the
Protestants, for the King of Navarre: besides four thousand others, whom he had
left behind him in his pa^^age through Dauphine, to reinforce the Army of
Lesdiguieres, but before they were able to join him, they were totally defeated
by the famous Colonel of Corsica, Alphonso d' Ornano. Duke John Casimir, of
whom I have frequently made mention in my History of Calvinism, ought to have
commanded these Germans in his own Person; but immediately before they were to
March, he excused his going with them, because he was obliged to stay in
Germany, having taken upon him the Government of the Palatinate during the
minority of the young Electour his Nephew; whereupon they were constrained to
receive the Baron of Dona his Favorite, whom long before he had resolved to
substitute in his room.

Justice ought in reason to he rendered to every man's desert, in speaking the
naked truth, without taking up a prejudice on trust from received Opinions,
which often have very false Founda^^ons: Though the greatest part of the French
and Italian Historians, have spoken little to the advantage of this Baron; it is
nevertheless most certain, that he was of a Birth Noble enough to sustain the
Quality of a General, and that he was not at all below the Dignity of that
Employment, being descended from one of the most illustrious Families of
Prussia; and his Ancestors having possessed for many Ages the Honor of
Burgraves, which is one of the most considerable of the Empire. He was a man
who wanted neither Sense nor good Carriage, and was besides extremely brave:
but on the other side, he had neither Authority, nor experience enough to
command so great an Army, the greater part of whose Officers were commonly at
variance amongst themselves, and never willing to obey his Orders.

Thus, to speak properly, he was only the General of the Reyters, though the
Lansquenets and Swissers acknowledged him for their Chief, in the room of
Prince Casimir: But the young Duke of Bouillon was he, whom the King of Navarre
had named for his Lieutenant, and who had the Title of General of that Army.
Notwithstanding which, he had no absolute Command over it, because there was a
Council composed of six French Officers, and as many Germans joined with him,
who, together with the Baron of Dona, decided all things by plurality of
Voices; which was the occasion of much disorder. For the Germans seldom or
never joined in opinion with the French; and on the other side, the French were
jealous both of them, and of one another; so that there could be no good
intelligence amongst them. Besides all which, there were some of their number
whom the Duke of Guise, the most artfull of Mankind, had gained into his
Interests, and who underhand gave him notice of all the resolutions, which were
taken in the Council.

For the rest, after the Strangers had received some part of their Pay, which
the Queen of England had supplied, after they had been assured of the
remainder, and also promised that the King of Navarre would join them in a
little time, and that they should have only the League upon their hands, and
not the King, who had Armed for no other purpose, but to assist them in the
destruction of the Guises; they passed the Rhine about the twentieth of August,
and in the Plain of Strasburg found William Robert de la Mark Duke of Bouillon,
and his Brother John Robert Count de la Mark, who had waited there for their
coming about fifteen days, with two thousand Foot, and between three and four
hundred French Horse. Thus this Army in the general review which was made of it
near Strasburg, was found to consist of thirty three thousand men effective;
all experienced Soldiers, and well equipped; without reckoning into the
number, the fifteen or sixteen hundred foot, and two hundred Horse, which the
Count of Chastillon, Son of the late Admiral, brought thither in a small time
after; and about two thousand others who joined them in their march. Insomuch
that when they entered France, they were not less than forty thousand Men; with
eighteen or twenty pieces of Artillery; which undoubtedly was sufficient to
strike a terror into those against whom they marched in favor of the King of
Navarre.

And indeed this distant thunderclap, which was heard as far as Paris, alarmed
the Council of Sixteen so te^ribly, that to shelter themselves from the ensuing
Storm, they sent fresh instructions to the principal Cities of the Kingdom, and
a new form of Oath to unite them more straightly to themselves in their common
defense: endeavoring maliciously to make them believe, that it was the King
himself who had called in these Heretic Foreigners, with intention of
destroying those who defended the Catholic Religion, and with design that
hereafter Heresy it self and the Promoter of it should Reign in France. But
the Duke of Guise, whose undaunted heart was not capable of the least
cowardice, took ways much different from theirs, in pursuance of the same
design, viz. the destruction of that formidable Army, which menaced him with
inevitable ruin. And he compassed his intentions happily and gloriously, by
his admirable conduct, readiness of wit, and daring resolution, performing one
of the noblest actions which were ever done, and which alone may justly rank
him with the greatest Heroes of Antiquity.

He had almost nothing of all that had been promised him at Meaux, when there
was made the partition of the Forces, which by appointment were to serve in the
King's Army and in his. Of twenty Troops of Men at Arms which were ordered him,
not one appeared at the Rendesvouz that was assigned at Chaumont: there was
neither Money, nor Ammunition, nor Cannon sent him: so that having assembled at
Vaucoleur, on the twenty second of August, all the forces he could get
together, by the means of his friends, and partly by the money of the
Parisians, there were found no more than a body of three thousand Men; that is
to say, about six hundred Cuirassiers of his own company, and those of the
Prince of Ioinville's, his Son, of the Count of Chaligny, the Chevalier d'
Aumale, the Sieurs of La Chastre, and D' Amblize; three hundred Horse which
were sent him from the Garrison of Cambray by Balagny, who had made himself a
Leaguer, to change his Government into a Principality, under protection of the
League; besides almost as many light Horsemen, some Italians some Albanois,
which were sent him by the Duke of Parma, Governor of the Low Countries. As
for Infantry he had no more than the two Regiments of Captain St. Paul, and of
Johannes, on whom he very much relied.

With these inconsiderable Forces he went to join himself with those of Charles
Duke of Lorrain; who with the Succors which he had received out of Flanders,
under the conduct of the Marquis d' Avre, and the Marquis de Varambon, and all
he could Levy in Germany, had no more than seven thousand Foot, and about
fifteen hundred Horse; Insomuch, that both in conjunction could not make above
twelve or thirteen thousand Men at most, to oppose against thirty five
thousand, who were coming to fall on them. The Duke of Lorrain, who foresaw
this Tempest, had done what lay in him to provide against it; and to put
himself in a state of defense by fortifying the greatest part of his Towns. And
observing that Nancy, his Capital City, was of too little compass to receive
those great numbers of Persons of Quality, and Clergymen, who ran thither for
refuge from every quarter, some from their Countrey-houses, others from their
small Castles, and unfortified Towns, he took this opportunity to enlarge that
great and beautiful part of it, which is called the New Town; on the
Fortifications of which, being without dispute the fairest and the strongest of
that time, he employed his Workmen with so much diligence, that it was already
in condition of making a stout defense against that Army, which as numerous and
as powerful as it was had never the courage to attempt it.

These two Armies being one of them on this side the Mountains of Vauge, in
Lorrain, and the other beyond those Mountains in Alsace, a Council was held in
both of them at the same time; and it so happened by an accident seldom known,
that the same resolution was taken by them both. In the German Army the Duke of
Bouillon, and one part of the Council, would have it, that the War should be
made in Lorrain; to compass (as they urged) at one only blow the ruin of that
House, which first produced, and since that time maintained the League. But the
bottom of that design was this, that the Germans, had no great desire to be at
so great a distance from their own Country: and the Duke of Bouillon would
have been glad under that pretense to provide for the security of Sedan and
Iametz to which he knew the Lorrainers cast a longing eye. On the contrary the
Frenchmen, the Envoys of the King of Navarre and the Baron de Dona, who
followed the Orders he had received from Duke Casimir, made it be concluded,
that they should satisfy themselves in their passage through Lorrain, to make
what havoc they could in that Country, which had been wholly free from War,
since that which the Burgundians made, who were defeated with their last Duke
at the Battle of Nancy; and that without stopping their course by investing
Towns, they should hasten their conjunction with the King of Navarre who
expected them.

On the other side, in the Council which was held at Nancy, the Duke of Guise
proposed to hinder the passage of the Enemy, because, that being well informed
of the division which was amongst them, he doubted not with those few Troops,
which he had then with him, which notwithstanding were composed of well
disciplined and experienced men, that he should find some opportunity of
Defeating them in that narrow Dukedom, enclosed on all sides with mountains and
Rivers, or at least that he should force them back into their own Country: and
this was also adhered to by all the French who were then present. But the Duke
of Lorrain, who by no means would consent to expose his State to the hazard of
a Battle, and who after all that could be said, had rather his Dukedom should
be ruinated than be lost; would absolutely have it, that without opposing the
passage of that Army, one part of his Forces should be put into his Towns,
whither the Countrey-people should retire, with all the provision they could
carry; that the Ovens should every where be broken, the Mills pulled down, and
the Forage destroyed; and that with the remaining part of his Forces, they
should coast the Enemies, and constrain them, by the scarcity of all things and
by harrassing them perpetually, to depart speedily from Lorrain, and pass into
France, into which he was resolved he would not enter. And fearing lest the
Duke of Guise, whose design and boldness he well knew, should engage his little
Army, whether he would or not in some dangerous Battle, he determined to have
the Command of it himself; and ordered it to be encamped betwixt the New Town,
and a little Wood, which served for a Park to an House of his Highnesse's,
called the Male-Grange; watching his opportunity to employ it to his most
advantage, according to the way which the Enemy should take.

The Germans then having assembled in the plain of Strasburg almost all their
Troops, and finding the passages free, by the retreat of those who should have
guarded them, but were now recalled to Man their Towns, passed the Mountain
near Saverne, without other obstacle besides the trouble they had for three
days space, in opening the ways which were encumbered with bodies of great
Trees, laid across the passages. They were no sooner got over it, than the Duke
of Guise, who lost no occasion of surprising the Reyters, toward whom he was
advanced with the Vanguard, ordered the first Camisade to be given them, by
the famous Colonel De Rone, who was afterward made Marshal of the League, and
the Baron of Swartzenbourg, who in the night attacked the Quarters of Colonel
Bouck, who was undoubtedly the most able Officer they had. And being such he
was not surprised, for the Guard he kept about his Lodgings was so watchful,
that he had timely notice, and was got on Horseback when he was attacqu'd; but
he was so vigorously charged, that with all his brave resistance, he was not
able to maintain the place from the Assailants; nor hinder them from taking one
of his Colors, which the Duke of Lorrain sent immediately to the King: as by
way of Advertisement that the Enemy was already in his Country, and that
therefore it was time to Reinforce Monsieur de Guise with all the Troops which
he had promised them.

The next day which was the last of August, the Germans entering into Lorrain,
immediately possessed themselves of Sarbourg, which a Lorrain Gentleman who was
in it, with two Companies sufficient to defend it at least some little time,
surrendered basely on sight only of their Forerunners without staying so much
as to be invested. The like happened not to Blamont, which another young
Gentleman of the same Country maintained so bravely, though the Enemies Foot
with their Cannon was lodged in the Fauxbourg, that having killed of them more
than two hundred men in one Attacque, he forced them to dislodge with shame:
And from thence they Marched to Luneville, before which they received a greater
affront than was the former. In effect, the Baron d' Ossonville Colonel of the
Lorrain Infantry, having taken upon him to defend so weak a Place, where he had
hastily made some slight Fortifications, showed so much resolution grounded on
the promise which the Duke of Guise had given to relieve him, that they durst
not so much as once Attacque the Town. In this manner these Foreigners, who
acted rather like Robbers or Bandits than Soldiers, made it their only
Business to waste the Country, Plundering, Sacking, and Massacring the very
Women and Children, in revenge of the great wants they suffered, by being
deprived of the means of their subsistence; all Provisions being locked up from
them in the fortified places, in besieging of which they were unwilling to
engage, for fear of loosing too much time.

That which gave the Duke of Lorrain the greatest trouble, was the fear he had,
lest they should ransack his Town of St. Nicholas, which at that time wanted
nothing but Walls, to be the fairest and the richest Bourg in Lorrain,
excepting only Nancy, as it would be at this day, if the Imperialists, who
boasted that they would restore the late Duke Charles to his Estates, had not
finished its Destruction, by their feeble Succors, laying waste the Villages,
and open Towns without Defense, and particularly that famous and sacred Bourg,
which they had never violated as they did, when they reduced it almost into
Ashes, if any spark of Religion, or Humanity had been remaining in their
Hearts. I hope my Reader will pardon me for this short Digression, and give it
to the just resentments which I have against those Barbarians; being, as I am,
particularly interess'd, in the fortune of that miserable Town, which had never
been ruined by the Croats and Germans, if a Duke of Guise had been its
Champion, as he was on that occasion, which I am going to relate.

For that gallant Prince, seeing the concernment of the Duke of Lorrain for it,
and its Destruction seeming to be unavoidable, as lying open on all sides, took
up his quarters there, and not contented barely to put himself in posture of
defending it, he Salli'd out of it more than once with great success, and fell
into their Quarters, which he always carried. Insomuch that fearing to have to
do with a man of so great Courage and Conduct, and withal so fortunate, who
was resolved to perish, or preserve the place, which he had undertaken to
Desend with the choice and flower of the whole Army; they durst not approach
it, but instead of Marching along the Banks of the Meurte, upon which this
Bourg is Situate, about two Leagues from their Quarters in the Neighborhood of
Luneville, they turned short upon the left hand toward the Moselle, which they
passed near Bayon, to go from thence into the County of Vaudemont.

Then, seeing there was nothing more to fear for the places which are beyond
those two Rivers, they joined together all their Forces, and formed the body of
an Army, with intention to coast the Enemies, to hinder them from sending out
straggling Parties, and from laying waste the flat Country, according to their
ordinary custom.

This resolution being taken, The Duke of Guise who led the Vanguard, sent
Monsieur de la Chastre Marshal of the Camp, to take up Quarters for the Army at
Pont St. Vincent. But, because the Duke at this place performed one of the
bravest Actions, which have ever been done in War, and which particularly made
manifest his great Ability and strong Genius; I will take upon me to describe
it in the most exact manner I am able, that the Beauty of it may be seen in all
its circumstances.

The River of Madon is somewhat Narrow, but exceeding Deep; it takes its source
at the foot of the Mountains of Vauge, and runs from the South toward the
North, and having received into its Bed, the little Rivers of Dompaire, Illon,
Vittelle, Coulon, and Brenon, it waters the Town of Mirecour, and the Buroughs
of Haroue, Ormes, Buligny, Acraigne, Blainville, about ten Leagues distant from
Nancy, and four above Toul. A little below this River thus increased, and on
this side the Moselle stands Pont St. Vincent, a little City, or rather a great
Borough, Situate on the descent of a Hill, some part of it enclosed with weak
Walls; the rest only fenced with a quick-set Hedge, toward the foot of the
Hill, spreading along by the sides of the Moselle; over which there was a
Bridge; on the right hand it had the Madon, and the rib of a craggy Hill,
planted with Vines, encompassed with strong Quick-sets, and the top of it
covered with over grown Woods, which extended even to the Neighborhood of
Toul, and was parted from the Madon by a Meadow, which is bounded by that
River, and narrow'd to a very little breadth.

Here it was that the Catholic Army went to take up their Quarters, on the
fifteenth of September; Monsieur de Guise arrived there at seven of the Clock
in the Morning, and without staying for the gross of the Vanguard which
followed him, accompanied only by the Sieurs de La Chastre, Bassompierre, de
Dunes Brother to Monsieur d' Entragues, and three or four besides them, Rideing
on Nags, and all of them Unarmed as he was, went to observe some advantageous
place, where he might Lodge his Vanguard, under Protection of the Madon, which
he was certainly informed was not foordable in any part of it, since the Rains
which had fallen for four or five days together without intermission. But not
being able thereabout to find a Post which was suitable to his purpose, he
advanced as far as the Quarters of his Light Horse, who were Marched beyond the
Vanguard, under the Conduct of Rone and the Baron of Swartzembourg, and were
Quartered almost two Leagues beyond Pont St. Vincent, in the Buroughs of
Acraigne and Buligny, where there were Stone-Bridges over the Madon. He found
them there getting hastily on Horseback, pursuant to the advice which they had
just received that the whole body of the Enemy, which Marched betwixt the two
Rivers, was coming immediately to fall on them.

Yet this hindered him not from passing the Madon, he the seventh man, and with
the same Company, nor from advancing into the Plain to take a view of the
Enemy. But he had not gone far, before he discovered their Forerunners, and two
Cornets of Reyters, detached from the gross of their Army, who came thundering
upon him, to enclose him. Upon this he turned his Horse, repassed the Bridge,
and staid on the far side of a Brook, upon a little Hill, where he ranged his
light Horse, which were about four hundred to make head against the Enemy. The
Reyters who had passed the Bridge of Buligny after them, and pursued them
hotly, made an halt upon the Brook side, in expectation of their Army, which
they believed to be much nearer, than in effect it was: and in the mean time
the Duke of Guise, seeing they were not followed by greater Numbers, detached
against them the Sieur de Rone, and de la Route, who drove them back and
pursued them flying upon the Spur, a good space upon the Plain beyond the
River. But the Reyters finding there three hundred French Horse, and about an
hundred and twenty Dragoons, with three other Cornets of their Fellows, turned
upon them in a full body vigorously, and drove back those two Troops of Light
Horse, who endeavored at a round Gallop to regain the Hill, where their
Friends were drawn up in Battalia.

Then it was, (upon the discovery which they made from their Hill, of the whole
Army which was fileing over the Bridge,) that their danger was almost
inevitable: To expect the Enemy, and stand their Ground, was to take a
desperate resolution, of being all cut in pieces; for how was it possible for
four hundred Horse, without Infantry and Cannon to make defense against an Army
of five thousand men, who were ready to Attacque them, with eighteen or twenty
pieces of Artillery? To retire was altogether as impossible; for who knows not
that a Retreat of two Leagues, before an Army of twelve thousand Horse, and in
open day, can never be attempted without being exposed to extreme Danger, and
constrained to change it, to a general Rout; the consequence of which is, that
all must be either killed or taken.

This being considered by La Chastre and Bassompierre, who were near the Duke,
they earnestly desired him, to provide for his own safety, while they stopped
the fury of the Enemy for some time, to procure him the means of retiring to
the gross of their Army, leaving the rest to the disposition of Fortune, which
sometimes finds out unexpected ways of safety, when all things are in
appearance desperate. At which, the Duke looking upon them with a smiling and
assured Countenance; No, no, Gentlemen (says he) I cannot on such terms abandon
so many brave men, whom I my self have exposed to this present Danger. I have
considered the greatness of it, in its full extent; but I think, that at the
same time I have found an expedient to draw us out of it. The Counsel which
you have given me, as believing it necessary for my safety, I command you to
take for your selves, and for us all* Go then, to give out Orders to the Army;
draw them up in the narrow Passage, and upon the Hill which is Planted with
Vines, without Pont St. Vincent, to receive me after I have made the Retreat,
which I take upon my self to do; which I will perform, after the manner which
I have already cast in my imagination, and which perhaps shall be as much
without Danger, as it is without Example.

After this, Rone, and La Route, having already without loss, rejoined the Body
of Light Horse, he began to encourage his Soldiers, and that much less by his
Words than by his Countenance, and that Majestique air, which animated all his
actions, and inspired a part of his own Courage and assurance into the most
fearful; for appearing at the Head of his little Troup, with his Sword in his
hand, otherwise unarmed upon a Pad, and beholding his Soldiers and their
Officers with a lively piercing eye, which when he pleased he could even dart
into their Souls, and command them as he thought good, he spoke only a few
words to his French, Italian and German Officers, to each in their own
Language, and calling them by their Names, he assured them that he had invented
an infallible way of preserving them, if they would follow his directions
undauntedly, and take him for their Example.

Those few words cheerfully pronounced by a Prince, who always performed more
than he would promise, so much encouraged those four hundred men, that without
farther reflection on the apparent danger of perishing, and the seeming
impossibility of their escape, they looked disdainfully from their Hill, on
that vast Army of the Germans, who having almost all of them already passed the
Madon, at the Bridge of Buligny, Marched directly toward them in Battalia, not
doubting but they should enclose them, and cut them all in pieces, if they had
the confidence to expect them; or put them to the Rout, and totally defeat
them, if they attempted to make their Retreat before them. Yet they stood at
first in some suspense, when having passed the Brook which was betwixt them and
the Hill, they beheld them yet standing firm, and appearing with a resolution
of receiving them with their Swords in their hands.

So uncommon a Spectacle stopped them a while to observe their countenance, as
fearing perhaps that their great assurance proceeded from their being backed by
the whole Army. But at length resuming Courage, and being ashamed that they had
doubted one moment to Attacque so inconsiderable a Party, they sounded a Charge
without more delay. Seven Cornets of Reyters, having before them three hundred
Frenchmen of Arms, Marched foremost and began to Mount the Hill at a round
Trot against the Enemy; but the ascent was so rough, that their Horses, who
were spurred to the Quick, grew out of breath, and constrained them to abate of
their speed, and change their Trot into a Footpace. Then the Duke of Guise,
taking his opportunity to make his Retreat, according as he had modeled it in
his Head, in such a manner as none before him had ever practiced, Retreated a
little farther off upon the Hill, so as to be out of sight of the Enemy; after
which having made a half turn on the right hand, he turned short upon the left
hand at the right of the Enemy, through a little Valley, which was betwixt them
and the River. His March was out of View, under cover^ of the Hills, which hid
that Valley, as far as to a Foord which he had observed, though he had been
informed that there was none: besides which there was a Mill, wherein he Lodged
a dozen Arquebusiers, who were resolved to defend it to the utmost, and there
he passed the Madon, from whence the Enemies were departed, in pursuit of him.
On that side were only the Swissers, who Marched after the others to pass at
the Bridge of Buligny, and who being Foot, could neither stop nor follow that
Cavalry which had passed the River below the Bourg, and by that means had the
advantage of them. So that turning Face, and descending on the left, along that
little River, on the other side of which the Enemy was passed to Attacque him,
he continued to make his retreat toward the gross of the Catholic Army,
which was drawing up in Battalia near Pont St. Vincent.

In the mean time the Enemy having with much difficulty overcome the top of the
Hill, where they thought to find the Duke of Guise, were strangely surprised to
see him beyond the Water, retiring at his ease. Immediately they descended with
much more speed than they had Mounted, and pursued him eagerly. But they were
stopped so long by those twelve resolute Soldiers, who defended the Mill upon
the Foord, at the expense of their Lives, which they sold at a dear rate, that
before they could be forced, the Duke had the leisure, without mending his
pace, to repass the River on this side, at another Foord which he had also
observed adjoining to that narrow space, and that rib of the Hill planted with
Vineyards, where the gross of his Army lay.

In this manner that Prince, who had engaged himself too far in discovering the
Enemy, found the means of saving his little Troup, and retiring in the Face of
a great Army, not by turning his back as is the usual custom, but by going on
their side, by a new invented Strategem, and placing the River twice
successively betwixt himself and the Enemy. And what Crowned the glory of the
whole action was, that putting himself at the Head of five or six hundred
Horse, in that little Meadow which is at the foot of that rib of the Mountain,
on which his Army was not wholly yet embattel'd, he defended the passage of the
River and always repulsed the Reyters, who returned twice or thrice to the
Charge, and did their uttermost to Force it; and that having left it free the
next Morning, according to the resolution which had been taken in the Council
of War, he made good the Retreat of his whole Army, without the loss of one
single man.

After both Armies had refreshed themselves for two or three days, the Germans
who were always Coasted on the Right, and perpetually harrass'd by the Duke of
Guise who led the Vanguard, having passed the Meuse near Neufchateau, entered
France by the Principality of Ioinville, where they took their first Quarters
at St. Vrbain. The Duke of Lorrain who had followed them as far as his own
Frontiers, and had what he desired, when he had seen the Strangers out of his
Estates, was resolved to go no farther, but retired into the Duchy of Bar,
as did also the Marquis d' Havre with his Walloons, both of them saying that
they could not enter into France without permission from the King. Thus the
Duke of Guise was left to himself, with his own Troops, which amounted not to
four thousand men; and nevertheless he undertook with an invincible Courage,
and so small a Power, to pursue, to infeeble and entirely to ruin that great
Army, which was yet more increased in the Bassigny, by the conjunction of those
Troops, which the brave Chastillon Son to the late Admiral brought out of
Languedoc and Dauphine, after having traversed Lionnois and Burgundy with
incredible difficulty.

The Duke then undertook them all, being followed by Soldiers as indefatigable
as himself, who believed there was nothing impossible for them to perform under
his Conduct: and sometimes appearing at the head of the Enemy, sometimes at
their Rere, then coa^^ing them, now on the right hand, and afterward on the
left, cutting them of^ from Provisions, giving them continual Alarmes, and
har^^assing them Night and Day in a hundred several manners, he reduced them
often to great extremities, particularly after he was reinforced by the Troops,
which were brought him by Monsieur de Mayenne, by Chaligny, Elbeuf, and Brissac
who joined him at Auxerre; his Forces then consisting of six thousand Foot and
eighteen hundred Horse.

With these inconveniences, besides those which the continual rain, the broken
ways, their gluttony, and consequently sickness, made the Germans suffer, their
Forces having passed the Saine near Chastillon, and the Yonne, at
Mailly-la-Ville, they advanced about the middle of October, as far as the Banks
of the River Loire, which they thought to have passed at La Charity; where much
to their amazement they found that place not only in a good condition of
defense, but the King in person beyond it, with a powerful Army to dispute
their passage, on what part soever they should attempt to force it.

In effect, that Prince, according to the resolution which he had taken to
hinder both the King of Navarre and the Duke of Guise from growing too strong,
the first by joining the Army of the Reyters, and the second by their defeat,
had given the Duke almost nothing of that Succor which he had promised him,
either to stop or fight the Germans; and in the mean time had assembled a very
considerable Army in the neighborhood of Gien on the Loire, to oppose their
passage. His Forces not being less than ten thousand French Foot, eight
thousand Swissers, for the most part levied out of the Catholic Cantons, and
eight thousand Horse, the one half French the other Germans. The Duke of
Montpensier had also recruited him with the little body which he commanded
apart; the Dukes of Nevers and of Espernon, the Marshals de Aumont and de Retz,
and La Guiche, Grand Master of the Artillery, had each of them a Command in it,
and held no very good intelligence together, unless in this one particular,
that according to the King's express orders, they spoiled and made unpassable
all the Foords from that of Pas de Fer near N^vers, as far as Gien, by laying
across them huge bodies of Trees, and whatsoever else they could find, to
incumber the feet of Men and Horses.

This ill understanding amongst the Commanders, and the large Encomiums which
rung in Paris of the Duke of Guise, on occasion of every small advantage which
he gained upon the Enemy, and more than all, the murmuring, or rather the
downright railing of the Leaguers, who maliciously accused the King of holding
intelligence with the Navarrois, at the length produced this effect in him,
that shaking off his fatal drowziness, and those soft pleasures of the Court,
with much ado he came to his Army beyond the Gien about mid- October. Where he
had no sooner set his foot, but he began on the sudden to revive, to appear the
same brave Duke of Anjou, with the same Heroique soul, which inspired him with
so much vigor when he commanded the Armies of the King his Brother in the
fields of Iarnac and Moncontour.

Undoubtedly there can nothing be imagined more generous or more prudent than
what he did on that occasion. He put himself at the Head of his Army; he gave
out Orders in his own Person; and caused them to be executed with all manner of
exactness; he reunited the minds of his Captains and Officers, taking care that
every man should employ himself in his own duty, without interfering with the
business of another. He shared with them the labors and fatigues of War; lying
abroad in Tents, sleeping little, was first on Horseback, always in Arms, his
Men in good order on the Bank of the River, appearing in a readiness to receive
the Enemy wheresoever he should attempt his passage; and giving him to
understand by sound of Trumpet and beat of Drum, that he desired nothing more
than to give him Battle, if he should dare to seek it on the other side.

This manner of proceeding put the Strangers into a terrible consternation: The
French Huguenots who guided them, had made them to believe, before they entered
into Lorrain, that they should have the Town of Charity, and the Bridge for
friend. That if those should fail them, the Loire was foordable almost every
where during the Month of October; that the King who kept a secret
correspondence with the King of Navarre, to revenge himself of the League their
common Enemy, either would join himself with them, or at least favor their
passage, and that they should find the King of Navarre in a readiness on the
far side of the River to receive them. In the mean time they found the quite
contrary to all this: the Town of Charity against them, the King in Arms to
combat them, and instead of the King of Navarre, only some Envoys from him,
who without being able to ascertain them of any thing, barely promised them
that he would suddenly be with them; or at least in his room a Prince of the
Blood whom he would send to command them. This filled with complaints, murmurs,
disorders and Sedition the whole Army, which was come down as far as Neuvy,
without hope of being able to force the passage which the Royal Army in
Battalia beyond the River continually defended.

The Reyters, with loud clamours demanded the Money which had been promised
them as soon as they should be entered into France: threatening to return into
their own Country, in case they were not immediately satisfied. The Swissers
were already harkening to the proposition which some of their Officers, who
were gained by the King, had made to them of passing into his Army, where they
had assurance given them of great advantages. The Lansquenets were ready to do
as much; all things manifestly tended to revolt. And it was not without
incredible pains, that the Baron of Dona, the Duke of Bouillon and the French
Officers put an end to this Mutiny by promising to lead them into Beauce, a
Country abounding in all sorts of Provisions, where they might refresh
themselves at their own leisure, expecting there the Money and the Prince whom
the King of Navarre would send to conduct them by Vandome to Monsoreau upon the
Loire, where he waited to receive them with his Troops. Thus the Army
dislodging from Neuvy, and turning their back to the Loire, took the Road
toward Beauce, marching by little journeys all along the River of Loing, where
they found good Quarters on the Estate of Monsieur de Chastillon, who spared
for nothing to content the Germans.

In the mean time the Duke of Guise, who lay betwixt that River and the Yonne,
and had re-assembled all his Forces near Charny, to observe from thence the
motions of the Enemy, having received information that they were quartered on
the twenty fourth of October in the neighborhood of Chastillon, advanced as
far as Courtenay, taking his march from thence toward the lower part of the
River, thereby to put himself betwixt them and Paris, and to cover that great
City, which lay open to them; so that five or six thousand Reyters detached
from their Army, were capable of giving some terrible Alarm to the Citizens, by
Plundering and Firing of their Suburbs. This occasioned the Parisians, to
redouble their ardent affection to that Prince, regarding him at that time as
their only Protector; and the Leaguers who omitted no opportunity of decrying
the conduct of the King, made them believe, that he stopped short at Gien, on
set purpose to abandon them to the fury of the Reyters, who without this
interposition of the Duke of Guise had ransacked all things to their very Gates.

But this was the least part of their design; for they intended nothing more
than to pass on the left hand, through a Country more open and more easy,
betwixt the Forest of Orleans and Montargis, and to enter as fast as they were
able into the Plains of Beauce. For which reason, as soon as he had discovered
by his Spies that their Quarters were taken up for the twenty sixth of October,
spreading two Leagues about Montargis, on the left side of the River, he
ordered the Sieur de la Chastre, to depart about midnight with the Light Horse;
who arriving at Montargis at seven of the Clock in the Morning, on the same
day, (being the twenty sixth) caused the Gates of the Town immediately to be
shut, that no advice might be given to the Enemies; and the Duke of Guise came
thither about noon with one half of the Army, the other half not being able to
come up till the evening.

As he sat at Table supping with the Princes who accompanied him, one of his
best Officers who had been sent to take a view of the Enemy, returned to make
his report, saying, that he had seen seven or eight Cornets of the Reyters, who
took up their Quarters with their General at Vimory, a Borough almost half a
League in compass, a League and half above Montargis, and situate not far from
the River, which it had on the right hand. His intelligence was true; but he
knew not that fourteen other Cornets of them which arrived afterward were
lodged in the same place; that the French were Quartered but half a League
beyond the Ladon, and the Lansquenets and Swissers in two other Villages, which
were but the distance of a League from them.

The Duke after he had considered for some time what was to be done on this
report, believed that those Quarters at Vimory might easily be carried in the
Night, that the others wheresoever they might be, hearing the Alarm, and at the
same time fearing to be attacked themselves, would think rather how to secure
themselves in their own Post, and stay for daylight, than to march in the dark
to the succor of their Fellows: that after he had defeated the Reyters, in the
next place he might attacque the rest, and put their whole Army to a rout; and
in conclusion if he should miss his blow, he had secured himself a retreat in
the Borough of Montargis.

Thus resolved, and rising briskly from the Table, before he had done Supper,
he gave command that they should sound to Horse, and that every one should be
in readiness to march an hour after at the farthest: The Duke of Mayenne not a
little surprised at the sudden orders, asked him whither he was going? he cooly
answered him, to fight the Enemy. And after having in few words satisfied them
of the reasonableness of his undertaking, he added, that if any man thought the
attempt too hazardous, he had free leave to stay behind at Montargis: It may
very probably succeed said the Duke of Mayenne, and we will all follow you, yet
we are a little too hot upon the execution of it, and it would not do amiss to
weigh the business somewhat better. Understand, Brother, replied the Guise,
raising his Voice beyond the ordinary tone, that I should not come to a
resolution of any thing in all my life, which I could not resolve on at a
quarter of an hours thinking. On this he Armed and mounted on Horseback,
finding all his Men in readiness to follow him, full of gaiety in their faces,
and not doubting in the least of Victory under his Command against all
imaginable odds of number. So important a thing it is in War for Soldiers to
have confidence in their Captain, that they believe his fortune, his valor,
and his capacity in Military affairs, will always answer for the good success
of whatsoever he undertakes.

All the Orders being given, the Infantry which was in the Suburbs, was caused
to pass through the body of the Town, an hour before the shutting in of the
Evening; and drawn up in Battalia, half a League beyond it. It was divided into
three Battalions, each of them consisting of a thousand men. Captain St. Paul
commanded that on the right hand; Ioannes had the left, with his Regiment which
formed the second; Chevriers and Pontsenac were in the middle, at the head of
the third; the remainder was left at the entry of the Bridge, and in the Town,
in order to the favoring of their retreat.

The Duke of Guise who had waited till eight of the clock, for seven or eight
hundred Horse of his Army, which were not yet arrived from Courtenay, distant
seven long Leagues from Montargis, was resolved notwithstanding to go on, and
advancing the gross of his Cavalry before his Foot, he Marshalled it in four
Squadrons. Monsieur de Mayenne led the first, of three hundred Horse at the
head of the Army: he was sustained by Monsieur de Elbeuf with his, of two
hundred Men at Arms. The Duke of Guise placed himself on the left hand, and
Monsieur d' Aumale on the right of the Infantry having each of them three
hundred Horse.

In this Order this little Army marched directly on to Vimory through a long
Plain, and in a night so dark that one man could not discern another.
Notwithstanding which they kept on their way, till the Guides having advertised
Monsieur de Mayenne that they were just upon Vimory, he sent before him four
Cavaliers, who found neither Sentinel set, nor Guard advanced, nor Bars at the
entry of the Town, but the passage wholly free. For which reason, drawing off a
little on the left hand, as did also Monsieur de Elbeuf on the right to make
way for the Foot, Monsieur de Guise having given the signal to the Infantry,
the three Battalions entered one after another into the great Street of Vimory,
where the Baggage of the Reyters lay. And immediately having dispatched the
first they met, before they could so much as ask the Word, they entered the
Houses on both sides the Street, killing all the Germans whom they found: some
of them at their Supper, some in bed, and setting on fire the Granaries and
Cellars to consume those who absconded in them.

This Execution lasted for half an hour, during which they still went forward,
firing the Houses as they passed along, which being at some distance from each
other, could not spread the flames either so fast, or so far as they desired.
And in the mean time the Soldiers tempted with the sight of the Reyters
Wagons, instead of staying to plunder till they had completed the victory, as
their duty is on the like occasions, fell upon the Baggage in a hurry, and
loaded themselves with the richest part of the booty. This gave leisure to the
Baron of Dona, who was lodged at the farther end of the Town, to get on
Horseback and rally six or seven Cornets, with which he made show of advancing
against the Foot, who seeing him coming on, made ready to receive him, and
forsook their plunder; at the same time calling out to their Horse to enter and
sustain them.

This their Outcry caused two contrary effects, which occasioned two great
skirmishes, for on the one side the Baron fearing if he passed forward in the
great Street, through the Flames and Wagons with which it was encumbered, that
he should expose himself without defense to the Shot of the Infantry, turned on
the right hand to another Street adjoining on the Plain; on the other side the
Duke of Mayenne, who had taken on the left hand out of the Borough, coasting
the Foot, having heard their cry, advanced precipitately before his Squadron,
who presently lost sight of him in the dark, and followed only by threescore
Men of Arms, put on at a gallop to the succor of the Foot, through the same
Street, at the entry of which he rancounter'd the Baron with his gross of
Reyters, which charged him with extreme fury.

Never was there seen a Combat more unequal or more sharp. The Baron, who was
exceeding brave, discerning this Cavalry, whose number he could not distinguish
in the dark, rode up to him who was mounted on the white Horse at the head of
those Cavaliers, and fired his Pistol as he thought at the sight of his Helmet;
but it carried no higher than the Chinpiece. 'Twas the Duke of Mayenne, who at
the same time struck with his full force upon his head, and swept off a good
cantle of the skin; after which both the one and the other pursuing his point,
the Baron with his second Pistol killed Rouvroy who bore the Duke's colors,
and pulled them from him; and the Duke well seconded by those few brave men who
accompanied him, at last broke through this gross of seven Cornets, having lost
seventeen Gentlemen in the fight which cost the lives of fourscore Reyters.

After this there happening a great Storm which separated the Combatants, the
rest of the Reyters being now gotten on Horseback, and there being some danger,
lest the other Quarters which had already taken the Alarm should fall upon them
before day, the Duke of Guise ordered them to sound the retreat. He made it
very fortunately to Montargis, in the same order, in which he came; and brought
back his Soldiers enriched with the booty which they had taken from the
Reyters, who lost in this occasion near a thousand Men betwixt Soldiers and
Servants, a considerable part of their Baggage, and above twelve hundred
Horses, on which twelve hundred Foot were mounted in their return to Montargis:
and what most mortified the Baron, two Camels which he had designed to present
the King of Navarre; and the Kettle Drums that are carried before the General
as a mark of Honor, the loss of which is accounted to be more shameful, than
that of his own Standard.

Though this Victory was not very great, yet it drew after it important
consequences: and made way by the dangerous effects which it had, to the total
ruin of their Army. The Reyters who had lost the better half of their Baggage,
mutined afresh, demanding their Pay, and threatening to retire in case they were
not satisfied, which was not possibly to be done. The Swissers sent their
Deputies to the King, to negotiate their return; and the matter went so far
that the Duke of Espernon, who led the Vanguard of the Royal Army, concluded
the Treaty with them: by which the King was obliged to pay them four hundred
thousand Crowns, and to grant them a free passage into their own Country.

The Lansquenets, whom the fatigues of so tedious a march had reduced to a very
ill condition, were also thinking of some means to obtain the liberty of going
home. The Baron of Dona decri'd on all sides for his extreme neglect in not
providing for the security of his Quarters, had wholly lost his authority
amongst them; and the French who conducted them being continually reproached
with the unfaithfulness of their promises, were ashamed to show their heads.

But at last, the certain news of the great Victory obtained by the King of
Navarre, and the hope which consequently they had, that he would speedily
appear, with his victorious Army, together with the arrival of the Prince of
Conty, whom he sent before to command them in his place, till he should himself
come up, restored their courage, and caused a general rejoicing in the whole
Army. And because the King's Forces were gone to encamp at Bonneval, to cut off
their way, and hinder them from descending lower by the Country of Vandome,
toward the Loire, they took a resolution to change their Road, and to march
upwards toward the source of that River, according to the King of Navarre's
request. But seeing they were at that time in good Quarters, in the heart of
Beauce, and neighborhood of Chartres, they deferred for some days the
departure of the Army. And that gave opportunity to the Duke of Guise, to
accomplish at last with so much glory the execution of his design, by the
famous defeat of the Reyters at Auneau, which was immediately succeeded by the
total rout of that formidable Army.

That Prince, who some few days after the Combat of Vimory had retired to
Montereau-faut-^onne, as if he had turned his back upon the Germans, who at the
same time entered into Beauce, and without caring what constructions might be
made of his retreat, which raised a very odd report concerning him, there
refreshed his Men, for ten or twelve days together; and dismissed from thence
the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale with all their Troops, into their several
Governments of Burgundy and Picardy, against which he imagined the Enemies of
his House had some design: After which, though he had remaining in his little
Army no more than twelve hundred Horse, and betwixt three and four thousand
Foot, he put himself according to his custom in pursuit of the Enemy, who
marched exceeding slowly, and ceased not from harassing them, till, (before he
came up with the Army of the King, who pressed him extremely to a conjunction,)
he found an occasion of performing what he had so long time purposed, to carry
their head Quarters, by making himself master of the place which furnished them
with victuals. For he nothing doubted but the loss of that would be the total
ruin of their Army; which action he performed in the manner which I am going
to relate briefly.

Being arrived at Estampes on the eighteenth of November, after having for some
days coasted the Enemy on the right, the next Morning he sent the Sieur de la
Chastre with seven or eight hundred Horse to Dourdan; from whence, the Sieur de
Vins, who commanded the Light Horse, was detached to make discovery of their
Quarters. This he performed with great exactness, and after some petty
skirmishes wherein he had the advantage, he understood from some Prisoners
which he had taken, that they were Quartered at large in five or six great
Villages, two or three Leagues beyond Chartres, round Auneau, which was the
quarter of the Reyters.

Auneau is a great Borough Town, or little City, enclosed only with Walls of
six or seven foot high, without Ditches any way considerable, or Draw-bridges
at the Gates, like the other Buroughs of La Beauce: On the side of this Town
is a Marsh, and a broad Lake, from which there issues a River whose banks are
planted with Osiers and other Trees that slourish in a moist soil: it is
indifferently deep, and not easy to be passed unless by the Mills and Villages
which were possessed by the Enemy for more than two Leagues below the River,
which mixing with the Lorray empties it self into the Eure, near Maintenon; at
one end of the Lake there is a Causey, which after having crossed the Marsh, is
terminated at a little Wood and a Warren, right overagainst the Gate of the
Castle which commands the Town. The Castle it self is fair, large, and of
strength sufficient to defend it self from Storming, having in it a great Base
Court, large eno^gh to draw up the Garrison in Battalia there; and which is
separated from the Houses of the Town by an open place; so that no approaches
can be made without being discovered. As soon as the Baron of Dona was lodged
in the Borough into which he entered without resistance, the Reyters greedy
after pillage, failed not to come on as far as the Gate of the Base Court
belonging to the Castle; into which the Inhabitants had hastily removed the
best of their Goods, and a great number of their Cattle, which these Germans
were desirous to get into their possession. But they were repulsed with volleys
of Musket Shot, which laid three or four of them upon the ground. On this the
Baron dispatched a Trumpet to the Captain of the Castle with a threatening
message, that he would set fire on all things in his way, and beat the Castle
about his ears with Artillery, for which he would immediately send, in case he
desisted not from Shooting. But the Captain who was a Gascon, and held the
Castle for the King, answered with a Bravade, after the manner of his
Contrymen; and let the Baron know by his Trumpet, that he feared neither him
nor his Artillery; and that if his people made any more so near approaches to
the Castle, he would spare neither for Powder nor Ball to set them going as he
had done before. This was all the Parlee that was betwixt them, without any
manner of engagement on the Gascon's part, (though some have otherwise
reported) that he would attempt nothing against those troublesome Guests, who
were lodged in his Town against his will. Accordingly to secure their lives
against a man of the Captain's humor, the Reyters barricado'd themselves, and
set strong Guards at the Avenues, from whence there is a passage into the two
great Streets which make the length of the Borough. After which believing
themselves to be now in safety, they took their ease with profound security,
for seven or eight days together, during which the season of new Wines being
just come in, and the Vintage of that year exceeding plentiful, they fell to
ply the Bottle, and to celebrate the King of Navarre's Victory, and the Prince
of Conty's arrival, with all sorts of merriments, and particularly with
drunkenness, toping after their Country fashion, night and day to the good
health of the two Princes.

In the mean time the Duke of Guise, whose head was perpetually working how he
might surprise them, having received the Plan of their Quarters from the Sieur
de Vins, who had been there in person to take the View, resolved to attaque
them in Auneau. To this effect he negotiated so dexterously with the Captain of
the Castle, that after many difficulties, which were surmounted by the large
promises, and great liberality of that Prince, who after the example of
Alexander gave all away, and reserved nothing to himself but only the hope of
accomplishing his enterprises, the Gascon, who had no quarrel to a Bag of
Money, came at last to a conclusion with him upon that point in the World, in
which a wary Governor ought to be most nice; for he agreed to receive his
Troops into the Castle, through which they might enter into the Town.

He had advanced from Estampes as far as Dourdan on Friday the twentieth of
November, when he received this comfortable assurance; and as his little Army
was on its march, on the morrow in order to the execution of his enterprise, he
was informed that the Enemies had discovered it by taking a Peasant who was
bringing him a Letter from the Governor. This undoubtedly was capable of
Making him desist from farther prosecution of it; and all his Captains so
advised him. But he only deferred it for two days, till he was assured that
the Reyters were no longer on their Guard, and that they still continued their
Debauches, notwithstanding, that by an Ambuscade he had cut off an hundred, or
six score of the bravest men in their whole Army; amongst whom, besides thirty
five Gentlemen of the best Houses in Germany, were found slain a Count of
Mansfield, and one allied to him, who was Nephew to the Archbishop of Cologne
Gebbard Truchses, the same person who, misled by a blind affection, preferred
the enjoyment of the fair Chanoiness Agnes de Mansfield to his Electorat and
his Religion, which he renounced, to gain the liberty of Marrying her.

The Duke being then resolved to carry on his Enterprise, though it was
objected to him, that in all probability the Enemy would not have lingered out
the time so long at Auneau, and the adjacent places, but out of design to draw
him into the Plain, over which he must pass of necessity before he could reach
the Town; gave Order on Monday Night, that all should be in readiness to March
on Tuesday the four and twentieth of November, which was precisely the day that
the Germans had pitched upon, for their return toward the Source of the River
Loire. Yet on this occasion he reli'd not so much on his good Fortune, as not
to take all manner of precautions, and particularly neglected not that of
Piety, for before he departed out of Dourdan on his March, he did his Devotions
publicly at the Church; where he implored the assistance of the Lord of
Hosts, for the happy success of his undertaking.

And yet farther, he left his Almoner with the Clergy, to continue all Night
their Prayers before the Holy Sacrament, which was exposed; and by an
extravagant Sally of Piety, did an action, no ways to be imitated, yet
excuseable in a Prince, who acted sincerely, and Cavalier-like on this
occasion, in which he was so far from perceiving the least shadow of ill, that
on the contrary, without searching deep into the matter, he believed it
acceptable to God. For he ordained of his own Authority, that every Priest that
Night should Celebrate three Masses, as the custom is to do before
Christmas Day. And those well meaning men who understood not so much in those
times as we do in ours, obeyed him Simply, Devoutly, and without scruple: And
it may charitably be believed that God who heard their Prayers and accepted
their Sacrifice, as the event sufficiently shows, was not offended at what they
did out of their simplicity and without reflection.

The Duke forearm'd in this manner, came up at seven of the Clock in the
Evening, to the Rendesvouz, which he had given to his Troops, on the far side
of the Wood of Dourdan, in an open plain, where according to his Orders,
Monsieur de la Chastre, Marshal of the Field, had drawn them up in Battalia.
The Sieur de Vins, with three hundred Light Horse, was at the Head of this
little Army. The Sieur de la Chastre followed him, with his Squadron of more
than two hundred Men at Arms: and the Dukes of Guise and of Elbeuf sustained
them on the right and the left with their two Squadrons, consisting each of
them, of about three hundred Horse. The Infantry divided into four Battalions
under the Colonels, Ioannes, Pontsenac, Bourg, and Gie, was ranged on the right
hand of the Cavalry, which covered it from the Enemy, who could not possibly
approach them, but on the left hand in a large Plain, where there was neither
Tree nor Bush, nor Hedge for their defense. They Marched in this order during
almost all the Night, which was so extremely dark, that wandering about from
time to time, they arrived not till four in the Morning within a Mile of
Auneau, in a Valley at one end of the Causey, which led them to the Postern
Gate of the Castle, just bordering upon the Warren, till La Chastre who
advanced before the rest, came back and reported that he had heard the Trumpets
of the Enemy.

The reason of it was, that the Army was that day preparing to remove their
Quarters, but there was some reason to apprehend, that they had had
intelligence of the Duke's March. For this cause, that Prince who was advanced
too far to retire, and who was absolutely bent to Attacque the Germans, whether
they were advertised or not, and to prevent them, made his Infantry pass the
Causey in File, and himself led them, without the least notice taken by the
Enemy, to the Postern Gate which was opened to him, and which his Men entered,
as before in File: cheerfully exhorting the Soldiers and Officers to do well,
and to make themselves Masters of the rich Booty which was waiting for them,
meaning the Baggage of the Reyters. After this retiring to his Cavalry, which
attending his return had made a halt at the end of the Marsh; he went to
dispose his four Squadrons in the Plain round about the Borough, to receive,
and cut in pieces those who should bolt for their safety into the Fields.

In the mean time, Captain St. Paul, having left in the Castle as many men as
he thought sufficient to secure his retreat, if he were driven to it, was
descended into the Base Court, where he gave out his Orders for the Attacque in
this following manner. Himself took on the left hand, at the Head of five or
six hundred Arquebusiers, to charge into the great Street, where the Baron of
Dona lay: He placed on the right hand five hundred more of the Regiment of
Pontsenac, Commanded by their Colonel, to enter the Borough by the other
Street. He ordered four hundred to stand in Battalia in the Base Court, to
sustain and to relieve the first, and Commanded before him three or four
hundred with the Forelorn Hope to make the Van: leaving Orders with those who
stayed behind, that as soon as the Attacque was begun, they should slip betwixt
the Walls and the Houses, to seize the Gates, where there were neither Guard
nor Centry; so little had the Baron profited by that Lesson which he had taken
out at Vimory, where he had been surprised by the like negligence.

Things being disposed in this manner, and the great Gate of the Base Court
opened, by removing of the Earth about it, the Forelorn Hope put themselves
into the Van, just at the break of day, in that space which is betwixt the
Castle and the Town, where they found about fifty Horsemen of the Enemy,
appointed for the Guard of the Barricades, who running together at the Noise
which was made, received them so warmly, and repulsed them with so much vigor,
that being affrighted to see themselves without Cavalry to support them, they
retreated as far as the Gate. But Captain St. Paul coming up at that point of
time, and the rest following him, pushed them forward upon the Enemy, crying
out as loud as he could, to those who were remaining in the Base Court, that
they should Fire without mercy, on all those who gave back one foot of Ground.
But that which had more effect on those frighted Soldiers than this terrible
Command, or than the inevitable danger of present Death, in case they recoyl'd,
was the example of that Brave Captain and all his Officers, who detaching
themselves from their several Companies, came up to the Front against the Enemy.

For after having repulsed those Horsement, who were soon dismounted and
killed, by the Vollies of shot, which were poured in upon them furiously by the
Soldiers who followed their Officers, those Gallant men gave on with so much
courage against the Barricades, that having forced, broken and overturned them
in a moment, and slain the Guards who were to maintain them, the whole body of
Infantry spread themselves like an impetuous torrent on both sides of the
Streets, and without stopping at the Pillage, as they had done before at
Vimory, they killed all within distance of their shot, pelting down the poor
Germans, as they came dropping out of their Quarters half asleep, staggering
with Drunkenness, and half Naked; some with their Pistols in their hands, and
some only with their Swords, not able to get within reach of their Enemies,
who having all manner of advantage over them, destroyed them at their ease, and
without sharing any part of the danger with them.

Those of them who were already got on Horseback to depart, being without
possibility of drawing up into a Squadron, or marching orderly against the
Enemy, in those Streets encumbered with so many Carriages all harnessed, were
slain the more easily, because they stood like so many Marks to the
Mus^^^etiers, from whose shot they had no means of shelter. And this
encumberment, so fatal to them, served the Catholics instead of a Rampart,
from whence they fired upon them without danger, and almost without losing one
single shot.

In the desperate condition to which these Reyters were reduced, they could
find but one remedy to find covert from this raging Tempest, which they saw
come pouring on their Heads, which was as speedily as they could, to gain the
Gates, that afterward they might either rally in the Fields, or save
themselves in their other Quarters. But running thither tumultuously in a
crowd, they found them to be already seized by the Soldiers of Ioannes, who
drove them back, by firing continually upon them with their Muskets: So that
some of them, unable to do any thing more, for their own safety, suffered
themselves to be miserably cut in pieces, others returning from whence they
came, threw themselves into the thickest of their pursuers, that they might at
least have the sad comfort, of dying Honorably like Soldiers with their
Weapons in their hands. Some of them were hidden in their Lodgings, from whence
the fire made them bolt half roasted, and fell into the hands of those, who
thought it a deed of charity to dispatch them out of their pain, considering
the condition in which they saw them. Some there were also, who sliding down
from the Walls, thought to preserve themselves by running cross the Fields and
Marshes, but the Cavalry soon overtook them, and cut them all in pieces.

In conclusion, of all who were Quartered in that Borough, I find there was
only the Baron of Dona, with ten or twelve in his Company who escaped; whether
by means of some House adjoining to the Wall, and thence by some little paths
which he found in the Marsh, or at the beginning of the Alarm, through one of
the Gates, which the Soldiers of Ioannes had not yet shut up. The rest were
either killed or taken, when, after the heat of that bloody Execution was over,
which lasted but for half an hour, there was no more resistance made. In this
manner was the defeat of the Reyters at Auneau, where, without the loss of one
single man to the Conquerours, there were about three thousand Germans killed
upon the place, and five hundred Prisoners made, without reckoning into the
number one of their Companies, which running from the Neighboring Quarters to
the succor of their Fellows, surrendered themselves cowardly without defense,
as soon as they were charged in the open Field. Bosides the Cornet of the
General, there were taken nine or ten other Colors, which the Duke of Guise
sent away immediately to the King. All the Baggage and Carriages loaded, and
ready harnessed for their March, their Arms, their Plate, the Gold Chains of
their Officers, and the rest of the Booty remained to the Victours; and the
Infantry now exalted into Cavalry, mounted on the Horses which they found
Bridled and Saddl'd to their hands, with Pistols in their Holsters returned as
it were in triumph to Estampes, whither also the Duke of Guise came immedia^ely
upon his Victory, which was attended with all those happy consequences he had
foreseen.

For there fell so great a consternation into that shattered Army, which after
the defeat had rallied within a League of Auneau, that the poor Baron of Dona,
whatsoever reasons he alleged to fortify his opinion, could never induce the
Heads of it to go immediately and invest the Catholics, who dreaming on
nothing but the Pillage, might easily be surprised, encompassed, and
consequently defeated, and all taken or killed, in that hurry of disorder. But
far from harkning to any such advice, the Swissers thoroughly frightened by this
second misfortune, much greater than the first, extremely weakened, and their
numbers wasted by the Fatigues of a three Months March, separated themselves
from the body of the Army, and after having accepted of the conditions which
the King had granted them, put themselves on the way of returning into their
own Country.

Those few Reyters which were yet remaining in that Army, and the Lansquenets
reduced to a pitiful condition, followed their example within four or five
days afterward. They found themselves on the one side, pursued by the Vanguard
of the King's Army, under the conduct of the Duke of Espernon, and on the other
by the Duke of Guise; whom the Marquis du Pont had reinforced with three or
four thousand Italian Horse, which the Duke of Lorrain had given order to levy
at the beginning of the War. They had been informed that the Sieur de Mandelot,
Governor of Lions, was come out with five or six thousand men to cut off their
passage; and they were reduced after the defeat of Auneau, by frequent
desertions, by sickness, and by the toils of their long Marches, to a very
inconsiderable number, without Victuals, Ammunition and Baggage, and almost
without Arms, and hopeless of escaping from the midst of so many enemies by
whom they were on every side encompassed. Thus the last necessity forced them
in conclusion to accept of the Treaty which by permission from the King was
still offered them by the Duke of Espernon, to hinder the Duke of Guise whom he
loved not, from the Glory of having entirely defeated so great a multitude of
Foreigners.

The Conditions were, that the Lansquenets should deliver up their Colors;
that the Reyters should carry away theirs, but furled up and put in their
Portmantues. That the French Protestants should be repossess'd of their
Estates, but that they should depart the Realm, in case they returned not into
the Church; That both the one and the other should promise never to bear Arms
against the Service of the King, and that his Majesty would give them both an
ample safe Conduct and a Convoy, to pass in safety through his Dominions, and
to his Frontiers, from thence every man to dispose of himself according to his
own liking.

The French in that Army used their utmost endeavors to hinder the Germans
from accepting such shameful conditions, promising to lead them without hazard
to the King of Navarre's Army. But perceiving that the Strangers, far from
listening to their had designed to detain them as Hostages, to secure their pay,
which had been so often promised without effect, they shifted every man for
himself as secretly as he could, and took different ways to avoid pursuit. The
Prince of Conty with fourteen or fifteen Gentlemen, struck out of the common
Roads into by passages, and retired without being discovered to an Estate of
his in the Country of Main. The Duke of Bouillon took upon the right hand,
and after having crossed through Lionois and la Bresse with incredible pains,
avoiding continually the Highways, came at last to Geneva, where not long
after he Died, being worn out with the Toils he had undergone: in the same
manner his Brother the Count de la Mark was already Dead, during their March at
Ancy-le-Franc in Senonois. The rest of the Captains retired also, slenderly
attended and with great hazard and trouble, into other parts.

There was only the brave Chastillon, who with about an hundred and twenty
Horsemen, resolved to run his Fortune, and abandoning themselves to his
Conduct, pierced with great resolution favored by Fortune quite through the
Troops of Mandelot, and all the Country of Lionois, Forest, and Velay, from
whence they came pouring upon him on all sides, at the sound of the Larun Bell,
which they rung in all the Towns, Burroughts and Villages, and arrived at last
without much loss into Vivarez, where he had strong Places, and from thence
into Languedoc. As for the Lansquenets and Reyters, after their Treaty
concluded and signed, they were splendidly treated at Marsigny by the Duke of
Espernon, who gave them a Convoy of some Troops of men at Arms, and Companies
of Foot, to secure them as far as beyond the Saone, which they were ordered to
pass at Mascon. Yet all this prevented not the loss of a great part of these
miserable Germans, who falling Sick, or staying behind the rest out of
weakness, or being at too great a distance from their Convoy, and scatteringly
Quartered, had their throats Cut, and were knocked on the Head without
resistance and without mercy, by the Peasants in revenge of so many horrible
insolences which those Strangers had committed in France.

In this pitiful condition it was that the Baron of Dona, and Colonel Boucq,
who were the only survivours amongst the head Officers of this ruined Army,
being arrived on the frontiers of Savoy, implored the mercy of that Duke; who
that he might lay an obligation on the German Princes, gave them passage
through his Estates, from whence retiring through Swisserland they got into
Germany. The surprise was incredible to behold so great a desolation, and so
miserable a remnant of the greatest and most flourishing Army, which at any
time had been sent out of that Country to the succor of the Huguenots into
France. For, in fine, of twenty thousand Swissers, nine or ten thousand
Lansquenets, and eight thousand Reyters, which were levi'd for their
assistance, there returned only four thousand, betwixt Masters and Servants,
of whom the greatest part contemned and whooted at by their own Countrymen,
survived not their misfortunes any long time after; but died as much of shame
and sorrow, as of the diseases which they had contracted by so many hardships
which they had undergone, in so long and so unfortunate an expedition.

The Duke of Guise, and the Marquis du Pont, who after the departure of these
wretches out of France, had followed them almost as far as Geneva,
understanding by Letters from the Duke of Savoy, that he had taken them into
his Protection, abandoned them to their ill fortune, which persecuted them
worse than even their Enemies could have wished. After which, in order to
refresh their Troops, which excepting only the Italians last arrived, had
extremely suffered during four Months, in which they followed and continually
harras'd the Protestant Army, they put them into Quarters, in the small
territory of the Count of Montbelliard, one of the principal Authors of this
Expedition, who had instigated the Reyters to take Arms. There it was that the
Soldiers, to whom too much license was permitted, revenged themselves without
mercy (by all manner of Excess, Rapine and Cruelty, Plundring, Burning,
Massacring and Spoiling,) of all those mischiefs which the Germans, whose
example they ought not to have followed had caused the Lorrainers to suffer.

This great Victory obtained against so powerful an Army, without costing
almost any thing, was certainly most Glorious, but withal most fatal and
unfortunate to France; through the extreme malice, and insupportable insolence
of the Leaguers, who took advantage from thence, to raise their Idol to the
Skies; at the same time, infinitely debasing him who was God's Lieutenant, and
his living Image in France, by the indelible character of Royalty. The whole
City of Paris echoed from side to side, with loud acclamations of the Duke of
Guise: In private Families, in public places, in the Palace, and in the
Schools of the University, in the Churches, and Pulpits of the Preachers, they
discoursed of nothing but the defeat of the Reyters, and that too as of a
Miracle, which they wholly and solely attributed to him; comparing him to
Moses, and Gideon, and David the destroyer of the Philistines, and in short, to
every Hero of the Scriptures. And in the mean time, far from commending as
they ought in duty, what the King had performed with so much Conduct and
Valor, in hindering the Germans from passing the Loire, they went on with
dreadful malice, to charge him with horrible calumnies, and that with so much
the more insolence, as he had testified remisness and pusillanimity, when it
was his duty to have inflicted severe punishments on those abominable Villains,
who three or four months before, had the impudence to publish and to justify
them with a high hand in Paris.

For Prevost the Curate of St. Severin, one of the most Seditious and most
impudent fellows of the Age, having dared to say in one of his Sermons, that
the King (whom he accused after the example of the Sixteen, to have called in
the Reyters on purpose to de^troy the Catholics,) was a Tyrant, and an enemy
of God, and of his Church; Bussy, le Clerc, and Cruce placed themselves in
Arms, about the passages of the Parish, to secure the Curate from being
apprehended, and put in Custody. At the same time, the Curate of St. Bennet,
John Boucher, the most violent of all the Leaguers, having caused the
Alarm-Bell to be rung in his Church, all the rabble who came running in, from
about the University, with Arms in their hands to their assistance, fell upon
the Commissaries, the Sergeants and the Archers, whom the Lieutenant Civil,
and the Lieutenant of the Grand Provost had brought to seize them, and drove
them back, well loaded with ill Language and with knocks, beyond the Bridges.
And then as if they had achieved some glorious Victory, in pitched Battle
against the King himself, (who instead of Marching his Regiment of Guards, to
have laid hold on the Mutineers at the beginning of the Tumult, was weak enough
to restrain and conceal his just indignation, so far as even to flatter and
cajoll them,) the Sixteen in sign of Triumph after so famous an exploit,
ordained that this day which was the third of September, should henceforth be
called the happy day of St. Severin.

Now as they were become more insolent through the impunity of so great a
crime, and by the defeat of the Reyters, their Preachers animated with the
Spirit of Rebellion, made it their business to inspire it more furiously than
ever into the people, shamelesly affirming in their public Sermons, that the
King, who had invited the Reyters into France, being now grown desperate to see
his design ruined, by the Victories which the Duke of Guise had obtained over
them, had hindered the great Defender of their Religion from cutting in pieces
the remainder of those Heretics, that the Duke of Espernon, their known
Patron and Protector, had snatched them out of his hands by order from his
Master, and by a Treaty which he had made with them, to afford them the means
of putting themselves in a condition of returning once more into France. And
the business went so far, that the Spirit of Revolt, (which those Guides of
Consciences, those Confessors and Preachers ought to combat with all their
force, as being directly opposite to the Gospel, which teaches nothing but
Obedience and Submission to lawful Powers,) was not only inspired into the
people in private discourses, in confessions and in Sermons, but also in some
manner authorized by the Sorbonne.

I believe not that I can be taxed with any want of respect to that venerable
Body, because when occasion has been given me, which has happened more than
once, in diverse of my Works, I have not been wanting in those due
commendations, which the truth it self, to which I am entirely devoted, has
drawn from my Pen: But by the same obligation which indispensibly binds me to
the truth, I must say that in so numerous a Company, of young and old Doctors
mixed together, it is impossible but that there should be formed in troublesome
conjunctures, by the unhappiness of times, some Factions derived from certain
mutinous and extravagant persons who deviate from the principles and practices
of the more prudent. And as we have beheld in our own days a party, which, in
relation to a Book that was condemned, was overcome by the greater number of
Orthodox Doctors, who now prevalent; so, during the League, which had poisoned
the minds of most in Paris, there was one which carried it by their Caball over
the more sound and better Divines; who sighed at the deplorable blindness of
their Brotherhood, as shall be seen in the sequel of this History.

On the Subject of those Calumnies, which the Preachers of the League and the
Sixteen daily published, as so many indisputable truths, that faction of
corrupt Doctors being then assembled on the sixteenth of December, made a
decree, in which it was declared lawful for Subjects to take away the
Government from a Prince, who acted not for the good of Religion and of the
State; in the same manner as the administration of goods should be taken from
the Guardian of a Ward, who might reasonably be suspected to abuse his trust.
This was doubtless no other than to decide, on a most important Subject, a case
of Conscience from the false and pernicious principles of Morals, the most
corrupt that ever were. Accordingly the King, who after having expelled the
Strangers out of France, made his entry into Paris in Arms, was exrtemely
surprised, at the furious insolence, and unbounded license which was taken to
decry his conduct in their Sermons, and to stir up the people to Sedition. But
ins^ead of resenting it like a Severaign Prince, by punishing that attempt, and
making a terrible example of its Authors, (who well deserved it for that
detestable Doctrine, which tends to the subversion of all Monarchy,) he
satisfied himself with acting like a Censor, or to speak more properly like a
Ghostly Father, and a Guide of Consciences.

For all the punishment which he inflicted, for such an ungodly and detestable
an action, was to make to those factious people, and principally to Doctor
Boucher, the most seditious man amongst them, in presence of the Deputies of
Parliament, whom he sent for to the Louvre, a very pious and charitable
remonstrance, in which he taught them to comprehend the great enormity of their
crime, which merited eternal Damnation, for having vilified their King, with a
thousand horrible impostures in the chair of truth, which they had changed into
a pestilential Pulpit full of lies and calumnies; after which, when they were
come down, they made no manner of scruple to go immediately to the Altar, and
to offer there to God the Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist, before they had
reconciled themselves to him, whom they had so unworthily affronted. He added,
that though he might justly treat them, as Pope Sixtus had lately some
Religious of his Order, whom he had sent to the Galleys, for presuming to speak
irreverently of him in their Sermons, yet notwithstanding, he would not at this
time proceed in that manner against them; but in case they should once more
commit a crime of the like nature, he was resolved that his Parliament should
do justice so exemplary and severe upon them, that it might strike a terror
into all wicked and seditious persons who resembled them.

This was all the Vengeance, which this too good and gracious King took upon
those people, who abusing his Clemency which they now despised, grew day by day
more insolent against him. Which makes it demonstrable how extremely much it
concerns a Prince, so to temper the virtues which he ought to have, that one of
them may not destroy the other by its excess, and consequently be dangerous to
himself. That his Justice and his Mercy may agree without the interfering of
one in the others Province; that by endeavoring to be too rigorously just he
become not odious, and by being too yielding he grow not contemptible to his
Subjects. In the mean while it was impossible that these excessive praises
which were given to the Servant, when at the same time they reviled the Master
with so much malice and indignity, should not create great jealousies and
disquiets in him; and that a just resentment should not cause him to take up a
resolution of revenging so many affronts as were given to the Royal Majesty,
and of putting the Leaguers and principally the Sixteen and their Head, out of
a condition of disputing any longer with their Severeign for the Mastery. On
the other side, the Duke of Guise was puffed up more than ever with such a
series of Success, and with those illustrious testimonies which Pope Sixtus,
and Alexander Prince of Parma, had so solemnly rendered to his merit; the one
by sending him the consecrated Sword, and the other his Arms, as to him, who
amongst all Princes best deserved the glorious Title of a great Captain. And as
he was too clear sighted not to discern the visible signs, which the King in
spite of his dissimulation could not hinder often from breaking out, and
discovering the disdain and hatred which he had conceived against him; He
resolved to fortify his party in such manner, that he should not only have
nothing to apprehend, but also that he might hope for all things from his good
fortune. And he did it with so much the more ardour and resolution, as he was
then more than ever exasperated, and almost driven to despair, by a refusal
which he had from the King, which was given him in a most disobliging manner,
by preferring his Rival in Ambition before him; which he esteemed the most
sensible affront that he could receive: and which afterward put things out of
a possibility of accommodation. Thus it happened.

The Duke of Guise, after the signal Service which he had performed to the
Kingdom, was of opinion, that if he demanded some part of the Employments which
had been possessed by the late Duke of Ioyeuse, Admiral of France and Governor
of Normandy, they could not possibly be refused him. And in order to obtain his
request more easily, he was content only to ask the Admiralty, and that not
for himself, nor any of the Princes of his Family, but for the Count of
Brissac; whom the Nobility of his Birth, and his great desert, together with
the services which France had received from the brave Timoleon de Cosse his
Brother, Colonel of the French Infantry, and from his Father the great Marshal
of Brissac, Viceroy of Piedmont, might raise without envy, and with universal
applause to that high command. After the Duke had been held in hand, and fed
with fair promises and false hopes, he not only failed of obtaining the place
which he requested, but as if it had purposely been done to spite him, it was
conferred, together with the Government of Normandy, on the Duke of Espernon
his declared Enemy, whose Character I shall next give you.

John Louis de Nogaret, the youngest Brother of his House, who was called when
he came first to Court, the young La Valette, understood so well to gain the
favor of the King, particularly after Quelus one of those unhappy Minions who
killed each other in Duel, had recommended him to his Majesty at his death,
that immediately he grew up into the first rank of Favorites, with the Duke of
Ioyeuse, over whom at length he carried it, having had the cunning to insinuate
into him the desire of Commanding an Army, and by that artifice to remove him
from his Master's sight. There was no sort of Honor, Wealth or Dignities which
the King did not heap on this new Minion: in favor of whom he erected Espernon
into a Duchy, to make him Duke and Peer as well as Anne de Ioyeuse, because he
had taken upon him to make them equal in all circumstances; having so great a
tenderness for both of them, (I might say weakness unworthy of a King,) that he
answered those who represented to him his great profusions, and that he
impoverished himself to enrich them, that when he had married and settled his
two Children, for so he called them in his ordinary discourse, he was then
resolved to turn good husband. Yet there was this difference betwixt them, that
Ioyeuse by his courtesy, his civility, his magnificence, and by the winning
way of his behavior, had attracted men's affections; but on the contrary,
Espernon by reason of his rough, imperious and haughty nature, was hated not
only by the People, and the Leaguers, who made a thousand invective Satyrs on
him, but also by the great men of the Court, whom he treated with contempt and
insolence, as if the favor of his Master which he abused, had given him the
privilege to affront even those whose virtue and desert was acknowledged and
respected by the King. For in this manner it was, that amongst others he used
Francis d' Espinac Archbishop of Lions, and Monsieur de Villeroy one of the
most prudent and faithful Ministers which our Kings have ever had; a way of
procedure not disadvantageous to the Duke of Guise, who laid hold on that
occasion to gain the Archbishop entirely to his interests.

Above all the rest there was an invincible Antipathy betwixt the Duke of Guise
and this proud Favorite; who whether it were to please his Master, or to put
an obligation upon the King of Navarre, with whom he then held a private
correspondence, or were it out of the contrariety of their humors, professed
himself on all occasions his open enemy, omitting no opportunity of rendering
him suspected and odious to the King, and of working him up still more and more
to a greater height of hatred and indignation against him. And in requital of
those ill offices, the Duke of Guise was not wanting on his side to animate the
People of Paris against Espernon; who one day, ran the hazard, (in passing over
the Pont Nostre Dame, of being murdered by the Citizens, who running out of
their Shops in multitudes, went about to incompass him, if he had not escaped
by speedy flight. It Is true, that the Nuncio Morosini foreseeing the fatal
consequences of this their enmity, did all he was able by his prudent
admonitions to extinguish it; but though he smothered it for a little time, he
could not hinder it from blazing out immediately afterward. Insomuch that it
grew to a greater height than ever, when the King who either would not, or
durst not refuse any thing to this Favorite, united in his only person, what
before had been shared betwixt him and Ioyeuse; and conferred on him both the
Government of Normandy, and the Admiralty, which the Duke of Guise had
requested for Brissac.

The Ceremony was performed with great magnificence; and the Attorney General
in a long Harangue which he made at the Admission of the Duke of Espernon, said
pub^^quely, that the King who had made so worthy a choice was a great Saint,
and deserved to be Canonized at least as well as Saint Lewis; that the New made
Admiral, would expiate for all the crimes of the late Admiral de Coligny, and
make the Catholic Religion once more to flourish in the Kingdom. An insipid
Panegyrique, which is indeed no better than a base and fulsome flattery, if the
Author does not intend to fpeak by contraries should no more be suffered by
great men, who are lovers of true glory, than an affront or a Libel; neither
ought they to allow any commendations to be given them, but such as are solid
and established on such known truths, that their very enemies shall not be able
to deny them.

That Speech which the King's Attorney made on this occasion, did his Master
and the Admiral more mischief than all the furious Libels of the League. It
drew upon them the contempt and railery of the people; which sometimes make a
man more uneasy than a Satyr, which is but the impotent anger of a Scribler.
And it occasioned that famous Epigramm, which concludes that Henry cannot be
denied to be a great Saint, and a worker of Miracles, since of a little Valley
he has in a moment made a mighty Mountain. The Verses run thus, Quis neget
Henricum miracula prodere mundo,
Qui fecit montem, qui modo vallis erat?
A Saint at least, our Henry we account;
Who of a Vale so soon has made a Mount.


An Allusion was made to his Surname of La Valette, by a kind of clenching
Witticism, much in fashion in those times, but which is now exploded. And an
offer was likewise made at vilifying his birth, not unlike what Busbequius, the
Emperor Rodolphus his Ambassador to that King, has written in one of his
Letters, perhaps with some little malignity, and following the foolish reports
of the rabble, who commonly love to speak disgracefully of Favorites; what we
may receive for undoubted truth, is this, that this prodigious raising of the
Duke of Espernon, a declared Enemy to the Duke of Guise, was the reason that
he, being furiously incensed at the refusal which he had, and at the greatning
of a man who sought his ruin, believed himself now authorized to give the
reins to his resentment, and push his fortune as far as it would go. And from
thence ensued all those dismal and tragical events, the very remembrance of
which strikes an horror into my Soul; and which nevertheless in performance of
my duty, I shall faithfully represent in the following Book.

THE HISTORY OF THE LEAGUE.
LIB. III.
IF I intended to follow the Example of Livy, Ann. 1588.
the Prince of Latin Historians, who never suffers a Prodigy to escape him,
and describes it perhaps with as much superstition as exactness; I should here
make long narrations how the Sun was obscured on the sudden, without the
interposition of any Cloud appearing in the Sky, with a flaming Sword shooting
out from the Center of the Body; palpable darkness like that of the Egyptians
at noonday; extraordinary Tempests, Earthquakes, fiery Phantasms in the Air,
and an hundred other Prodigies, which are said to have been produced and seen
in this unhappy year of one thousand five hundred eighty eight, and which were
fansi'd to be so many ominous presages of those horrible disorders that ensued
in it.

But because I am not of the opinion that much credit ought to be given to
those sorts of Signs, which are commonly the effects of natural causes, though
very often unknown to us; nor to the predictions of Astrologers, some of which
verily believed they had found in the Stars, that this year should be the
conclusion of the World: I will only say that the most sure presage of so many
misfortunes then impending, was the minds of men too much exasperated on both
sides, to live in peace with each other; and not rather to be searching out for
means of making sure of those whom they suspected, and disposing of them
according to their jealousies.

In order to this the Duke of Guise, after he had made an end of ruining the
County of Montbelliard, took his way to Nancy, whither he had invited all the
Princes of his house, to assemble in the Month of January, there to take their
resolutions, in reference to the present condition of affairs; and of that
happy success which they had in the War against the Reyters. Some of them there
were, as it is reported, so swollen with that Victory, and so blinded with their
prosperity, that they proposed in this Conference, the most dangerous and most
violent expedients; to which the Duke of Lorrain a moderate and wary Prince
would by no means listen. Howsoever it were, (for I find nothing to confirm
these relations, not even in the Memoires of their greatest Enemies, who have
written most exactly of that Assembly,) it is most undoubted, that if they
proceeded not so far as to those terrible extremities, yet what was then
concluded, passed in the World for a most unjust and unlawful undertaking, and
was condemned by all those who were not blindly devoted to the League.

It was, that a Request should be presented to the King, containing Articles,
which under the ordinary pretense of their desire to preserve in France the
Catholic Religion, tended manifestly to despoil him of his Authority and
Power, and to invest the Heads of the League in both. For those scandalous
Articles bore this substance in them, that for the service of God, and the
maintenance and security of Religion, the King should not only be most humbly
Petitioned, but also summoned to establish the Holy Inquisition in his Realm;
to cause the Council of Trent to be there Published, suspending nevertheless
that Article which revokes the exemption pretended by some Chapters and Abbeys
against the Bishops: to continue the War against the Huguenots, and to cause
the goods both of them and of their Associates to be sold, with which to defray
the charges of that War; and to pay the Debts in which the Heads of the League
had been constrained to involve themselves for the prosecution of it: To refuse
quarter to all Prisoners who should be taken in that War, unless upon condition
of paying the full value of their goods, and giving caution, of living
afterward like good Catholics.

Behold here a most specious appearance of Zeal for Religion; but in the next
place observe the Venom which lies hidden under all these fair pretenses. That
the King shall unite himself more cordially and more openly than before to this
Holy League: thereby to keep exactly all its Laws, to which men are obliged by
this the most solemn and most inviolable of all Oaths. That besides the Forces
which he shall be obliged to set on foot to wage that War against the Huguenots
he shall maintain an Army on the Frontiers of Lorrain to oppose the German
Protestants, if they should determine once again to enter France. That besides
those places which the Leaguers already held for their security, there should
be delivered to them other Towns of more importance which should be specified
to him, where they might establish for Governors those of their Heads which
they shall name, with power of introducing such Garrisons and making such
Fortifications, as they shall think fit, at the charges of the Provinces in
which they are situate. And in conclusion, to secure them that they shall be no
more hindered, as till this present they have always been, in the executing of
those things which have been promised them for the safety of Religion, his
Majesty shall displace from his Council, and from the Court, and shall deprive
of their Governments and Offices, those who shall be named to him, as Patrons
of Heretics, and Enemies to Religion and the State.

These were those extravagant demands which began to open the eyes of many good
Catholics, who had suffered themselves to be innocently seduced by the
appearances of true zeal, which being little illuminated, was not according to
knowledge, as the Apostle speaks. For they now more clearly saw into some of
those Articles; that the League to engage the Pope and the King of Spain in
their Interests, would be content to abandon those Privileges and Liberties,
which our Ancestors have always maintained with so much vigor and resolution:
and to subject to the yoke of a Spanish Inquisition, the French, who have never
been able to undergo it. And in others of them, that they designed to bereave
the King of all the solid and essential parts of Royalty, to leave him only
the shadow and appearance of it, and afterward to dispose even of his Person,
as the Heads of their party should think fit.

And accordingly when the Request was presented to the King on the part of the
Associated Princes, and the Cardinal of Bourbon, whose simplicity and whose
name they abused, and made it a cloak to their Ambition, he conceived an
extreme indignation against it, which immediately appeared in his eyes and
countenance. Yet he thought it necessary at that time to dissemble, not finding
himself then in a condition of returning such an answer to it, as was becoming
a King justly provoked against his Subjects, who stood on terms with him like
Lords and Masters. For which reason, and withal to gain farther time, he
contented himself, to say, that he would examine those Articles in his Council,
in order to his Answer: which should be in such sort, that all good Catholics
should have reason to be satisfied.

But in the mean time, the Duke of Guise, who took not fair words for payment,
well understanding the King's design, and resolving not to give the Duke of
Espernon the leisure to conjure down that Tempest which was raised against him,
and to infuse into his Master those vigorous resolutions which were necessary
for him to take, pressed the King continually to give a precise Answer to every
particular in those Articles: For he doubted not that in case it proved
favorable, he should ingross all power in himself, and if it were otherwise,
that it would be thought the King resolved to maintain the Huguenots, and that
by consequence the Catholics would enter into a War against him.

On which considerations, being then retired into his Government of Champaigne,
to which place he went after the Conference at Nancy, he pli'd the King
incessantly with Messages sent by Gentlemen one after another, to urge him to a
speedy and punctual Answer: And this he did with the more eagerness and
importunity, because on the one side he found himself more powerful than ever,
having a great part of the Gentry, and almost all the People, and especially
the Parisians for him. And on the other side he observed the party of the
Huguenots to be very low and infinitely weakened, by the defeat of their great
German Succors, and by their late loss of the Prince of Conde, a person of all
others the most strictly tied to their Religion, and on whom they more relied
than any man, not excepting the King of Navarre himself.

He deceased on the fifth of March at St. Iean de Angely, of an exceeding
violent distemper, with which he was suddenly seized one evening after Supper,
and which carried him off in two days time. The Sixteen with infamous baseness,
made a great rejoicing for it, and their Preachers failed not to roar out in
their Sermons, that it was the effect of the Excommunication, with which he had
been Thunderstruck by Pope Sixtus. But besides that the King of Navarre who had
been struck in the same manner by the Bull, had his health never the worse for
it, the King, to whom that poor creature the Cardinal of Bourbon had been
telling the same story, and making wonderful exclamations in relating it,
answered him with a smile, That it might very well be the occasion of his
death, but withal there was something else which helped him on his journey.
And truly the matter was put beyond all doubt, after the attestation of four
Physicians, and of two Master Surgeons, who deposed upon their Oaths, that
they had manifestly seen in almost all the parts of his Body, all the most
evident signs and effects of a Caustique Poison, burning and ulcerating. A most
execrable action, which could not be too rigorously punished; and yet the Laws
inflicted what was possible on the person of one of his domestic servants, who
was drawn in pieces by four Horses in the place of St. Iean de Angely.

As to the rest, he was a Prince, who excepting only his obstinate adhering to
a Religion, in which he was born, and who^e falsehood he might have known in
time, if he had not been too much prepossessed, had at the Age of five and
thirty years, at which he died, all the perfections which can meet together in
one man, to render him one of the greatest and most accomplished persons in the
World: if at least there might not possibly be discerned in his carriage and
customs some of those little failings, from which the most wise are not
exempted, and which may easily be pardoned, without lessening the esteem which
we have for them. And if Fortune which is not always propitious to merit, was
not favorable to him on some occasions, wherein he had need of her assistance,
yet in this she was his friend, that she gave him the greater opportunity of
showing his invincible courage in his adversities, in which he raised himself
infinitely above her, by the vigor and greatness of his Soul.

Accordingly the death of this great Prince was lamented, not only by those of
his own party who loved him passionately, but also by the Catholics, and even
by the Duke of Guise himself; who, Head as he was of an infamous and wicked
Faction, which he made sub^ervient to his ends, had of his own stock, and the
excellency of his nature, which was infinitely noble, all the generosity which
is requisite to love and respect virtue, even in the person of his greatest and
most formidable Enemy.

All which notwithstanding, he was content to make what advantage he could of
so lamentable an accident, toward the compassing of his designs: And as he
observed, not only by this but by a multitude of concomitant accidents and
misfortunes, that the Huguenot party decreased in strength and reputation, and
his own grew more bold and undertaking, he set himself more vigorously to push
his fortune, and to demand an entire satisfaction to all the Articles of his
request; which had so puffed up the spirits of the Sixteen, that they ^orgot
all manner of moderation, and grew daily more and more insupportable. It
happened also at the same time, that the King received several advertisements
of the resolution which had been taken in their Council to seize his Person,
and to enclose him in a Monastery. And the same Lieutenant of the Provostship
of the Isle of Paris, Nicholas Poulain, who had formerly discovered the like
Conspiracy, to which belief was not given, told him so many particular
circumstances in relation to this, that though he was very diffident of that
double dealing man, whose integrity he much suspected, yet his evidence
concurring with the extreme insolence of the Sixteen, which rendered his report
more credible, could not but leave a strong impression on his Soul. Insomuch
that at last following the counsel of those who had so long advised him, to
employ his power and justice against those Mutineers, he took up a resolution
once for all to take that thorn out of his side, to reduce Paris into that
state of submission and obedience which belongs to Subjects; and to extinguish
the Faction of Sixteen, by the exemplary chastisement of the most seditious
amongst them.

The preparations which of necessity he was to make to secure the success of
this undertaking, the three thousand Swissers whom he caused to be quartered at
Lagny, the Companies of Guards which were reinforced, the Troops which were
sent him from the Duke of Espernon, who was gone into his Government of
Normandy, and all the passages of the River both above Paris and below it being
possessed by him, were so many Alarms to those Mutineers who believing
themselves already lost, implored the assistance of the Duke of Guise. That
Prince who had advanced from Rheims as far as Soissons, in favor of the Duke
of Aumale his Cousin, who met with trouble and resistance in his Government of
Picardy, satisfied himself at first with sending them some of his most
experienced Captains, to regulate and manage their Militia in case of need. But
some few days after, finding himself still pressed more eagerly by the
solicitations of those people, who were now driven to despair, and believing
that this foundation of the League on which he had built his hopes being once
shaken he himself must perish under its ruins, for that being destroyed the
next design was certainly to fall on him, who was the Head and Protector of
it; he gave immediate notice to his Friends and Creatures, to get into Paris,
one after another, at several Gates, and ordered some to assure the Sixteen in
his name, that he would suddenly be there in person to live and die with them.

The King, who was advertised of this resolution, and who was under great
apprehensions of his coming, lest his presence might hinder the execution of
his Enterprise, and arm with a word speaking that great City which was entirely
at his devotion, sent the President de Bellievre, a man of great Authority and
known Prudence, to tell the Duke from him, that in the present juncture of
affairs, and just apprehension which he had, that his coming would produce
great troubles in Paris, he thought good he should not come till he received
new orders from him, for otherwise he would render himself guilty of all those
disorders which might thence ensue.

To this the Duke, who was never to be beaten off from any resolution which he
had once taken, answered calmly, but in doubtful terms, that he was ready to
obey the King, that he had never intended to go to Paris, but in the condition
of a Private man, and without a Train: that he desired to justify himself from
those aspersions with which he knew his Enemies had basely charged him in his
absence, that he had reason to believe there was a design on foot to oppress
the good Catholics, whose Protector he had declared himself; and that he
humbly besought his Majesty to give him some security against so just an
apprehension: Bellievre, who well knew that the King would stick at no manner
of verbal satisfaction, in case that would prove sufficient to break his
Journey, promised he should have all the security he could possibly desire. In
effect the King was fully resolved to have given him all manner of assurances:
But as ill luck would have it, this was not done at the same time it was
determined. Insomuch that without more delay, he got on Horseback, and crossing
the Country out of the common Roads, that he might avoid the Messengers which
he knew would be sent with new orders to him, entered Paris on Monday the Ninth
of May, with eight more in his company, just about Noon by the Gate of St.
Denis.

It may be said in one sort of meaning, that this day was the most unfortunate,
and yet the most glorious of all his life. For whether it were that the people,
who were made to believe by the Sixteen, that the City was to be Sacked, were
advertised by them of his arrival, or that the report was spread at an instant,
when he was first seen to approach the Fauxbourg, it is most certain that he had
no sooner passed it, but the whole Town running together from all parts of it,
crowded up the Street, and all the rest through which he passed; the Windows
were filled, and even the Tiles of Houses; the Air echoed with a thousand sorts
of acclamations, and the loud cries of Vive Guise were repeated with far higher
peals than had been formerly of Vive le Roy; for those loyal shouts were grown
out of date, and, the League in a manner had abolished them.

There was a kind of madness in this Transport, or rather in this furious
torrent of their joy; which was so extravagant, that it passed even to
Idolatry. They haled and tore each other to get nearest to this Prince: Those
who were born off by the throng to a farther distance, stretched out their Arms
to him, with their hands clasped over their heads; they thought themselves
happy, who could crowd so near as to touch any part of his Cloak or Boots. Some
there were amongst them who kneeled to him, when he was passing by, and others
who when they could not reach him with their hands, endeavored to touch him
with their Chapelets, which they kissed when they had received that honor, as
the custom is in adoration at the Shrines of Saints. A thousand praises were
given him, and a thousand blessings. He was called aloud the Pillar of the
Church, the Prop of Faith, the Protector of the Catholics, the Savior of
Paris; and from all the Windows there fell upon him a shower of Flowers and of
Greens, with redoubled acclamations of Vive Guise.

To conclude, no imaginable demonstrations and testimonies of love, honor and
veneration, but were shown to the height at this tumultuous entry, by that
sudden overflow of joy; and that wonderful dilatation of hearts and
affections, which was to him a sort of triumph, more pleasing than any of the
Caesar's. Accordingly he enjoyed the full gust of it, with all the satisfaction
of extreme pleasure; passing on Horseback very leisurely through that infinite
press of people, bare headed, beholding them with a smiling countenance, and
with that courteous and engaging air, which was so natural to him, saluting on
the right and on the left, bowing to those below in the Streets, and to those
above in the Windows, not neglecting the very meanest, holding out his hand to
the nearest, and casting his obliging glances on the more remote, he passed in
this manner to the Queen-Mother's Palace, near St. Eustache, where he alighted,
and from thence to the Louvre, following her on foot, who had taken her Chair
to conduct him to the King, and was witness to those incredible transports of
public joy, and acclamations of that innumerable herd of people, which beat
her ears incessantly with the name of Guise, bellowed from more than an hundred
thousand mouths.

In the mean time, the King, who had heard with infinite rage of this sudden
arrival of the Duke, was shut up in his Closet, where he was in consultation on
that Prince's life or death; who had been so blindly rash, as to precipitate
himself, in his single ^erson, into inevitable danger, from whence only his
good fortune, (of which he was not Master,) could deliver him. Some there were,
and amongst others the Abbot d' Elbene, and Colonel Alphonso d' Ornano, with
the most resolute of those Gascons, whom the Duke of Espernon had placed
amongst the five and forty, to be always near the King's person, who counseled
that irresolute and wavering Prince to dispatch him on the spot, having so fair
a pretense, and the means so ready in his hand, to punish a rebellious Subject;
who in opposition to his express orders, had audaciously presumed to come to
Paris, as it were on purpose to let him know, that he was absolute Master of
it. The rest more moderate, and amongst them the Chancellor de Chiverny, and
the Sieurs de Bellievre, de la Guiche, and de Villequier Governor of Paris,
diswaded him from that attempt, laying before him, besides the dangerous
consequences which this terrible action might produce in such a juncture, that
it always concerned him, both for his reputation, and for the maintenance of
the most inviolable Laws of natural equity, before he passed to extremities, to
hear a man who came to put himself so freely into the hands of his King, and to
be answerable for all that was all^dg'd against him.

While these things were in debating, and the king in suspense betwixt his
anger and his fear uncertain which way to resolve, the Duke, (who had passed
through the French Guards commanded by Grillon who loved him not, and through
the Swissers, which stood ranck'd on both sides of the great Staircase; and
afterward had traversed the Hall and the Antichamber filled with people who
made no very ceremonious returns to his salutations and civilities) entered
into the Presence Chamber, disguising a sudden fright which seized him,
intrepid as he was, with the best face he could set upon the matter, which yet
he could not act so well, but that it was easy to discern through that
affectation of bravery, that he could have been well contented to have been in
some other place, and not to have engaged himself so far, especially when a
certain Princess whispered him in the ear to have a care of himself, and that
his life and death were under consideration in the Closet. Yet immediately
after, as his courage was usually raised at the sight of the greatest dangers,
he resumed his wonted boldness, and was not able to hinder himself, perhaps by
a sudden motion purely natural, and arising from the magnanimity of his heart,
from laying his hand on the pommel of his Sword, without his own perceiving it,
and from stepping hastily two or three paces forward, with a haughty walk, as
if he were putting himself into a posture of selling his life as dear as he was
able to his Enemies. But the King at that instant coming out of the Closet with
Bellievre, he changed posture suddenly, made a low reverence, and threw himself
almost at his feet, protesting to him, that not believing his presence ought to
be displeasing to him, he was come to bring him his head, and fully to justify
his carriage against the calumnies of his Enemies; and withal to assure his
Majesty, that he had not a more faithful Servant than himself. But the King
demanding in a grave and serious tone of voice, Who had bid him come, and if he
had not received an express prohibition from him? the business was then brought
to a scanning, and some little contest there was betwixt him and Bellievre, the
last maintaining that he had delivered him the King's commands, and the former
instead of answer, asking him if he had not engaged himself to return with all
possible speed to Soissons, which he had not done, and protesting that he had
never received those Letters, which Bellievre justified he had written to him.

Then the Queen, who though she seemed to be in much affliction for the Duke's
arrival, yet held a private correspondence with him, broke off the discourse,
and taking aside the King her Son, she managed his mind so dexterously, that
whether she made him apprehend a general revolt of Paris, which she had seen so
openly to own the Duke of Guise, or whether he himself were mollifi'd by the
submissive, humble way of speaking which that Prince had used, he contented
himself for that time to tell him, that his innocence which he was so desirous
to prove, would be more manifest if his presence should cause no stirs in
Paris; and thereupon he sat down to Table, remitting till the Afternoon what
he had farther to say to him, and appointing the Queen's Garden for the place.
Then the Duke bowing very low retired, without being accompanied by any of the
King's Servants, but as well attended by all the Town, to the Hostel de Guise,
as he had been from the Gate of St. Denis to the Louvre.

When he had made reflection on the danger, into which he had so rashly thrown
himself, and which now appeared more formidable, by considering it with cooler
thoughts, than he could possibly in that agitation of spirits, and that anxiety
wherein he was in spite of all his courage, when he found himself so far
engaged; he resolved he would never hazard his life in that sort again, and
took such order concerning it, that from the next day, and so onward, he had in
his Palace four hundred Gentlemen who assembling there from all parts of Paris,
according to his orders, never afterward abandoned him. Neither would he
adventure to go that afternoon to the Queen's Garden, but well accompanied by
the bravest of his Officers, amongst whom Captain St. Paul, se^ing that after
his Master was entered, he who kept the door was going to shut it on him,
thrust him back roughly, and entered by force, followed by his Companions,
protesting and swearing that if the game was there to be played he was resolved
to have his stake in it.

So that if the King had designed to have him murdered in that Garden, which I
believe not, though some have written it, it is easy to see that the presence
of those brave men, who were fully resolved to defend their Master, that of the
Queen who made the third in this enterview, the daring countenance of the Duke,
who from time to time was casting his eyes toward his Sword, and to sum up
all, that infinite multitude of Parisians which encompassed the Queen's Palace,
and many of which were got upon the walls, had hindered the execution of such a
purpose.

For that which passed betwixt them at this Conference, since I find nothing of
it in the most exact Memoirs of those times, I shall not offer to relate it, as
Davila has done by a certain Poetical license which he and some other
Historians have used, to make men think and speak without their leave, whatever
they please to put into their thoughts and mouths. What I can deliver for
undoubted truth is this, that there was nothing concluded at this Enterview;
and that the King who had resolved before hand, to chastise the most Seditious
of the Sixteen, and to make himself Master of Paris, after a long consultation
taken by Night, with those in whom he most confided, continued firm to the same
resolution, and set up his rest to stand by it, in spite of the arrival of the
Duke.

With this determination, he sent the next morning for the Prevost of the
Merchants, and the Sheriffs, and Commanded them in company of the Lords, de
Villequier and Francis d' O. to make an exact search for all those Strangers
who were come to Paris some few days since, without any urgent occasion to call
them thither, and to cause them forthwith to depart the Town, without respect
of persons. This was a manifest endeavor to weaken the Duke of Guise; to
reduce him to those seven or eight Gentlemen, who attended him into Paris, and
consequently to give him occasion of believing that after they had rid
themselves of the others, they would attacque him.

Perhaps the design was so laid, as some have conjectured with probability
enough: but if this were really their intention, there are others, who believe
that according to the advice which was given by the Abbot of Elbene, they had
done more wisely to have begun with the Duke of Guise, when they had him single
and at their mercy coopt up in the Louvre: and they ground this opinion on the
meaning of that Abbot's words, who quoted the Scripture to this purpose, It is
written I will strike the Shepherd, and the Flock shall be scattered. However
it was intended, the Paris^ans immediately took the Alarm, perceiving clearly
that those Strangers who were to be sent out of the City, were no others but
those very men whom the Duke of Guise had conveyed into the Town for their
defense and for his own. Insomuch that when they went about to execute that
Order, and to search their Houses, every one opposed them; and the Citizens set
themselves with so much obstinacy to conceal their Lodgers, that the Deputies
and Commissaries fearing a general Insurrection through all the Quarters, durst
proceed no farther. And in the mean time, the Duke of Guise, who was the Soul
that actuated this great Body, forbore not going to the Louvre, but well
accompanied; and the very Evening before the Barricades he presented the Napkin
to the King.

But, as after the flashes of the Lightning, and the rattling of the Thunder,
comes a furious Tempest and lays waste the Field; so after those mutual fears
and jealousies, those Nightly meetings, those Murmurs and Menaces, and those
preparations which were made on both sides with so much tumult, either for
assaulting or for defense, they came to the fatal day of the Barricado's, which
was followed by that horrible deluge of misfortunes, with which all France was
overflowed.

For at last, the King more incensed than ever, by the resistance which was
made to his Orders, and fully resolved to make himself be obeyed one way or
other, caused the French Guards to enter Paris, with some other Companies and
the Swissers, which in all, made up six thousand men: this was done on Thursday
the twelfth of May, just at day break; he being present himself to receive them
on Horseback, at the Gate of Saint Honor. And after having given out his
Orders to their Officers, to Post them according to his direction, he enjoined
them above all things, to be no ways injurious to the Citizens, but only to
repress the insolence of such, who should go about to hinder the search for
Strangers: After which himself retiring to the Louvre, the Marshals d' Aumont
and Biron, who were at the Head of the Troops, went to Post them with beat of
Drum, in the Church yard of St. Innocent, and the adjoining places, on the Pont
Nostre Dame, on that of St. Michael, on the Pont au Change, at the Townhouse,
at the Greve, and at the Avenues of the Place Mauhert.

It appeared immediately by what followed, that this was in effect to give the
signal of a mutiny, and general revolt to all Paris. For a Rumor being spread,
that the King had determined to put to Death a great number of the principal of
the League, and a List being also forged of their Names who were to be
Executed, and shown openly to the people, the Citizens, according to the order
of their Captains and Overseers of their Wards, were in a readiness to put
themselves into a posture of defense, at the least motion that was made. For
which reason, so soon as they heard the Drums and Fifes, and that they beheld
the Swissers and the Guards advancing through the Street of Saint Honor, they
doubted not but the report which was noised about by the Sixteen was true, and
farther believed (as they had been also assured) that the Town would be sacked,
and exposed to Pillage. The Alarm therefore was given round the City: They
began by shutting up their Shops, and the Church doors on that side of the
Town: They rang the Tocsin (or alarm Bell) first in one Parish and then in
another: and immediately afterward through all Paris, as if the whole City had
been on fire.

Then the Citizens came out in Arms, under the Overseers of their Wards, and
their Captains, and other Officers of the Duke of Guise, who had mingled
themselves amongst them, to encourage and to marshal them. The Count of
Brissac, who had placed himself at the Quarter of the University toward the
place Maubert, (where Cruce, one of the most hotheaded of the Sixteen, caused
the alarm to be Sounded,) being himself encompassed with a multitude of
Students, a rabble of Porters, Watermen, and Handicrafts men all Armed, who
waited only for the signal to assault the Swissers, was the first who gave
Orders to Chain the Streets, to unpave them, and erect the Barricades, with
great logs of Timber, and Barrels filled with Earth and Dung, at the Avenues of
the Palace: And this word of Barricades passing in a moment from mouth to
mouth, from the University into the ^^ty, and from the City into the Town, the
same was done everywhere, and that with such exceeding haste, that before Noon,
these Barricades which were continued from Street to Street, at the distance of
thirty paces from each other, well Flanck'd and Manned with Musketeers, were
advanced within fifty paces of the Louvre: Insomuch that the King's Soldiers
found themselves so encompassed on every side, that they could neither March
forward nor retreat, nor make the least motion, without exposing themselves
unprofitably to the inevitable danger of the Musket shot, (which the Citizens
could fire upon them without missing, from behind their Barricades,) or of
being beaten down with a tempest of Stones, which came pouring upon their Heads
from every Window.

The Marshals d' Aumont and Biron, and Villequier the Governor of Paris,
gained little by crying out to the Citizens, that they intended them no harm,
for they were too much enraged to give them the hearing; and were possessed
with a belief of what Brissac, Bois Dauphin, and the other Creatures of the
Duke of Guise had told them; who roared out, on purpose to envenom them against
the Royalists, that those Troops which were entered into Paris, were sent for to
no other end, than to make a general Massacre of all good Catholics, who were
members of the Holy Union, and to give up to the Soldiers, their Houses, their
Money, and their Wives. Upon this the Musket shot, and the Stones from above,
were redoubled on those miserable men, and more especially upon the Swissers,
to whom the Citizens were most inexorable.

More than threescore were either slain, or dangerously hurt, as well in St.
Innocents Church yard, as below on the Place Maubert, without giving Quarter,
till Brissac (who with his Sword in his hand was continually pushing forward
the Barricades) arriving there, and beholding those poor Strangers who cried
out for mercy, with clasped Hands, and both Knees on the ground, and sometimes
making the sign of the Cross, in testimony of their being Catholics,) stopped
the fury of the Citizens, and commanding them to cry out vive Guise, which they
did as loud as they could for safeguard of their Lives, he satisfied himself
with leading them disarmed and Prisoners into the Boucherie of the New Market,
by the Bridge of St. Michael, which he had already mastered.

It cannot be denied but that this Count was he, amongst all the Leaguers who
acted with the most ardour against the Royalists on that fatal day. As being
infinitely exasperated, because the King had refused him the Admiralty, and
refused it in a manner so disobliging, as to say openly he was a man that was
good for nothing either by Sea or Land, accusing him at the same time, that he
had not done his Duty in the Battle of the Azores, where the Navy of Philippo
Strozzi was defeated by the Marquis of Santa-Cruz, he burned inwardly with
desire of Revenge. And when he saw the Soldiers enclosed on all sides, by the
Barricades, which were of his raising, and the Swissers at his mercy, it is
reported that he cried out, as insulting on the King, with a bitter Scoff, and
magnifying himself at the same time; At least the King shall understand to day,
that I have found my Element, and though I am good for nothing either at Sea or
Land, yet I am some Body in the Streets.

In this manner it was, that the people making use of their advantage, still
pushed their fortune more and more, and seemed to be just upon the point of
investing the Louvre; while the Duke of Guise by whose secret orders, all
things were regularly managed amidst that horrible con^usion, was walking
almost unaccompanied, in his own House, and coldly answering the Queen, and
those who came one on the neck of another with Messages to him from the King,
entreating him to appease the tumult, that he was not Master of those wild
Beasts, which had escaped the toils; and that they were in the wrong to
provoke them as they had done.

But at last, when he perceived that all things were absolutely at his command,
he went himself from Barricade to Barricade, with only a riding switch in his
hand, forbidding the people who paid a blind obedience to him, from proceeding
any farther; and desiring them to keep themselves only on the defensive. He
spoke also very civilly to the French Guards, who at that time were wholly in
his power, to be disposed of as he thought good, for Life or Death. Only he
complained to their Officers, of the violent counsels which his Enemies had
given the King to oppress his Innocence, and that of so many good Catholics,
who had united themselves on no other consideration than the defense and
support of the ancient Religion. After which, he gave Orders to Captain St.
Paul, to reconduct those Soldiers to the Louvre; but their Arms were first
laid down, and their Heads bare, in the posture of vanquished men; that he
might give that satisfaction to the Parisians, who beheld the spectacle with
Joy, as the most pleasing effect of their present Victory. He also caused the
Swissers to be returned in the same manner by Brissac, and gave the King to
understand, that provided the Catholic Religion were secured and maintained
in France, in the condition it ought to be, and that himself and his Friends
were put in safety from the attempts of their Enemies, they would pay him all
manner of Duty and Service, which is owing from good Subjects, to their Lord
and Sovereign.

This in my opinion makes it evident, that the Duke had never any intention to
seize the person of the King, and to enclose him in a Monastery, as that
Nicholas Poulain who gave in so many false informations, and many Writers as
well of the one Religion as of the other, have endeavored to make the World
believe. For if that had been his purpose, what could have hindered him from
causing the Louvre to be invested? as he might easily have done the same day,
by carrying on the Barricades close to it, while the tumult was at the height;
and for what reason did he return the French Guards and Swissers to the King,
if his intention had been to have attacqu'd him in the Louvre? This was not his
business, nor his present aim, but to defend and protect his Leaguers with a
high hand, and to avail himself of so favorable an opportunity, to obtain the
thing which he demanded; and which doub^less had put him into condition of
mounting the throne after the King's decease, and becoming absolute Master of
all affairs even during his Life.

In effect, the Queen having undertaken to make the reconcilement, as believing
that thereby she might reenter into the management of business, from which the
Favorites had removed her, and having asked him what were his pretensions, he
proposed such extravagant terms, and with so much haughtiness and resolv'dness,
speaking like a Conqueror, who took upon him to dispose at his pleasure of the
Vanquished, that as dextrous as she was, in the art of managing Men's minds,
from the very beginning of the conference she despaired of her success. For
inhancing upon the Articles of Nancy, he demanded that for the Security of the
Catholic Religion in this Realm, the King of Navarre, and all the Princes of
the House of Bourbon, who had followed him in these last Wars, should be
declared to have forfeited for ever their right of succeeding to the Crown:
That the Duke of Esperno^, La Valeite his Brother, Francis d' O. the Marshals
of Retz and of Biron, Colonel Alphonso d' Ornano, and all others who like them
were favorers of the Huguenots, or were found to have held any correspondence
with them, should be deprived of their Governments and Offices, and banished
from the Court, without hope of ever being restored again. That the spoils of
all these should be given to the Princes of his House, and to those Lords who
had engaged with him, of whom he made a long List: That the King should casheer
his Guard of five and forty, as a thing unknown in the times of his
Predecessors, protesting that otherwise he could place no manner of confidence
in him, nor ever dare to approach his person. That it would please his Majesty
to declare him his Lieutenant General through all his Estates, with the same
Authority which the late Duke of Guise his Father had, under the Reign of
Francis the Second: by virtue of which he hoped to give him so good an account
of the Huguenots, that in a little time there should remain no other but the
Catholic Religion in all his Kingdom. To conclude, that there should be
called immediately an Assembly of the three Estates, to sit at Paris where all
this should be confirmed, and to hinder for the future, that the Minions who
would dispose of all things at their pleasure, should not abuse their favor,
that there should be established an unchangeable form of Government, which it
should not be in the power of the King to alter.

It Is most evident that Demands so unreasonable, so arrogant, and so offensive,
tended to put the Government, and the power of it into the Duke's hands, who
being Master of the Armies, the Offices, and the Governments of the most
principal Provinces, in his own person by his Relations, his Creatures, and the
Estates, where he doubted not of carrying all before him, especially at Paris,
would be the absolute disposer of Affairs. Insomuch that there would be nothing
wanting to him but the Crown it self, to which it is very probable, that at this
time he pretended, in case he should survive the King, to the exclusion of the
Bourbons, whom he would have declared incapable of succeeding to it.

For which reason, the Queen seeing that he would recede from no part of these
Articles, and beginning to fear, that he would go farther than she desired,
counseled the King to get out of Paris with all speed, while it was yet in his
power so to do. And though some of his chief Officers, as amongst others the
Chancellor de Chiverny, and the Sieurs of Villeroy and Villequier, who were of
opinion that more would be gained by the Negotiation, and who foresaw that the
Huguenots and the Duke of Espernon, whom they had no great cause to love, would
make their advantage of this retreat so unworthy of a King, endeavored to
dissuade him from it, yet a thousand false advertisements, which came every
moment, that they were going to invest the Louvre, and his accustomed fear,
together with the diffidence he had of the Duke of Guise, whom he considered at
that time as his greatest Enemy, caused him at the last to resolve on his
departure.

Accordingly, about noon the next day, while the Queen Mother went to the Duke
with propositions only to amuse him, the King making show to take a turn or
two in the Tuilleries, put on Boots in the Stables, and getting on Horseback,
attended by fifteen or sixteen Gentlemen, and by ten or twelve Lacqueys, having
caused notice to be given to his Guards to follow him, went out by the Port
Neuve, riding always on full gallop, for fear of being pursued by the
Parisians, till having gained the ascent above Challiot, he stopped his Horse to
look back on Paris. It Is said, that then reproaching that great City, which he
had always honored, and enriched by his Royal presence, and upbrayding its
ingratitude, he Swore he would not return into it but through a Breach, and
that he would lay it so low, that it should never more be in a condition of
lifting up its self against the King. After this he went to Lodge that night at
Trappes, and the next morning arrived at Chartres; where his Officers, those of
his Council, and the Courtiers came up to him, one after another in great
disorder; some on Foot, others on Horseback without Boots, several on their
Mules, and in their Robes, every man making his escape as he was best able, and
in a great hurry for fear of being stopped; in short, all of them in a condition
not unlike the Servants of David, at his departure from Jerusalem, traveling
in a miserable Equipage, after their distressed Master, when he fled before the
Rebel Absalom.

The Duke of Guise, who on the one side, had been unwilling to push things to
an extremity, to the end he might make his Treaty with the King, and that it
might not be said he was not at liberty; and on the other side, not believing
that he would have gone away in that manner, as if he fled from his Subjects,
who stopping short of the Louvre by fifty paces, seemed unwilling to pursue
their advantage any farther, was much surprised at this retreat which broke the
measures he had taken: but as he was endu'd with an admirable presence of mind,
and that he could at a moments warning accommodate his resolutions to any
accident, how unexpected or troublesome soever, he immediately applied himself
to put Paris in a condition of fearing nothing, to quiet all things there, and
restore them to their former tranquillity, and withal to give notice to the
whole Kingdom how matters had passed at the Barricades, as much to his own
advantage, as possibly he could.

To this effect he possessed himself of the strongest places in the City; of
the Temple, of the Palace, of the Townhouse, of the two Chastelets, of the
Gates, where he set Guards, of the Arsenal and of the Bastille, which was
surrendered to him too easily by the Governor Testu; the Government of which
he gave to Bussy Le Clerc, the most audacious of the Sixteen: He obliged the
Magistrates to proceed in the Courts of Judicature as formerly: He made a new
Provost of Merchants, and Sheriffs, a Lieutenant Civil, Colonels, and Captains
of the several Wards, all devoted to the League, in the room of those whom he
suspected. He retook without much trouble all the places both above and below,
on the River, that the passages for Provisions might be free. He writ at last
to the King, to the Towns, and to his particular Friends, and drew up Manifests
(or Declarations) in a style, which had nothing in it but what was great and
generous, while he endeavored to justify his proceedings, and at the same time
to preserve the respect which was owing to the King, protesting always that he
was most ready to pay him an entire Obedience, and that he proposed nothing to
himself, but that provision should be made for the safety of Religion, and of
good Catholics, which were designed to be oppressed, through the pernicious
Counsels of such as held intelligence with Heretics, and projected nothing
but the ruin of Religion and the State.

These Letters, together with those which the Parisians wrote to the other
Towns, exhorting all men to combine with them for their common preservation in
the Catholic Faith, and those of the King, which on the contrary were
written, in too soft a style, and where there appeared more of fear and of
excuse, than of resentment and just complaint for so sacrilegious an attempt,
had this effect, that the greatest part of the people, far from being
scandalis'd at the Barricades, approved them, loudly praising the conduct of
the Duke of Guise, whom they believed to be full of Zeal for the Catholic
Faith, for the good of the Kingdom, and for the Service of the King. And as he
desired nothing so much as to confirm them in that opinion, he was willing that
the body of the City, should send their Deputies to the King, humbly to beseech
his Majesty, that he would forget what was passed, and return to his good Town
of Paris, where his most Loyal Subjects were ready to give him all the highest
demonstrations of their Obedience and devotion to his Service.

He permitted that even processions should be made, in the Habit of Penitents,
to desire of God, that he would please to mollify the King's Heart and this was
performed with so much ardour, that there was one which went from Paris as far
as Chartres, in a most extraodinary Equipage, under the conduct of the famous
Friar Ange. This honest Father was Henry de Ioyeuse, Count of Bouchage, and
Brother to the late Duke. He had given up himself to be a Capuchin, about a
year before this time: having such strong impressions made upon him, by the
death and good example of his Wife, Catharine de Nogaret, Sister to the Duke of
Espernon, that he was inflamed with a desire of repentance; insomuch that
neither the tears of his Brother, nor the entreaties and favors of the King,
who loved him exceedingly, nor the ardent solicitations of all the Court, were
able to remove him from the resolution he had taken of leading so austere a
Life. This noble Friar, having put a Crown of Thorns upon his head, and
carrying an overgrown Cross upon his Shoulders, followed by his Fraternity, and
by a great number of Penitents, and others who represented in their Habits the
several persons of the Passion, led on that procession, singing Psalms and
Litanies. The march of these Penitents was so well managed, that they entered
the great Church of Chartres, just as the King was there at Vespers: As they
entered, they began to sing the Miserere, in a very doleful tone; And at the
same time, two swindging Friars armed with Disciplines, laid on lustily poor
Friar Ange, whose back was naked. The application was not hard to make, nor
very advantageous to the Parisians, for the charitable creature seemed
evidently to desire the King, that he would please to pardon them, as Jesus
Christ was willing to forgive the Jews, for those horrible outrages which they
had committed against him.

A Spectacle so surprising produced different effects in the minds of the
standers by; according to the variety of their tempers, some of them were
melted into compassion, others were moved to Laughter, and some even to
indignation: And more than all the rest, the Marshal de Biron, who having no
manner of relish for this sort of devotion, and fearing besides, that some
dangerous Leaguers, might have crowded in amongst them, with intention to
Preach the people into a Mutiny, counseled the King to clap them up in Prison
every Mothers Son. But that good Prince, who notwithstanding all his faults,
had a stock of Piety at the bottom, and much respect for all things that
related to Religion, rejected wholly this advice. He listened to them much more
favorably, than he had heard all the Harangues of the former Deputies: and
promised to grant them the pardon they desired for the Town, which he had so
much favored, on condition they would return to their Obedience. And truly
it is exceeding probable, that he had so done from that very time, if they had
not afterward given him fresh provocations, by proposing the terms on which
they insisted for the Peace, which they desired.

For the Duke of Guise, to whom all these fair appearances were very
serviceable, and could be no ways prejudicial, and who always pursued his
designs in a direct line, knew so well to manage the disposition of the Queen
Mother, who had seemed at first to be much startled at his demands, that he
recalled her with much dexterity into his interests; by working on those two
passions which were rooted in her Soul. She desired to raise to the Throne,
after the death of the King her Son, her Grandson Henry de Lorrain, Marquis du
Pont; and believed that the Duke of Guise would contribute to it all that was
in his power. But as cunning as she was, she saw not into the bottom of that
Prince, who fed her only with vain hopes of that Succession for another, to
which he personally aspired. She infinitely hated the Duke of Espernon, and
believing he was the man, who having possessed himself of the King's Soul, had
rendered her suspected to him, longed to turn him out of Court; promising her
self by that means to be reestablished in the management of affairs from which
the Favorites had removed her. And the Duke of Guise who had as little
kindness as her self for the Duke of Espernon, concurred in the same design,
with at least as much earnestness, but for a much different end; for he desired
to be absolute himself. In this manner this subtle Prince, always dissembling,
and artifically hiding the true motives by which he acted, drew the Queen at
last to consent to all that he desired: and above all, to give her allowance
that a request should be presented to the King in the name of the Cardinals,
the Princes, the Peers of France, the Lords, the Deputies of Paris and the
other Towns, and of all the Catholics united for the defense of the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion.

This reqest which in the manner of its expressions, was couched in most
respectfull terms, contained notwithstanding in the bottom of it, certain
Propositions, at least as hard as the Art^cles of Nancy; and even as those,
which not long before were proposed to the Queen by the Duke of Guise. For
after a protestation in the beginning of it, that in whatsoever had passed till
that present time, there had been nothing done, but by a pure zeal for God's
honor, and for the preservation of his Church, they demand of the King, That
he would make War with the Huguenots, and that he would conclude no Peace till
all Heresies were rooted out. That it would please him to use the Service of
the Duke of Guise, in so just and holy an undertaking; that he would drive out
of the Court, and despoil of all their Offices, all those who held a secret
correspondence with the Huguenots, and principally the Duke of Espernon, and
his Brother La Valette. Against whom there are recited in that request, all
imaginable crimes that could be thought most capable of rendering them odious
and insupportable to the whole Kingdom. That he would deliver the Nation from
the just apprehensions it had, of falling one day under the power and dominion
of Heretics. And (that there might be given to the City of Paris a full
assurance henceforth to enjoy a perfect tranquillity, without fear of
oppression,) he would not only please to confirm the new Provosts, and
Sheriffs, but that also the said City may have full and entire liberty for the
future, to make choice of such as shall succeed in those places, and in those
of City Colonels and Captains.

This request was extremely displeasing to the King, who saw but too clearly,
that their intention was to give the Law to him hereafter, whom they had first
so haughtily affronted. He therefore caused it to be examined in his Council,
where there was but small agreement, because the Members of it were divided in
their Interests. There were but two methods to be taken on that subject; either
for the King to join with the League against the Huguenots, as the request
demanded, or to make War against the League with all his Power, in conjunction
with the Huguenots; for unless he espoused one of these interests it was
impossible for him to succeed. Those of the Council who loved not the Duke of
Espernon, who were many, and who feared that the acting of the King's Forces in
combination with the Huguenots, would prove of great prejudice to his
Reputation, and of greater to Religion, were for the former Proposition and
Counsel, that all differences should be accommodated in the best manner they
could with the Duke of Guise, which was also the desire of the Queen Mother:
But the rest, who for the most part consisted of those persons, whose disgrace
and banishment was demanded in the Request, insisted strongly on the second:
and gave their voice for a War to be made against the Duke to the uttermost;
fortifying their opinion by the number of Forces, which the King might raise
promiscuously, both from Catholics and Protestants, because this was not a
War of Religion, but that the Sovereign only (...) himself; to quell and
chastise his rebellious Subjects.

It would be a matter of much difficulty to tell precisely what was the true
resolution which the King took, betwixt the extremes of these different
Counsels. But it may be told for a certain truth, that having a long time
deliberated, and that much more in his own breast than with his Council, he
seemed at length all on the sudden to pitch upon the first; whether it were,
that being as he was, a good Catholic, and hating the Huguenots, he could not
yet come to a resolution of uniting himself to them; or were it, that he
thought not himself at that time strong enough, even with the King of Navarre's
assistance, to destroy the League, which was grown more powerful than ever
since the Barricades, and Headed by a man so able, so bold, and so successful
as the Duke of Guise; or lastly, as many have believed, that being strongly
persuaded, he should never be in safety, nor be Master in his Kingdom, while
that (...) whom he hated mortally was (...), he took up from that very moment a
resolution within himself to dispatch him out of the World, and that he might
draw him into the Net which he was spreading for him, was willing to grant in a
manner whatsoever he desired, as if it were done in co^^^mplation of a Peace.

Whatsoever were his true motive, (for I desire not that random guesses should
be taken for truths,) it is certain that though the King was highly exasperated
against the League, yet he answered their request with much gentleness and
moderation, assuring them that he would assemble the three Estates at Blois, in
the Month of September, there to advise of the means to give them satisfaction,
and to deliver them from the jealousy they had of falling one day under the
dominion of a Huguenot Prince; that for what related to the Duke of Espernon,
he would do them Justice, like an Equitable King, and would make it manifest
that he preferred the public welfare, before the consideration of any private
person.

Accordingly in the first place, that Duke was despoiled of his Government of
Normandy, commanded to depart from Court, and retire himself to Angouleme. Not
long time afterward the King concluded a Treaty with the Lords of the League,
to whom, besides the Places which they had already in possession, the Towns of
Montreuil, Orleans and Bourges were given for six Years. A publication of the
Council of Trent was promised, with provision against that part of it which was
contrary to the liberties of the Gallicane Church. ^There was given to the Duke
of Guise, instead of the title of Constable, that of Head of the French
Gendarmerie, which signifies the same thing. Two Armies were promised to be
raised against the Huguenots, one in Dauphine under the command of Duke of
Mayenne, and the other in Saintonge and Poitou, which ^hou'd be Commanded by a
General of the King's own choice: For the New Constable under another name
would not be so far from Court, lest his absence from thence might be of ill
consequence to his Party. In conclusion the King caused to be published the
famous Edict of July, which he commanded to be called the Edict of the Reunion,
where he did more in favor of the League, than the League it self desired from
him.

For, after having declared in that Edict, that he would have all his Subjects
united to himself, that in like manner as their Souls are redeemed with the
same price, by the Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, so also they and
their posterity should be one Body with him; he swears, that he will employ all
his Forces, without sparing his proper life, to exterminate from his Realm all
Heresies condemned by Councils, and principally by that of Trent, without ever
making any Peace or Truce with Heretics, or any Edict in their favor. He
wills that all Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Inhabitants of Towns, and
generally all his Subjects, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, should take the
same Oath. That farther, they should swear and promise, for the time present,
and for ever, after it shall have pleased God to dispose of his life, without
having given him Issue Male, not to receive for King, any Prince whatsoever,
who shall be a Heretic or a promoter of Heresy. He declares Rebels and
guilty of High Treason, and to have forfeited all Privileges which have
formerly been granted to them, all persons and all Towns, which shall refuse to
take this Oath, and sign this Union. He promises never to bestow any Military
employment, but on such as shall make a signal profession of the Roman
Catholic Religion. And prohibits in express terms, that any man whosoever
shall be admitted to the exercise of any office Judicature, or any employment
belonging to the Treasury, whose profession of the Roman Catholic Religion,
appears not under the Attestation of the Bishop or his substitutes, or at least
of the Curates or their Vicars, together with the deposition of ten Witnesses,
all qualified, and unsuspected persons. He also swears to hold for his good and
Loyal Subjects, and to protect and defend as well those who have always
followed the League, as those others who have formerly united and associated
themselves against the Heretics; and that at this present he unites them to
himself; to the end they may all act together in order to one common end. And
that he holds for null, and as never done, that which seems to have been done
against him; as well in the Town of Paris, as elsewhere particularly since the
twelfth of May to the day of the publication of this Edict: without future
molestation or bringing into trouble any person whomsoever, for any thing
relating to the premises. But he also wills that all his Subjects of what
Quality soever, swear that they will and do renounce all Leagues and
Confederations, as well without as within the Realm, which are contrary to this
Union, on pain of being punished, as infringers of their Oath, and guilty of
High Treason.

This Edict was verified in Parliament the one and twentieth of July; and
published immediately after; being received with extraordinary transports of
joy by the Leaguers, who believed that by it, they had obtained a clear Victory
against the King, whom they beheld entirely subjected to the will and good
pleasure of their Heads. He himself also as it is reported, with profound
dissimulation endeavored all he was able to confirm them in that opinion, by
making public demonstrations of his joy, and satisfaction for the peace. He
was very solicitous to cause his Edict to be signed by all the Princes and
Lords who were then at Court: He proclaimed the convention of the three Estates
at Blois, which was to be at the beginning of October following. He procured
the Letters Patents for the Duke of Guise's Commission of Intendant General,
over all his Armies, with the same power which is annexed to that of Constable,
to be verified in Parliament. He received him at Chartres with such particular
tokens of esteem, affection, and trust, that it was believed the tender
friendship which was betwixt them when the King was then but Duke of Anjou, was
once more renewed. He favored all his creatures, on whom he bestowed
considerable Employments, and at last, to satisfy him in that point, which of
all others was most nice, he caused the Cardinal of Bourbon to be solemnly
declared the next of Blood to him, by allowing him all the Privileges and
Prerogatives which belong to the Heir presumptive of the Crown. After all, as
it is almost impossible that a violent passion in the Soul, what care soever be
taken to conceal it, should not discover it self by its consequences, and by
some indications, which break out even from the closest men: So this Prince as
great a Master as he was in the art of dissimulation, could not act his part so
well, but that he gave occasion to those who were more clear sighted, to
believe, or at leastwise to suspect, that all which at that time was done by
him to testify his joy, was only to cover his indignation and his hatred,
which urged him incessantly to revenge himself on those from whom he had
received such unworthy usage.

For being departed from Chartres, and going thence to Rouen, where he made the
Edict of Reunion, he would never be persuaded to go to Paris at his return,
what instance soever the Deputies of the Parliament, and those of the Town
could make to him: always alleging faint excuses, which he grounded only on
the preparations which he was to make in order to his meeting the Estates at
Blois. He still retained near his person his Guard of the five and forty which
the Duke of Guise had requested him to dismiss. He gave the command of the Army
designed for Poitou to the Duke of Nevers, whom the Duke of Guise his
Brother-in-law could never endure, since his renunciation of the League. He
admitted none to his private friendship, but the Marshal d' Aumont, the Lord
Nicholas d' Angennes, de Rambouillet, Colonel Alphonso. d' Ornano, and some few
others, who were no friends to the Duke of Guise.

In fine, that which made the greatest noise, was, that the Chancellor de
Chiverny, the Presidents Bellievre and Brulart, and the Sieurs de Villeroy, and
Pinart, (the two Secretaries of State, who had given him advice, to accommodate
matters with the Duke of Guise) were absolutely disgraced. The Queen Mother who
had managed that accommodation, had little or no part in business; and was
wholly excluded from the Cabinet Council. The Seals were given to Francis de
Monthelon a famous Advocate, a man of rare integrity, and of inviolable
fidelity to the King's service, who raised him to that high Employment, without
his own seeking, at the recommendation of the Duke of Nevers, who was known to
be on very ill terms with the Duke of Guise.

All this was sufficient without doubt to alarm that Prince, and give him
caution to look about him, or at least to suspect the King's intentions toward
him, but the flourishing condition, wherein he was placed, the applauses which
were given him both by the people and by the Court it self, which admired both
his conduct and his perpetual felicity, and regarded him as Arbitrator and
Master of Affairs; and the certain opinion which he had, that all things would
go for him in the Estates, had so far blinded him, that he believed it was not
in the power of fortune to do him any prejudice, not so much as to shake him,
or to give the smallest stop to the full carrier of his success. Thus he
entered as it were in triumph into Blois at the end of September; and the King
came thither about the same time, to order the preparations for the Estates. He
commanded that all future proceedings should be as it were sanctified by two
solemn and conspicuous acts of piety; which were a most devout and magnificent
Procession made on the first Sunday of October, the second day of that Month,
and by a general Communion, taken by all the Deputies on the Sunday following,
the ninth of the same Month; on which the King, in token of a perfect
reconcilement, received with the Duke of Guise, the precious Body of Jesus
Christ, from the hands of the Cardinal de Bourbon, in the Church of Saint
Savior. After which, all those who were expected being at length arrived, the
Assembly of the Estates was opened on Sunday the sixteenth of that Month, in
the great Hall of the Castle of Blois.

As it is not my business to say any thing of this Assembly, which relates not
precisely to the History of the League, I shall not trouble my self with every
particular which passed in it. I shall only say, that the King who was
naturally eloquent, opened the Assembly with an excellent Oration; wherein
after he had in a most Majestique manner, and with most pathetique words,
exhorted the Deputies to their duty, he either could not or would not conceal
from them, that he had not so far forgotten the past actions, but that he had
taken up a firm resolution, to inflict an exemplary punishment on such who
should persist in acting against his Authority, and continue to be still
possessed with that spirit of Leaguing and Caballing, which was upon the point of
ruining the State; neither would he henceforth spare those who should have any
other union, than that which the Members ought to have with their Head, and
Subjects with their Sovereign.

This touched so sensibly the Leaguers of that Assembly, and principally their
Head, who looked on this Speech as particularly addressed to himself, that they
proceeded even to threatening that they would break off the Estates by their
departure, if the King, who had commanded his Speech to be Printed, would not
give order to suppress it, or at least correct that passage. There are some who
affirm, that after a rough dispute concerning it, the King permitted at last
that something should be altered, and the harshness of his expressions a little
mollifi'd. But there are others, and even of their number who heard it spoken,
who assure us, that it came out in public in the same terms it was
pronounced. However it were, it is certain, that this complaint of theirs much
exasperated the King's mind, who saw clearly by this proceeding, that the
League, notwithstanding its Reunion with him, had still a separate interest of
its own, and extremely opposite to his.

I will adventure to say farther, that he was then fully persuaded of it, when
he perceived that the Duke of Guise, who was the true Head of it, was evidently
more powerful than himself in those Estates. For besides that the greatest
part of the Deputies had been elected by the factious intrigues of his
dependants in the Provinces, those who were chosen to preside over the several
Orders, that is to say the Cardinals of B^urbon and of Guise, for the Clergy,
the Count of Brissac, and the Baron of Magnac for the Nobility, and the Provost
of Merchants, La Chapelle Martau for the third order, were all of them entirely
at the Duke's devotion.

Insomuch that at the second Session, after the Edict of Reunion had been
solemnly confirmed, sworn to again, and passed into a fundamental Law of the
State, when the Petitions of the three Orders were read, he saw that under
pretense of desiring to reform some abuses which were crept into the State,
they were filled with an infinite number of Propositions, which tended to the
manifest diminution, or rather the annihilation of the Royal Authority, and to
reduce the Government to that pass, that there should remain to the King no
more than the empty name and vain appearance of a Sovereign Monarch; and that
all the real and essential part of Sovereignty should be in the League, which
absolutely depended on the Duke of Guise.

Yet farther they were not satisfied barely to propose these things, leaving to
the King, according to the Ancient Laws and Constitution of the Monarchy, the
power of either passing or refusing them, according to his pleasure, ^after
they had been well examined in his Council; but they pretended that after they
had been received by the consent of the three Orders, they should become Laws
of course, and be inviolable, so that the King should not have the power either
to change or abrogate them in his Council. Then they would have an abatement of
Taxes and Imposts, but so much out of measure, that they took away from the
King the means of making that War, in which themselves had engaged him. They
would also that the Council of Trent should be received absolutely, and without
modification. And the famous Attorney General Jacques de Faye, d' Espesses, who
in a great Assembly held on that occasion, maintained with strength of reason,
against some decrees of that Council, the Prerogatives of the King (or Regalia)
and the Immunities of the Gallicane Church, was so ill treated there, though he
had baffled the Archbishop of Lions, who undertook to destroy those
Privileges, that the King who was affronted in the person of his Attorney, was
not a little displeased at their proceedings.

But above all things they were urgent with him, and pressed it with incredible
obstinacy, that the King of Navarre, who at the same time had assembled the
Estates of his Party at Rochelle, and from thence had sent to those at Blois,
intimating his desire of a General Council to be summoned, where all things
might be accommodated, should from that time forward be declared incapable of
ever succeeding to the Crown. They had made a Decree concerning this, by
consent of the three Orders, at the particular instance of the Order of the
Clergy. And the King who clearly foresaw the terrible consequences of this
unparalled injustice, and who was plied incessantly to subscribe it, was not
able to defend himself otherwise, than by amusing them with delays, and rubbs
which he dexterously caused to be thrown in their way, on sundry pretenses. It
was not doubted but that the Duke of Guise, (who having two thirds of the
Estates for him, was consequently the Master there,) was Author of all these
Propositions so contrary to the true Interests and Authority of the King,
especially when it was evident, that he employed all his Managers, to cause
himself to be declared in the Estates, Lieutenant General through the whole
Kingdom, as if he would possess himself of that Supreme Command, without
dependence on the King, and that he pretended his Prince to be no more his
Master, as not having power to deprive him of a dignity which he was to hold,
from a Commission given him by others.

All these things so unworthy of the Majesty of a great King, at the length
quite weari'd out his patience; which after so long dissembling his injuries,
on the sudden broke out into the extremity of rage: Insomuch that those among
his Confidents, who ardently desired the destruction of the Duke for their own
advantage, found not the least trouble, in passing on the King for truths, many
reports and oftentimes very groundless rumors, which ran of the Duke, adding
to them that it was he, who underhand had drawn the Duke of Savoy to possess
himself of the Marquisate of Saluces, as he had lately done. And this they
confidently affirmed, though the Duke by his own interest in the Estates, had
procured them to vote a War against the Savoyard. Thus, whether it were that
the King had long since resolved to rid his hands of the Duke of Guise, in
revenge of some ancient grudge and sense of the affronts he had received from
him, particularly on that fatal day of the Barricades; or were it, that being
sincerely reconciled to him he had taken, or perhaps resumed that resolution
when he saw him act against him in the Estates, of which he had made himself
the Master, and believeing his own condition desperate, if he made not haste to
prevent him, most certain it is, that he deliberated no more, but only
concerning the manner of executing what he had determined.

He had only two ways to choose, the one by justice, first committing him, and
afterward making his process; the other by Fact, which was to have him slain.
He managed this consultation with exceeding secrecy, admitting only four or
five of his Confidents, on whom he most relied. One of these was Beauvais
Nangis, who having served the King well, in his Army against the Reyters, was
restored so fully to his favor, that in recompense of the Command, of Colonel
of the French Infantry, which the Duke of Espernon had got over his head, he
made him afterward Admiral of France, though he never enjoyed that great
dignity, which he had only under the Signet.

This Lord, who was as prudent, and temperate in Council, as prompt and daring
in execution, concluded for the methods of Justice, maintaining that they were
not only the more honest, but also the more safe, because the fear alone which
would possess the Duke's party, lest they should kill him, in case they
attempted to deliver him by force, and by that means hinder the course of
Justice, would stop all manner of such proceeding, and restrain them within the
terms of Duty. That after all, if he were once made Prisoner, which might be
done without noise or tumult, it would be easy to give him such Judges, as
should soon dispatch his Trial, and that afterward he might be executed in
Prison, according to the Laws. But if on the contrary, they should enter
crudely on so bloody an execution, there was danger lest that action which was
never to be well justified, and which the Leaguers would certainly cause to
pass in the World, for tyrannical and per^idious, might raise a rebellion in
the greatest part of France, which had already declared so loudly for that
Prince, whom they regarded as the pillar of Religion, and would afterward look
on as the Martyr of it. But the rest, who believed it impossible on that
occasion, to observe the ordinary forms of Law and Justice, and thought that
the Head being once cut off, the Body of the League would immediately fall like
a dead Body, were of opinion that he should be dispatched with all possible
speed, which was easy to perform, especially in the Castle, where the Duke was
almost hourly in the King's power, whom he had in no manner of distrust, as
sufficiently appeared by his Lodging there.

In the mean time it is most certain, that this secret was not kept so close,
but that he received advertisement from more than one, of his imminent danger,
and that his death already was resolved. And he slighted not so much these
informations, as intrepid as he was, or as he affected to appear, by replying
continually, they dare not, but that two or three days before his death, he
consulted on this affair, which so nearly concerned him, with the Cardinal of
Guise, his Brother, the Archbishop of Lions, the President de Neuilly, the
Provost of the Merchants, and the Sieur de Mandrevile Governor of St.
Menehoud, on whom he principally relied. In weighing those proofs which in a
manner were indubitable, that a design was laid against him, they were
unanimously of opinion that the safest course was to be taken, and that under
some pretense or other, he should instantly retire. Excepting only the
Archbishop, who continued obstinate to the contrary, fortifying his opinion
with this argument, that since he was upon the point, of carrying all things in
the Estates according to his wi^h, he ran the hazard of loosing all by leaving
them. And, that for the rest, it was not credible that the King should be so
ill advised, as to incur the manifest danger of ruining himself, by striking
that unhappy blow. To which Mandrevile replied, Swearing, that for a man of
Sense as he was, he was the worst Arguer he ever knew. For, said he, you talk
of the King, as if he were a wary and cool-headed Prince, looking before him at
every step, and will not understand that he is only a hot-brained Fool, who
thinks no farther than how to execute, what his two base passions, Fear and
Hatred which possess him, have once made sink into his imagination, and never
considers what a wise man ought to do on this occasion. It were a folly
therefore, for the Duke to hazard himself in such a manner, and to be moved by
so weak a reason, to loose all in a moment.

It Is wonderful to observe, that the most clear sighted men, who have it in
their power if they will use the means before them, to avoid that which is
called their Destiny, after the misfortune is happened, should suffer
themselves to be dragged and hurried to it as it were by force, in spite of
their understanding and their foresight, which their own rashness, and not a
pretended fatality renders unprofitable to them. It Is reported that the Duke of
Guise, confessed that this dsicourse of Mandrevile carried the greater force of
reason, yet nevertheless he added, that having gone so far forward as he then
was, if he should see death coming in at the Windows upon him, he would not
give one step backward to the door, though by so doing, he were certain to
avoid it. Nevertheless it is very probable, that the encouragement he had to
speak with so much loftiness and resolution, was the assurance, which he
thought he had, that the King, whose Genius he knew, particularly since the day
when he entered into the Louvre, where the Duke gave himself for lost, would
never afterward dare to take up so bold a resolution as to kill him.

It Is certain, that when the Sieur de Vins, one of his greatest Confidents, had
written to him from Provence, that he should beware of keeping so near the
King, and not rely on those large testimonies of his affection, which he said
he had received, the Duke answered him, that he reposed not the hopes of his
own safety on the King's Virtue, whom he knew to be ill natured, and a
Hypocrite, but on his Judgment and on his Fear, because it was not credible,
but he must needs understand, that he himself was ruined in case he made any
attempt against his person. But he learnt at his own cost, by the unhappy
experiment which he made, that it had been better for him to have followed the
wise advice which was given him, and which he himself had approved, than a bare
conjecture, and the impulse of his inborn generosity, which his bloody and
lamentable death, as things are commonly judged by their event, has caused to
pass in the World for an effect of the greatest rashness.

It ought not here to be expected, that I should dwell on an exact and long
description of all the circumstances of that tragical action, which has been so
unfortunate to France, and so ill received in the World. Besides that they are
recounted, in very different manners, by the Historians of one and the other
Religion, according to their different passions, and that the greatest part of
them are either false, or have little in them worth observation; the thing was
done with so great facility, and precipitation, and withal, in so brutal a
manner, that it cannot be too hastily passed over: this then is the plain and
succinct relation of it.

After that the Brave Grillon, Mestre de Camp of the Regiment of Guards had
generously refused to kill the Duke of Guise, unless in single Duel, and in an
honorable way, the King had recourse to Lognac, the first Gentleman of his
Chamber, and Captain of the forty five, who promised him eighteen or twenty of
the most resolute amongst them, and for whom he durst be answerable. They were
of the number of those whom the Duke of Guise, who had always a distrust of
those Gascons, as creatures of the Duke of Espernon, had formerly demanded that
they might be dismissed, from which request he had afterward desisted.
Insomuch that it may be said he foresaw the misfortune that attended him,
without being able to avoid it. For, on Friday the twenty third of December,
being entered about eight of the Clock in the Morning, into the great Hall,
where the King had intimated on Thursday night, that he intended to hold the
Council very early, that he might afterward go to Nostre dame de Clery; some
came to tell him that His Majesty expected him in the old Closset, yet he was
not there, but in the other which looks into the Garden. Upon this, he arose
from the fire side, where finding himself somewhat indisposed, he had been
seated; and passed through a narrow Entry, which was on one side the Hall, into
the Chamber, where he found Lognac with seven or eight of the forty five: the
King himself having caused them to enter into that room very secretly before
daybreak: the rest of them were posted in the old Closset, and all of them had
great Ponyards hid under their Cloaks, expecting only the coming of the Duke
of Guise, to make sure work with him whether it were in the Chamber or in the
Closset, in case he should retire thither for his defense.

There needed not so great a preparation for the killing of a single man, who
came thither without distrust of any thing that was designed against him: and
who holding his Hat in one hand, and with the other the lappet of his Cloak,
which he had wrapped under his left Arm, was in no condition of defense. In this
posture he advanced toward the old Closset, saluting very civilly as his
custom was, those Gentlemen who made show of attending him out of respect, as
far as the door. And as in lifting up the Hangings, with the help of one of
them, he stooped to enter, he was suddenly seized by the Arms, and by the Legs;
and at the same instant struck into the Body before, with five or six Ponyards,
and from behind, into the Nape of the Neck, and the Throat, which hindered him
from speaking one single word, of all that he is made to say, or so much as
drawing out his Sword. All that he could do, was to drag along his Murderers,
with the last and strongest effort that he could make, struggling and striving
till he fell down at the Beds-Feet, where some while after, with a deep Groan,
he yielded up his breath.

The Cardinal of Guise, and Archbishop of Lions, who were in the Council Hall,
rising up at the Noise, with intention of running to his aid, were made
Prisoners by the Marshals D' Aumont and de Retz: At the same time the Cardinal
of Bourbon was also seized in the Castle, together with Anne d' Este Duchess of
Nemours, and Mother of the Guises, and the Prince of Ioinville, the Dukes of
Elbeuf, and Nemours, Brissac and Boisdauphin with many other Lords, who were
Confidents of the Duke, and Pericard his Secretary. And in the mean time the
Grand Prevost of the King's House went with his Archers to the Chamber of the
third Estate, in the Townhouse, and there arrested the President Neuilly, the
Prevost of Merchants, the Sheriffs Compan and Cotte-Blanch, who were Deputies
for Paris, and some other notorious Leaguers.

This being done, the King himself brought the News of it to the Queen Mother,
telling her that now he was a real King since he had cut off the Duke of Guise.
At which that Princess being much surprised and moved, asking him if he had
made provision against future accidents, he answered her in an angry kind of
tone, much differing from his accustomed manner of speaking to her, that she
might set her heart at rest, for he had taken order for what might happen, and
so went out surlily to go to Mass; yet before he went, he sent particularly to
Cardinal Gondi, and to the Cardinal Legate Morosini, and informed them both of
what had passed, with his reasons to justify his proceedings.

Davila the Historian reports, that before he went to Mass, the King met the
Legate, and walking with him a long time, gave him all his reasons for that
action, which he takes the pains to set down at large, as if he had been
present at that long Conference, and that he had heard, (without loosing one
single word;) all the King said to the Cardinal, together with the Cardinal's
politic reflections upon it, and his reply to the King's discourse. For he
tells us, that the Legate fearing to lesten Henry's affection to the Holy See,
assured him that the Pope as being a common Father, would listen favorably to
his excuses, and withal exhorted him to make War against the Huguenots, that
he might make demonstrations of his sincerity, and that it might be evident, he
killed not the Duke of Guise, the great Enemy of the Heretics, out of
intention to favor the King of Navarre and that party.

He adds, that the King promised him, and confirmed it with an Oath, that
provided the Pope would join with him he would proceed to make War against
them, with more eagerness than ever, and would not suf^er any other Religion
but the Roman Catholic in his Kingdom. That after this solemn Protestation,
the Legate judged it not expedient, to proceed any farther in the Conference,
and that without saying any thing for the present in favor of the Prelates who
were Prisoners, he continued to treat with him in the same manner he had used
formerly: There are those also who are bold enough to affirm, that by the
freedom of his action and carriage, while he was discoursing with the King,
sometimes whispering to him, and sometimes laughing with him, it was believed
that the King had done nothing without the consent and privity of the Pope: And
they add with Davila, that this carr^age of the Cardinal, gave the King
encouragement to proceed yet farther, and to cause the Cardinal of Guise to be
also slain; as observing that he made so light a matter of the imprisonment of
Prelates.

You see these Authors have related with great seriousness and gravity, as an
undoubted truth, the passages of this conference which they say was publicly
beheld, in the Court of the Castle of Blois. Notwithstanding which, it is all a
most manifest falsehood; and all that Davila has said in relation to it, is no
better than one of those fictions which only Poets have Authority to make. The
proof of this amounts to no less than a demonstration, and leaves not a scruple
remaining to be satisfied. We have the Printed Memoires of Cardinal Morosini's
Life, written in Italian, in an Elegant and Manly style, by Monsignor Stephano
Cosmi, Archbishop of Spalato; who did me the honor to send them to me from
Venice more than three years since. And it is evident from the Letters of this
Cardinal Legate, to Cardinal Montalto, Nephew of Pope Sixtus the fifth, to whom
he gives a most exact account, of all the passages on the twenty third of
December, and the following days, that whatsoever importunity he had used at
the request of Madam de Nemours, to obtain an Audience of the King, on the
morning of that day, the entrance even of the Castle was refused to him,
notwithstanding that he used his utmost endeavors at the Gate to get
admission, and that he could never procure an Audience till the twenty sixth,
which was three days after the Murder of the Cardinal. After this what will
become of all those fine discourses, and all the particular circumstances of
that pretended Conference in the Castle Court, on the twenty third? and of that
easy and unconcerned, or rather light behavior of the Cardinal to the King,
when he whispered in his Ear and laughed so heartily; which gave men occasion
to believe, that according to his Orders from Rome, he was of intelligence with
the King, who seeing him so merrily disposed, was resolved to prosecute his
design yet farther, and to rid his hands of the Cardinal of Guise? What else is
this, than to turn History into Romance; as on this very occasion two
Protestant Writers have also done, I mean d' Aubigne, and the Author of the
Discourse of that which passed at Blois, until the death of the Duke of Guise?
And our Catholic Historians who have followed their Authority, having
suffered themselves to be imposed on by those Huguenots, have consequently
imposed upon their Readers. There is so little appearance that the complaisant
Discourses of the Legate Morosini, had given the King occasion to resolve on the
death of the Cardinal de Guise, that you see on the contrary he refused to
grant him an Audience, because he would not hear what he could urge in favor
of that Cardinal, whose death already was determined.

In effect, that Cardinal grown desperate by reason of his Brother's death,
having uttered in the first transports of his grief and fury, all that those
passions could possibly inspire into a man of his hot temper, in the most
opprobrious and affronting terms he could invent against the person of the
King; that Prince thereby more incensed than ever, and fearing all things from
the revenge of his violent and haughty Soul, who was almost as formidable to
him as his Brother, Swore he should die for it. That which provoked him more to
hold this resolution, was the report which had been made to him, that the
Cardinal had the impudence to say, that he should not die, before he held the
King's Head to be shaved and made a Monk of him; for these are the very words
of the King in his Letter of the 24th. of December, to the Marquis Pisani, his
Ambassador at Rome.

Nevertheless, they had trouble enough to find out men, who would undertake the
Execution of this Order. Those of the 45 who had Ponyarded the Duke, refused in
plain terms to embrue their hands in the blood of a Cardinal, a Priest, and
Archbishop of Rheyms. Yet at last they lighted on four Soldiers, who not
having so much Honor as those Gentlemen, offered themselves to kill him for
four hundred Crowns, which were promised them. So that after the wretched
Cardinal was returned by little and little from the extravagance of his
Passion, and had passed the remainder of the day, and the greatest part of the
night following in Prayers, with the Archbishop of Lions, in a little Chamber
where they confessed themselves to each other, one came to tell him in the
morning about ten of the Clock, that the King asked for him: then having
recommended his Soul to God, and received yet once more the benediction of the
Archbishop, who believing that he himself should likewise die, exhorted him to
receive his death with constancy of mind, and like a Christian, he went out,
and perceiving the Soldiers who expected him in an obscure passage, he covered
his Face with his Cloak, and leaning his Body against the Wall, suffered
himself to be wounded, with strong thrusts of their Hallbards, without giving
the least Groan or sigh, or even shaking in the least, till he fell down dead
at the Feet of his inhumane Murderers.

His Body together with his Brother's, were put into the hands of a Surgeon,
who consumed the Flesh with unslak'd Lime, and then burned the Bones in a
Chamber of the Castle, that they might not come into the possession of the
Leaguers, who would be sure to have used them, to inflame the people who were
his Idolaters, and to have made relics of them, to which they would have paid
the same Honors, as are given to the Bones of Martyrs. Thus perished in the
middle of his course, one of the most illustrious men who ever lived; at the
age of 42 years, Henry of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, who by the incomparable
perfections of his Body, of his Mind, and of his Soul, which made him admired
even by his Enemies, had merited all that Fortune seemed to be preparing for
him, had he not presumed to have pushed it beyond the bounds, which the
providence of God to whom it is subservient, had prescribed him.

For in conclusion, the following events have made it evident, that the divine
providence which disposes Sovereignly of Empires, had ordained to take away
that of France, from the Family of Valois, and to transfer it to the House of
Bourbon; and by consequence whatever was set up in opposition to this eternal
Decree, must fall under it at last; neither Conspiracies, nor Leagues, nor
Fortune, nor any power on Earth, being able to resist it.

In the mean time the violent death of those Princes, far from bringing those
advantages to the King, which he had promised himself from it, and which his
passion had represented to him through false optiques, as exceeding great and
most as^ur'd, threw him headlong on the sudden into a more deplorable
condition, than that which he thought he had escaped. He well knew after he had
considered, what he had done in cold Blood, that the Murder of the Cardinal of
Guise, would be extremely offensive to the Pope, and that it was necessary he
should endeavor to appease him, lest he who carried all things with a high
hand, and was not of a temper to endure the least affront to his Authority,
should declare himself for the League in opposition to him, which as yet he had
not done: In consideration of which, he writ a Note to the Legate on Christmas
day, in these very words which follow.

Now at last I am a King, and am resolved from henceforth, not to suffer my
self to be affronted: I will give them to understand, and make them feel
whosoever they are, who dare to attacque me, that I will always remain in this
generous resolution, following therein the example of our Holy Father the Pope,
whose common saying it is, that we must make our selves be obeyed, and punish
those who injure us. And since I have accomplished my purpose according to this
Maxim, to morrow I will see you. Farewell.

Accordingly on the twenty sixth of December, the Legate had a long Audience:
wherein the King having informed him of the reasons which he had to kill the
Duke and Cardinal, took God to witness that he had debated within himself, and
opposed his own Arguments with all manner of severity, for six days together;
and during all that time, was firmly resolved not to have come to those
extremities for fear of offending Almighty God. But at length considering that
He who had made him a King, made it part of his duty to maintain himself in
that Dignity, and that the Pope had sent him word by Monsieur de Luxembourg,
and had often spoken to the same purpose to the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, that he
ought to make himself be obeyed, and punish those who affronted him; he had
accordingly resolved to prevent them, by taking their lives, rather than stay,
till his own were taken by them: the design of which they had already laid. And
if he had not proceeded by the ordinary forms of Justice, the reason was, that
in the low condition to which they had reduced him, 'twas impossible to make
use of Law.

To this the Legate, who had leisure in the mean time, to consider of what he
ought to say, answered, without mentioning the Duke of Guise's death, that he
thought it his duty to advertise him, that supposing the Cardinal had been
guilty, yet his Majesty in causing him to be put to death as he had done, had
incurred the Censures, contained in the Bull, called In Coena Domini; as much
as those who had executed his Orders, and either counseled or approved that
action. That therefore it was his duty to ask pardon, and absolution of his Sin
from the Pope, who alone was able to give it him, and in the mean time he ought
to abstain from entering into the Church.

The King, surpised exceedingly at so brisk a declaration, answered him, that
there was no Sovereign Prince, who was not endued with power, to punish his
Ecclesiastical Subjects for crimes of High Treason, and more especially when
his own Life was concerned in them: for which reason, he believed not that he
had incurred any manner of censure, principally considering that the Kings of
France have the privilege to be exempted from excommunication. It Is certain
that he failed not on Newyears day to perform his Devotions, in ceremony with
the Knights of the Order, and to communicate publicly in the Church of Saint
Sauveur. And when the Legate had made complaint concerning it, he sent to him
the Sieur de Revol, Secretary of State, who showed him a Breviat of the 21st.
of July, in the year foregoing, by which the Pope permitted him to choose what
Confessor he pleased, and who in virtue of that Breviat, had power to absolve
him from all manner of crimes, even the most enormous, from all those
particular cases reserved to the Pope's own person, from all censures and
Ecclesiastical punishments, even those which are contained in the Bull which is
called In Coena Domini. And the Secretary added, that though the King by virtue
of his Privileges had no need of that Breviat, in order to his frequenting the
Sacraments, yet it was past all manner of dispute, that having it, he might
communicate without either scruple or scandal, after having received Absolution
from his Confessor. The Legate having nothing to reply to this, said no more,
and satisfied himself with the remonstrance which he had made.

But Pope Sixtus stopped not there, for he was strangely transported against his
Legate whom he accused of Cowardice, because that having seen a Cardinal
Murdered, he had not published the censures against the King with the
Interdictions, even though it should have cost him (as he said) an hundred
Lives. He testified his resentment of it to the Marquis de Pisany the King's
Ambassador at Rome, with much sharpness, as also to Cardinal de Ioyeuse
Protector of France, and yet more vehemently to the Sacred College in full
Consistory, though the Cardinal de Saint Croix speaking to him immediately
before, had told him, that having consulted the Books of the Doctors on this
Subject, he had there read, that a King who had found a Cardinal plotting
against his Estate, might cause him to be put to death, without either form or
figure of Process, and that he had no need of absolution in such a case. The
Pope was incensed at this freedom which he took, and loudly protested, that he
would never grant any favor, nor would suffer any consistorial Remission to be
made, before the King had sent to beg Absolution, which yet should not be
granted him, till the whole business had been thoroughly examined in a
Congregation of Cardinals, which he established for that purpose.

The King was very willing, that the Pope if he so pleased, should give him yet
another absolution, which could have done him no prejudice, though he believed
it not to be necessary. But he would by no means allow that it should be
juridically scanned, whether he had the right of punishing his Subjects as he
had done. Upon which, the Cardinal de Ioyeuse made no scruple of remonstrating
to the Pope, with all the respect which was due to his Holiness, that the best
and most devout Catholics of France, (they are his very words) held not for
authentic the opinions which were received at Rome, in that which concerns
not the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church, (in both which, there was no
difference betwixt Rome and France) but that in France, they held the
Prerogatives or Rights of the King, to be much greater than they were thought
at Rome, and they believed themselves, to stand on so sure Foundations for what
they held, that they would not depart from it on any considerations whatever.
That in this particular Fact, the King would not want most Zealous Catholics
to maintain, that not only his Majesty, who has an especial privilege to stand
exempted from Excommunication, but that also the meanest man can incur no
censures for having done a thing which is of absolute necessity, for the
preservation of his liberty, and of his Life. And that which way soever it be
determined, yet his Majesty was absolved by the Authority of his Holiness
himself, in virtue of the Breviat which he had granted him.

To which the Pope made no other reply than this, that it belonged to him to
interpret his own Breviat, and that it ought only to be understood of crimes
committed, before the Breviat was given, and not of those which were committed
afterward. But one of the most understanding Prelates of the Roman Court, had
the confidence to make it appear, by a writing which was sent to the King, that
this Breviat being conceived as it was in general terms, without any
restriction, extended as well to the future as to the past. In the mean time,
the Pope as it were by immediate inspiration, changing his Humor on the
sudden, began to tell the Cardinal, that he acknowledged the King had great
provocations to do what he had done; that God had suffered the Cardinal of
Guise and the Duke his Brother, to die in that manner for their Sins; That the
League had ruined the affairs of France, and even the Catholic Religion it
self: That it was at no time lawful to take up Arms against the will of the
Sovereign, for it never succeeded happily: That he called that very Cardinal to
witness what he had formerly told him concerning this, and that he had then
prophesied what since had happened.

The Cardinal ravished with joy to hear the Pope speak after this manner, gave
him his most humble acknowledgments, and earnestly besought him always to
persist in so just an opinion, without suffering himself to be imposed on, by
the artifices of the Spaniards and the Leaguers. But when he perceived that
after all this fair discourse the Pope, according to the obstinacy of his
temper which was never to be moved, when once he had fixed his resolution,
still continued to suspend all the expeditions, till the King had sent to
desire absolution, he had the courage to tell him plainly, that this suspension
which was prejudicial to the service of God, the salvation of Souls, and even
to the authority of the Holy See, could be laid to no other man's charge, but
the whole burden of it would fall on the Conscience of his Holiness. And that
all the evils which arise from the long vacancies of Churches, would be imputed
to him only not to the King, who had done on his part what he ought, by naming
(or presenting) men to Bishoprics and Abbeys according to the Concordat, and
that in mean time they who were thus presented to the Prelacy, had wherewithal
to comfort themselves easily in their disgrace, by enjoying their Oeconomats a
longer time, without putting themselves to the trouble of providing and sending
to Rome so much money, for obtaining the Apostolical Provisions. And after all,
it might well happen that the King, moved by the remonstrances of the French
Clergy and even of the Estates themselves, which were still assembled at Blois,
and also because his nominations were refused at Rome, might set all things
again upon the Foundation of the ancient right, in which case there would be no
more trudging from France to Rome, but only for the confirmation of three or
four primacies, and those too to be expedited gratis.

In fine, this prudent and honest Cardinal, concluded his long dispatches by
the advice he gave the King, that according to the opinion of the wisest men,
and those who meant him best, the longer he delaid to send, or write to his
Holiness, in case either of them were his intention, the more satisfaction he
should receive, provided that his affairs prosper'd at home. For added he, your
Majesty has nothing more to hope or fear, but only from your own management,
and you are to expect that as matters go well or ill in France, you shall be
treated here accordingly. So that to know how you stand in grace at Rome, you
will have no need to be informed, by your Ambassadors dispatches or by mine,
you will find the truest Intilligence from day to day by your own success.

The event verified his prediction, for some time after Sixtus perceiving that
the League grew exceeding powerful, and the King much weaker by the Revolt of
the greatest part of France, caused a thundering Monitory to be posted up at
Rome against him, in which he declares at the first dash, that the King had
incurred the Excommunication provided by the Canons, for the Murder committed
on the person of a Cardinal.

The death of the Duke of Guise, was yet more ruinous to his affairs, and
produced an effect quite contrary to what he had expected from it. He believed,
that having cut off the Head of the League, it would thenceforth be no more
than a body without life or motion, and that he should then be absolute Master
and truly a King, as he had used to say. But it was not long before he found
how much he had deceived himself. His supposition may come to pass, when a
faction is weak in its beginning, and that they who are entered into it are
irresolute, wavering betwixt their first fury, which has hurried them into a
Rebellion, and their fear of a Master justly incensed against them, whom they
also see well armed, and in condition to take Vengeance on them, as well as on
their Head, in case they prove obstinate in their revolt. But here all things
were in a contrary posture; the League had taken root so deeply in the peoples
Hearts, that there was no probability it should be torn out, at one single
pull: and the faction was too strongly supported both within the Kingdom and
without it, to beget a reasonable hope that it would easily be destroyed. On
the other side, that love and respect, which the French have naturally for
their Kings, was almost wholly extinguished in the greater part of them, in
reference to Henry the third, who was equally hated both by Huguenots and
Leaguers, and so very much despised, especially by the last, that he was not
feared by any one.

Thus instead of arming himself as he ought in reason to have done, after so
terrible a blow as he had given, and advancing toward Paris, with all the
Forces he either had in readiness, or could raise immediately, without giving
leisure to the Leaguers to recover from their first amazement, and to provide
themselves of a new Head against him, He trifl'd away his time according to his
custom, in making specious Declarations, and writing fine Letters which he
sent far and near, wherein amongst other things which he alleged for his
justification, he said (what no body then believed, and what the Duke of
Mayenne positively denied to the Cardinal Legate,) that he had received from
that Duke, and from the Duchess of Aumale, a most certain information of the
Conspiracy which the two Brothers had contrived against his person. Doubtless
he was ignorant that having done an action of this nature, a King can never
justify it better, than with his Arms in his hand, and by putting himself into
a condition of forcing the vanquished to approve his reasons.

And truly by making such an insignificant and verbal Apology, so inconsistent
with the greatness of a King, he brought his matters to that pass, that he was
neither believed by his own Subjects, nor by Foreigners. And was so
unfortunate, that not only the Leaguers but even the Huguenots themselves, and
principally the Gentlemen amongst them condemned his action in most
reproachful Language, and thought it contrary to the Genius of the French
Nation. In the mean time he was much surpised, that while he was losing his
time in writing and continuing the Estates, which he held on till three weeks
after the execution, he heard the news that Orleans was revolted against him;
that the Duke of Mayenne, (who was advertised at Lions of the death of his
Brothers before Alphonso d' Ornano, who had been sent either to make him
Prisoner, or to kill him, could arrive there,) had refug'd himself in his
Government of Burgundy, where he was Master of almost all the Towns; and
especially that Paris had reinflam'd the League with more ardour than before to
revenge the death of the two Brothers.

There is nothing more prodigiously strange in all this History, than the
transactions in that great City, when they heard the news of this amazing
accident. The Sixteen, who had it first, even before the Parliament had notice
of it, (so great was the negligence of the Court) commanded immediately on
Christmas-Evening, that they should stand to their Arms in all the Wards,
secured all the strong places, placed Corpse de Guard upon the Bridges, and in
the Squares, and put Soldiers into the Houses of the Politiques, for by that
name they called suspected persons, that is to say, all those who were not
carried away by the Torrent of so hot-brained and furious a Faction. Afterward
finding themselves absolute Masters of Paris, where the People being enraged
almost to madness for the murder of the Duke of Guise, were one and all for a
Revolt, they held a General Assembly at the Townhouse, where notwithstanding
the opposition which was made by Achilles de Harlay, the first President, who
was in danger of his life on that occasion, they elected the Duke of Aumale
their Governor, and made amongst themselves a more strict Union than ever, for
defense, as they gave out, of their Lives and Liberties, and of the Catholic
Religion. In this manner they disguised Rebellion under a specious name; which
their Preachers, and the Doctors of the League baul'd out, and thundered
through all Paris.

For the Preachers, of whom the most furious were Pelletier Boucher,
Guincestre, Pigenat, and Aubry the Curats, Father Bernard de Montgalliard,
surnamed the Petit Feuillant, and the famous Cordelier Feu Ardent, Preaching in
the Parishes of Paris, during the Christmas Holidays, changed their Sermons
into Satyrs against the Sacred person of the King, and described so movingly
the Tragical death of the two Brothers, whom they lifted up to the Skies as
Martyrs, that they melted their Audience into tears, and nothing but sighs and
groans were heard in their well-fill'd Congregations. And instead of proposing
to them the example of St. Stephen, they inspired into them the desire of
vengeance. Insomuch that even they who were not disposed to sob and cry, and
who were even scandalized at this manner of behavior, which was so unworthy of
the holy Ministry of the Gospel, were constrained to act their parts, and
squeeze out tears for fear of being murdered, if they had not wept for company.

It Is certain that when Guincestre who had Preached the Advent at St.
Bartholomews, had said in one of his Sermons, (after a terrible Declamation
against the King, and lamentation for the Duke of Guise,) that it behooved his
Auditors to lift up their hands, every man of them, in token that they would
revenge his death, and live and die in the Holy Covenant, which was now
renewed, the whole Congregation immediately obeyed him, excepting only the
first President, Ann. 1589.
who that day which was the first of the Year 1589, was present at the Sermon
in his Parish Church, seated overagainst the Preacher. Then that Enthusiastique
Zealot had the impudence to say to him, Lift up your hand too like the rest,
you Monsieur the first President. The Leaguers had caused a report to be
spread, that this excellent Magistrate, who was known to be a Loyal Servant to
the King, was one of those who advised the death of the Duke of Guise; for
which reason he was of necessity to obey, lest otherwise he should indiscreetly
expose himself to the fury of the multitude, who in case he had refused, had
absolutely believed the lie which was forged against him, and consequently had
torn him piecemeal: He therefore lifted up his hand, but to no great height,
as an action that was forced from him; upon which that impudent covenanting
Preacher, had the insolence to bid him lift it higher, that the whole
Congregation might be satisfied, he was under the same obligation with the rest.

The Curat of St. Nicholas in the fields, Francis Pigenat, was yet more
audacious and more impious, than his brother in iniquity. For, making the
Funeral Oration for the Duke of Guise, in the Parish of St. Iean en Greve, (as
it was made in all the Parishes of Paris and even at the Cathedral of Nostre
Dame, with more than Royal pomp and Ceremonies,) he rose to that excess of
fury, as to ask of his Auditors, if they could not find one brave Spirit
amongst them all, who would undertake to revenge the Duke's murder, by killing
the Tyrant? And more to enrage the People, he spoke in the person of the
Duchess Dowager to the late Duke, who was then big with Child and ready to lie
down, and made her pronounce those terrible imprecations of Virgil's Dido; thus
imitated by him. Exoriare aliquis, nostris ex ossibus Vltor,
Qui face Valesios, ferroque sequare Tyrannos.
Arise some offspring of my murdered Lord;
Revenge him on Valois with Fire and Sword.


These Seditious Preachments occasioned infinite disorders: but the mortal
stroke was given by the scandalous Decree which the Doctors made, who being
blinded with that furious passion, which possessed the League, and they leading
the blind multitude, brought them to tumble headlong with themselves, into that
frightfull gulf of crimes and of misfortunes. The body of the Town which was
composed of Leaguers, to authorize that horrible revolt which they designed,
was of opinion to propose to the College of Sorbonne, not only by a verbal
request, but by an Authentic Act, which was signed by the Magistrate, and
Sealed with the Town Seal, these two important cases of Conscience; the one
was, Whether the French were effectively discharged from the Oath of Allegiance
and Faith, which they had made to the King? the other, Whether in Conscience
they might Arm, and unite themselves, and whether in order to it, they might
raise Money and Contributions for the defense and preservation of the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion in France, in opposition to the
detestable designs and endeavors of the King and all his Adherents, since he
had violated the public Faith at Blois, in prejudice of the Catholic
Religion, the Edict of the Holy Union, and the natural liberty of the Estates?
On which occasion, the Faculty assembling on the Seventh of January, to the
number of Seventy Doctors, after a solemn Procession, and a Mass of the Holy
Ghost, concluded for the affirmative, on both the points by a common consent,
without so much as the opposition of one man; (as the Decree it self informs
us,) and that this resolution should be sent to the Pope, to the end he might
approve and confirm it by his Authority, desiring that he would have the
goodness to succor the Gallicane Church, which suffered under great
oppressions.

To confess the truth, this Decree gave great scandal; and the Huguenots who
were not wanting to report it word for word, and to make an Examen of it in
their Writings, drew a great advantage from it, to insult over our Divines, of
whom they had reason to say that both their Doctrine and their Morals in this
respect, are directly opposite to the word of God, which teaches us the quite
contrary. But it is easy to answer them, by letting them know, what is most
true, namely that this Decree was passed by a faction of seditious Doctors;
Boucher, Prevost, Aubry, Bourgoin, Pelletier, and seven or eight old Doctors,
who were violent Leaguers, and also of the Council of Sixteen, drew after them
by their Cabals, and by their inveterate malice, fifty or threescore Doctors,
the greatest part of whom were those young, hotheaded, and turbulent ^ellows
whom we have already mentioned; and the rest, in fear of their lives, if they
should dare to oppose them, assented only upon compulsion to this Decree,
which the Sorbonne it self, at all times when it was free, has held abominable,
and which Doctor John Le Fevre, at that time Dean of the Faculty, resisted what
he could, without gaining any thing upon that wretched faction, which
constrained him at last in spite of his opposition, to Subscribe it with them.

In like manner the King, who complained extremely of this proceeding, having
Assembled at Blois twenty Bishops and twelve Doctors of the Sorbonne, who were
of the number of the Deputies, when that Decree was read to them, they all
concluded without the least hesitation, that it was execrable, and could never
have passed without compulsion, and for safeguard of their lives from the rage
and fury of the Parisian Leaguers.

In the mean time it must be acknowledged, in what manner soever it were
gained, yet being of the Sorbonne, whose name and authority were had in
singular veneration through all Europe, and particularly in France, that Decree
was the Trumpet to the general Revolt, which was made in Paris, and from thence
in a short time after extended it self through the greatest part of all the
Cities in the Kingdom. For as soon as it was published in that great Town, by
the most furious and giddy-brain'd Preachers of the League, who exalted it to
the People in their declamatory style, they ran on the sudden into such
horrible extremes, and such transports of rage, so contrary to the duty of
Subjects to their lawful Sovereign, that though our Writers have made them
public, yet I believe it more decent to suppress them, than to profane my
History by a Relation, which would render it unpleasant, and even odious.

I shall only say, that at the same time when by virtue of this damnable
Decree, they bereft him of the title of King, leaving him only the bare name
of Henry de Valois, they heaped upon him all sorts of outrages and villainies,
which the impotent fury of the Rabble could produce. They vented their rage
against him in Satyrs, Lampoons, and Libels, infamous Reports and Calumnies,
and those too in the fowlest terms, of which the most moderate were Tyrant and
Aposltate. And that they might not be wanting to discharge their fury in the
most brutal manner they could invent; they extended it even to his Arms, his
Statues and his Pictures, which they tore in pieces, or trampled under their
feet, or dragged about the Streets, through the mire and dirt, or burned them,
or cast them into the River, with a volee of curses and imprecations against
him; in the mean adoring the Duke of Guise, and his Brother the Cardinal, as
Martyrs, and placing their Images upon Altars. At last this blind fury went so
far, that after the Decree, the Curats and Confessors of the Faction of
Sixteen abusing the power which was given them by their Sacred Ministry, of
binding and loosing, refused Absolution to those who acknowledged to them in
Confession, that their Conscience would not suffer them to renounce Henry the
third their lawful King.

This impious practice, was the first effect that was produced by the Decree of
the Faculty, the news of which was received by the King with much sadness, at
the same time when he was busied in paying his last duties to the Queen his
Mother, who deceased at the Castle of Blois, on the fifth of January, in the
seventy second year of her age, whether it were out of melancholy for the death
of the Guises, which was upbraided to her by the old Cardinal of Bourbon, or of
a Hectique Fever, or a false Pleurisy. Certain it is, that there was no mean
or moderation used either in praise or dispraise of that Princess; who indeed
has afforded sufficient matter to Historians, to speak both good and ill of
her, and either of them in excess. Both the one and the other are easy to be
discerned, by what I have related of her in this History, and in that of
Calvinism. I shall only add this last touching, to finish her picture, that it
cannot be denied but that she was endued with great perfections of mind and
body; a carriage extremely Majestical, a certain air of Greatness and
Authority, worthy of her high Estate, her Behavior noble and engaging, her Wit
polite, her Apprehension prompt, her Judgment piercing, a great talent for
Business and Treaties, and a singular address of managing and turning others to
her own bent; a Royal Magnificence, Constancy and Fortitude of mind,
extraordinary in her Sex, a masculine courage and greatness of Soul, which
naturally carried her to the highest undertakings: In one word, she might have
passed for a Heroine, if so many illustrious qualities had not been blasted by
great vices, which appeared so openly in all her conduct, that History neither
ought, nor is able to dissemble them.

For it was but too apparent, for her honor, what prodigality, what luxury,
what shameful dissoluteness she permitted in her Court; and which she her self
made use of for gaining such whom she desired to engage in her interests. Add
to this her want of sincerity and faith in her promises, the too much credit
she gave to Astrologers and Fortune Tellers, whom she consulted in reference to
the future, and above all her immoderate and vast ambition, on the account of
which, and out of her insatiable desire of being always absolute, she made no
scruple to sacrifice the interests of the State and of Religion, both which she
had almost ruined, by wavering betwixt the Huguenots and Catholics, sometimes
seeming to be on one side, sometimes on the other, according as this or that
Religion appeared most conducing to her designs. In fine, to conclude her
character, by what relates to the essential part of this History, the hatred
which she bore to the King of Navarre her Son-in-law, and the love which she
had to her Grandson of Lorrain, caused her underhand to favor the League, of
which nevertheless she was the gull, and was cousen'd by those whom she
intended to deceive. For she had this misfortune which commonly happens to
those who would manage two contrary Factions, and poize themselves Trimmer-like
betwixt them, that she was in a manner equally hated both by the Catholics
and Protestants.

Such was this Princess, whose good and ill qualities were in extremes. Yet
happy both in relation to God and man. For she di'd at a time, when the World
believed her life would be profitable and indeed necessary for the King, to
draw him out of that Labyrinth of confusions wherein he was entangl'd; and also
because she di'd with all the serenity of a good Christian, having first
received the Sacraments with much devotion, though the Huguenot Historians, who
naturally hated her, have written to the contrary. And because she was not less
abhorred by the Leaguers of Paris, (who believed she had a share in the death
of the Guises, as others also have thought therein following the relation,
which was written by Miron the Physician,) they said publicly that if her
Body should be brought to Paris to be laid in the magnificent Tomb which she
had built at St. Denis, for her self and King Henry the Second her Husband,
they would certainly throw it into the Seine.

In the mean time the King who was still of opinion that they might be reduced
to their obedience by the ways of clemency and mildness, sent thither the
Duchess of Nemours, mother of the Guises and of the young Duke of Nemours,
their Brother by the Mothers side, who had made his escape, not long after he
had been imprisoned by the King. That Princes^ who was very prudent, preferring
the benefits of Peace before the unprofitable revenge of her Childrens death,
had begun to treat by Letter with the Dukes of Nemours and Mayenne, her two
remaining Sons, endeavoring to reduce them by gentle means, and offering them
all the advantages and all the security which they possibly could wish: which
gave the King occasion to believe, that in the end she might conquer their
resentments, and appease the commotions in Paris. He was willing also that she
should be accompanied by the Sheriffs Compan and Cotteblanche; who promised him
to use their best endeavors to that effect; or to return to Prison in Blois,
if they succeeded not in their negotiation; and at the same time sent his
express order to the Parliament to inroll the Declaration which he had
published immediately after the execution at Blois.

The Duchess was received at Paris with great honor, and incredible joy of
the people; who paid their veneration to her, as to the Mother of two Holy
Martyrs. And the Petit Feuillant Preaching one day before her, flew out into so
high a transport, that turning himself toward her, he made an Apostrophe to
the late Duke of Guise in these words; O Holy and Glorious Martyr of God,
blessed is the Womb that bore thee, and the Breasts that gave thee suck. But
after all she succeeded not in her negotiation. The two Sheriffs forswore
themselves, and joined with the Factious, according to their former practice:
And upon the request (the original of which is kept in the Library of Monsieur
Colbert, and which I have seen signed by forty eight of the principal
Citizens,) a prohibition was made them to return to Blois; and the Oath which
they had taken, was declared Null, by an order of the New Parliament, which the
Leaguers set up, after they had broken the old one, by one of the most Horrible
Encroachments, which was ever made upon the Royal Authority.

For the Duke of Aumale, and the Council of Sixteen, having that August Body in
suspicion, the Principal Members of which, were Loyally devoted to the King's
service, resolved to take them into custody, and all the other Officers whom
they distrusted. Iean Le Clerc, otherwise called Bussy, heretofore a Procureur
in Parliament, one of the most heady and impudent fellows that ever breathed,
and whom the Duke of Guise, well knowing him to be a desperate Leaguer, had
made Governor of the Bastille, demanded and obtained that Commission; which he
executed on the sixteenth of January. For in the Morning possessing himself of
the Palace-Gates, he entered, armed Cap a pie, into the great Chamber at eight
of the Clock, where the Parliament was assembled, and told them, that the good
Catholics of Paris had given him in charge to present them a Request.
Afterward having put it into the hands of one of the Members, he retired to
the Parquet des Huissiers where his men waited for him. The Request was this in
substance, That it would please that Court to unite it self with the Prevost of
Merchants, the Sheriffs, and the good Citizens of Paris, for the defense of
Religion, and of the Town. That in conformity to the Decree of the Sorbonne, it
would declare that the French were discharged from their Oath of Allegiance and
Obedience to the King, and that they would use his name no more in their Orders.

This was the way which that Villain took, to lay hold of an occasion, which he
knew would be specious and popular, under the shadow of which he might use the
Parliament as afterward he did; for he knew full well, that they would never
confirm a Decree so impious as was that of the Sorbonne. This is a passage
which all of our Historians have omitted, and which I learned from the
Manuscript Journal which the famous M. Anthony Loysel, an Advocate in
Parliament, who was then at Paris, left to his Children for their instruction.
It was nobly communicated to me by Monsieur Ioly his Grandson, Chanter of the
Church of Nostre Dame, a man commendable for his Integrity and Learning, and to
whom the Chapter of the Metropolitan of Paris is much acknowledging, for his
rare Library which he has bestowed on it. This, then, was the snare which Bussy
Le Clerc laid for the Parliament, thereby to pick an occasion of treating them
with the most unworthy usage which they could possibly receive.

For without expecting an answer to his insolent request, finding that they
debated it much longer than he thought fitting, he returned into the great
Chamber, with his Sword in his hand, followed by five and twenty or thirty men
armed Breast and Back, and with Pistols; and after having told them at the
first, that the business was delayed too long, and that it was well known, that
there were those amongst them who betrayed the Town, and held correspondence
with Henry de Valois, he added, that he had order to secure them; and commanded
with an imperious voice, that they whom he should name, should immediately
follow him, if they had a mind to avoid worse usage. At which, when looking
over his list, he had named the first President Achilles de Harlay, the
Presidents de Blanc Mesnil Potier, de Thou, and the most ancient Counselors,
all the rest rose up, as by common consent, protesting that they would not
abandon their Head; whom they followed to the number of about threescore, of
all the Chambers, walking two and two after Bussy Le Clerc, who led them as it
were in triumph through an infinite multitude of people to the Bastille; where
those of them only were imprisoned who were known to be inviolably faithful
to the King's service.

The most considerable of them in desert as well as dignity, was the great
Achilles de Harlay, whom to name is to commend; a Magistrate every way
accomplished, and of that illustrious house, which having for four hundred
years together signalized it self in Arms, has since added to that glory all
that can be acquired by the highest preferments of the long Robe, and of the
Church.

I should be ungrateful to their memory, if I did not justice to the merit of
those Senators, who followed their Head; and if I made not their names known
to posterity which are not found in our Historians, but which I have collected
from the forementioned Manuscripts of Monsieur Loysel the Advocate, who knew
them all. Besides the Presidents already named, the Counselors who were
imprisoned in the Bastille with them, were Chartier, Spifame, Malvault, Perrot,
Fleury, Le Viry, Mole, Scarron, Gayant, Amelot, Iourdain, Forget, Herivaux,
Tournebu, Du Puy, Gillot, de Moussy, Pinney, Godard, Fortin, Le Meneur, and the
Sieur Denis de Here.

This last was a man of Wit, and of Quality, one of the most resolute of the
whole Company; who from a warm Leaguer, (as formerly he had been, out of an ill
guided Zeal,) was now become a great servant of the King; having discovered at
last the pernicious designs of the League; of whose extraordinary merit Henry
the Fourth, after his conversion, made great account. Insomuch that he had the
credit to get his name struck out of the Catholicon, in which the Author of
that witty Satyr, had placed it but little to his advantage. For whereas in the
first Edition, of the year 1594. Machaut and Here were named as great sticklers
for the League; in all the rest of the Editions we find Machaut and Baston.
That hotheaded Baston, who was so furious a Leaguer, that he signed the
Covenant with his own blood drawn from his hand, which remained lame after it;
and who, after Paris was reduced to the King's service, chose rather to go out
of it with the Spaniards and retire to Flanders, where he di'd sterv'd, than to
stay in France, and live at his ease under the Government of his lawful King.
Thus you have the names of those Loyal MEN WORTHY of the Parliament, who were
clapped up in the Bastille with their first President.

There were others of them whose names I could not recover, but who well
deserve to be known, and had in veneration by the world. The rest of them
whether they turned Leaguers for company, or seemed to turn for fear of Death,
or that by such their dissimulation, they thought they might put themselves in
a way of doing the King some considerable service, having engaged to be
faithful to that party, were left at their liberty, and continued in their
stations, with the President Brisson, who from the next morning began to sit
and take the Chair as Head of the new Parliament of the League, with which it
was believed he held correspondence, on purpose to procure himself this new
dignity. An action much unworthy of a man who had so high a reputation for his
rare learning, who ought rather to have lost his life, than to have so basely
abandoned his King, and to have made himself a Slave to the passions of his
mortal Enemies, under pretense that all he did was only to shelter himself
from the violence of the Faction, as he privately protested. But so it is, that
the greatest Clerks are not always the wisest Men; and that good sense
accompanied with constancy of mind, and an unshaken fidelity in our duty, is
imcomparably more useful to the Service of God and of the State, than all the
knowledge of Books and Learning of Colleges, huddled together in a Soul without
integrity and resolution.

And truly, it manifestly appeared, that all these good qualities were wanting
to this pretended Parliament, at that time; for about nine or ten days after
that action, all the Members of it, to the number of an hundred and twenty,
(comprehending in that account the Princes and the Prelates,) swore upon the
Crucifix, that they would never depart from their League, and that they would
prosecute by all manner of ways their revenge for the death of the two Guises;
against all those who were either Authors of it, or accomplices in it. This
protestation which was dispatched away to all the Towns that held for the party
of the League, increased the fury of the people, who every day grew worse and
worse, even to that degree, that some of them by an abominable mixture of
Sacrilege, Paricide, and Magical Enchantments, made Images of Wax resembling
the King, which they placed upon the Altars, and pricked them in diverse parts,
pronouncing certain Diabolical words at every one of the forty Masses which
they caused to be said in many Churches, to make their charms more powerful;
and at the fortieth, they pierced the image to the heart, as intending thereby
to give their King the stroke of death.

And in the mean time their Bedlam Guincestre showing in the midst of his
Sermon, certain little Silver Candlesticks made an hundred years before, and
curiously cast into the shape of Satyrs, carrying Flambeaus, which had been
found amongst the rich ornaments of the Capuchins Oratory, and the Minimes of
the Bois de Vincennes lately plundered by the Rabble, accused the King himself
of Sorcery, saying, that those were the Idols, and the figures of those Devils
to which Henry de Valois was accustomed to Sacrifice, in his retirement to Bois
de Vincennes; and that they had commanded him to murder the Duke of Guise, the
Protector of their Faith. But that which gave the mortal blow to the Royal
Authority, and settled the Revolt in Absolute power, by giving it a kind of
regular form of a popular Government, or rather of an Aristocracy, against the
fundamental law of the French Monarchy, was the arrival of the Duke of Mayenne.

It Is true that Prince was not endued with all those great and Heroique
qualities, which raised the admiration of the World in the person of his elder
brother the late Duke of Guise: but if we consider him in himself, and without
comparing him to the former, whose merit being incomparably greater, and his
actions more glorious, would certainly obscure him, it must be said, if we will
do him right, that he had as much spirit, as much courage, wisdom, moderation,
sincerity and probity, as was necessary for him, to maintain an honorable
place amongst the great men of his time: but not so much resolution, constancy,
greatness of Soul, vigor, activity and good fortune, as he ought to have had
for the sustaining of so powerful a party as that, which he took upon himself
to Head, in opposition to two Kings.

On the one side he was strongly solicited by the Council of Sixteen, and by
the Duchess of Montpensier his Sister, to come and take the place of his dead
Brother, and to put himself at the head of those, who were all in a readiness
to obey his orders, and to give up themselves to his command: and on the other
side he had received the King's Letters, which assured him in most obliging
terms, that being as fully persuaded of his innocence, as he was convinced of
his Brother's crimes, he was ready to give him all the part he could desire
both in his favor, and his bounty, provided that he still continued in that
obedience and fidelity, which he owed him.

But the extreme grief he had conceived, for the cruel treatment of his
Brothers, after so many promises, and such solemn protestations, that all past
actions should be forgotten, the obligation, which he thought his honor
imposed on him to revenge their death; and more than all, the distrust he had
of the King, which was insuperable in him, whose fair words he took for no
security, after so horrible an action, made him at last resolve to take up
Arms, though he was not naturally inclined to rashness, and to precipitate
himself blindfold, into such an Abyss of hazards and confusions, as are
inseparable from Civil Wars. He thought he should ^ind much less security in
the King's word and honor, than in fortune, unconstant and variable as she is;
and that he ran not so much hazard in declaring himself openly his Enemy, as in
trusting to his Promises and Oaths. So that at the first, it was neither
hatred, nor ambition, but only distrust, which hurried him as it were by force
into the Civil Wars; and he had never exposed himself to so manifest a danger
of being ruined, but that he imagined that by not hazarding himself, he had
been ruined.

In the mean time, the beginning of his unhappy Enterprise, was exceeding
prosperous: He marched from Dijon, with many Troops, which he had drawn out of
his Government of Bourgog^e, and of Champaign, which declared generally for the
League, excepting only Chaalons, the Magistrates of which place having
received information of the Duke of Guise's death before the Sieur de Rone,
whom that Duke had there established Governor, constrained him immediately to
depart out of it: And as a River swells and enlarges its channels, the farther
it flows from its Spring, and the nearer it approaches to the Sea; so the
Forces of this new Head of the League increased on his march, by the concourse
of those whom his own reputation, the memory of the late Duke his Brother, the
common hatred to the King, the example of Paris, the false Zeal of Religion,
and above all, the Interest and desire which many had to make their advantage
of these troubles, drew to him in all the Countries through which he passed;
and all the Towns, as it were in Emulation of each other, opened their Gates
for his reception.

He was received at Troyes, with the same Honors which are peculiar to Kings;
and he acted there as a Sovereign Prince; from thence sending out his
Commissions to the Creatures of the Duke of Guise, and especially (...) Rosne
and St. Paul, to whom he expedited his Orders for them to command in Champaign
and Brye. He ^ossess'd himself of Sens, to which ^^ace those of his party
invited him. (...) things bent under his Authority ^heresoever he passed. He
entered like a Conqueror into Orleans; where the fame alone of his coming,
constrained the Royalists to surrender the Citadel to the Townsmen who
besieged it. He made himself Master of Chartres by the intelligence which he
held there: where the people changing on the sudden, as it were by Enchantment,
were become quite another sort of creatures than they were formerly, when the
King retired thither after the Barricades, and where they received him with
wonderful acclamations.

Thus covered with glory, and now becoming much more haughty than his nature
seemed to allow, by reason of so many prosperous events, which appeared like
good Omens of the future, he entered on the twelfth of February into Paris,
where as if the Duke of Guise had been raised from the dead in his person,
there was a loose given to all public demonstrations of joy, with so much
transport and excess, that they proceeded so far as even to expose his Picture
Crowned, and to erect a Royal Throne for him; and if he had had ambition and
boldness enough to have accepted it, he had found perhaps enough to have
acknowledged him, that they might have held under him those Governments which
he could have given them, with the titles of Dutchies, and Counties in homage,
as Hugh Capet had given him the example. But whether it were, that he durst not
attempt it out of fear, or would not out of prudence, as foreseeing in it
insuperable difficulties, which by his endeavoring to have risen higher, had
thrown him down from the steep of the Precipice; certain it is, that by
refusing to accept that honor, which yet in the sequel he desired not any
other should possess, he saved the State, and besides his present intention, or
rather against it, preserved the Crown to the King of Navarre who was the
rightful presumptive Heir of it.

He satisfied himself then, with establishing his own authority in the first
place; and with rendering himself more powerful than the Council of the League,
composed of those famous forty, amongst which, were the most seditious
Mutineers of the whole party, who, whatsoever protestation they made to obey
him, had carried all matters in Council against him, and had not failed,
whenever it had pleased them, to have given the Law to him. To this effect he
weakened that Council by augmenting it to a greater number of the most
qualified of the party, on whom he knew he might safely rely, as being of his
own Election. For under pretense that it was necessary, that this Assembly,
which ought to be the General Council of the Union, should be enlarged, and be
authorized by the whole Party, he caused an Order to be passed, that all the
Princes might assist in it, whenever they pleased, and that all the Bishops,
the Presidents, the Procureurs, and the Advocates General of Parliaments,
fifteen Counselors whom he named, the Prevost of Merchants, the Sheriffs, the
Town Solicitor, and the Deputies of the three Orders of all the Provinces of
the League, should have places in it, and deliberative Votes.

Thus being always the strongest in that Assembly, by the great number of
voices, which were for him, he caused whatsoever he pleased to pass, in spig^t
of the Sixteen; and procured an authority to himself, near approaching to the
Sovereign Power of a King. For the first thing which was ordered in this new
Council, was that in sign of this absolute Dominion, which either they suffered
him to take, or they gave him, he should have from thenceforth, till the
holding of the Estates, the most extraordinary and unexampled quality of
Lieutenant General, not of the King, for the League acknowledged none at that
time, but of the Estate, and Crown of France. As if he who commands and governs
could represent a Kingdom, and hold, in quality of Lieutenant, the place of an
Estate, which is not that which governs, but what is, or ought to be governed.

Notwithstanding which, he took his Oath for that new fantastique dignity, on
the thirteenth of March in the Parliament, which verified the Letters Patents
of it, under the new Seals, made instead of those of the King, which were
broken by them. And, to begin the Exercise of his Office by an act of
Sovereignty, he caused immediately to be published his new Laws, contained in
one and twenty Articles, for the uniting under one form of Government, all the
Towns which were entered into the League; and those which in process of time
should enter, the number of which in a short space grew very great. For, there
is nothing more surprising, than to see with what rapidity that torrent of
Rebellion spreading from the Capital City into the Provinces, drew along with
it the greatest Towns, which under pretense of revenging the death of the
pretended Patrons of the Faith, and of preserving Religion, associated
themselves against God's Anointed, either to make themselves a new Master, or
to have none at all.

Almost all the Towns of Burgundy, of Champaign, of Picardy, and of the Isle of
France, the greater part of those of Normandy, Main, Bretagne, Anjou,
Auvergne, Dauphine, Provence, Berry, and the greatest Cities of the Kingdom
next to Paris, as Rouen, Lions, Toulouse, and Poitiers, had put themselves
under the protection of the Union, and were members of it, before the end of
March, and in every place were committed the like disorders as were at Paris.
But principally at Toulouse, where the furious Rabble having set upon the first
President Duranti, and Daphis the Advocate General, two men of great
understanding, singular Virtue, and uncommon fidelity to the King's Service,
Massacred them in the open Street. After which their faculty of Divines,
confirmed the decree of the Sorbonne, which was proposed in a general Assembly
at the Townhouse, by which they authorized the Revolt.

The greatest part of Provence, had also thrown it self with the same
impetuosity into the League, under the leading of the famous Hubert de Guard
Sieur de Vins, who by his courage and extraordinary Valor, accompanied with
his great prudence, and the wonderful talent he had, of gaining the affections
of the people, had acquired more reputation and power than any Gentleman not
supported by the Royal Authority had ever obtained in his own Country. He had
formerly saved the Life of Henry the Third at Rochelle, when that Prince who
was then but Duke of Anjou, approaching too near to a Retrenchment, a Soldier
who had singled him out from all the rest, had just taken aim at him, which the
Sieur de Vins perceiving, threw himself before him, in the Bullets way, and
received the Musket shot, which wanted little of costing him his Life. He
expected as he had reason, some great preferment from the Duke when he was
King, in recompense of so generous an action, but perceiving that all was
played into the Minions hands, without so much as taking the least notice of
his worth, the indignation of being slighted, caused him to enter into the Duke
of Guise's Interests, and to engage in the League, (of which he was Head in
Provence,) the Count of Carcas his Uncle, his Brother-in-Law the Count de
Sault, a great part of the Nobility, and the Parliament of Aix, as also to
expose the whole Province to the manifest danger of being lost, by calling in
the Duke of Savoy, who nevertheless was constrained at last, to retire with
shame into his own Dominions.

In the mean time, the King who from time to time received the unpleasant News
of the Rebellion of his Subjects, had been forced to send back the Deputies of
the Estates to their several Provinces, where the greatest part of them being
hot Leaguers, blew up the Fire to that height, that he was constrained at the
length to lay aside the ways of Clemency and Mildness, and to take up, (though
somewhat of the latest,) those of Rigor and Compulsion. He began by sending a
Herald to Paris, who bore an Injunction to the Duke of Aumale, the pretended
Governor, immediately to depart the Town; an Interdiction to the Parliament,
to the Exchequer, and the Court of Aids, with prohibition to all other
Officers, of any farther exercise of their employments; But he was remanded,
without an hearing, loaded with affronts, and threatened with an Halter, if he
presumed to return on such an Errant.

He declared the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale, the Citizens of Paris, Orleans,
Amiens, Abbeville, and the other Associated Towns, to be guilty of High
Treason, if within a time prefixed, they return not to their Duty. He
transferred the Parliament of Paris to Tours, and all the Courts of Judicature,
which were in the Cities of the League to other Towns, which continued
faithful to him. But they without being concerned at his angry Declarations,
revenged themselves in all places, on such as were of the Royal Party, by all
manner of ill usage. He did in the month of March, what he ought to have done
in December: He called together his Gendarmery, and Rendevouz'd what Forces he
could raise in the Neighborhood of Tours; to which place he had retired, as
not thinking himself secure in so open and weak a Town as Blois; but first he
secured his Prisoners, whom he caused to be carried from the Castle of Amboise,
and distributed them into several Prisons. But the Duke of Mayenne who
over-powr'd him in men, was already upon the point of coming out from Paris
with a strong Army, with a resolution of preventing his designs, and assaulting
him in Tours. And upon that consideration it was, that he was forced to resolve
upon the only way, which remained for his Shelter, from the last extremities
of Violence, and for the preservation of his Crown and Person. France at that
time was in a most deplorable condition, divided, and as it were broken into
three Parties, which laid it waste. That of the League the most powerful of
any, by the Rebellion of so many Towns: that of the King of Navarre, which had
greatly strengthened it self, dureing the first troubles; and that of the King,
which in a manner was reduced to his own Household, and some very few depending
Towns. It was impossible for him in this condition to carry on the War, which
he had undertaken against the Huguenots, and at the same time, to maintain
himself against the Army of the Leaguers. It remained then, that of necessity
he must close with one of those Parties, that by its assistance he might reduce
the other to Obedience, or at least that he might save himself from ruin,
which was inevitable, if he stood single and exposed to the violence of the
other two. Now the Leaguers would neither admit of Peace nor Truce with him,
having Sworn in the Oath, which was administered to them by the Duke of
Mayenne, that they would prosecute their Vengeance to the extremity, for the
death of the two Guises. It Is manifest by consequence, that he was
indispensably obliged, to unite himself with the King of Navarre, and to accept
the aid he offered him, with so much frankness and generosity.

After the death of the Guises, that Prince making his advantage of so
favorable an opportunity, while all things were in confusion amongst the
Catholics, had much advanced the affairs of his Party, by taking of Niort,
Saint Maxent, Maillezais, and some other Towns in Poitou, since when, upon his
quick recovery from a dangerous Sickness whereof he was like to die, he had
pushed his conquests as far as the Frontiers of Touraine, having made himself
Master of Loudun, Thouars, Montreiuil Bellay, Mirebeau, Lisle Bouchard,
Chastelleraud, Argenton, and of Blanc in Berry. At which time, observing the
wretched Estate to which the Kingdom was reduced, by the three Parties which
dismembered it, he published a Declaration on the fourth of March, addressed to
the three Estates of France, therein exhorting them to Peace, which was the
only remedy for so many distempers, as afflicted the miserable Nation.

Then, having clearly proved, that it was impossible for the King to succeed in
a Civil War, to be prosecuted as some advised him, at the same time against the
Huguenots and Leaguers, he offered him his Service, and all the Forces of his
Party, not for bringing the Leaguers and the Revolted Towns to punishment, but
for reducing them to the terms of desiring Peace, which he most humbly
petitioned him to grant them, and to pardon and pass by the injuries he had
received, after they had been subdued by the joint Forces of all good
Frenchmen, both of the one Religion and the other; marching under the conduct
of his Majesty against Rebels. After which, he protested in the sight of God,
and engaged his Faith and Honor, that forasmuch as that union of his most
faithful Servants, as well Catholics as Protestants was only intended, to
restore the Royal Authority, and Peace in France, he would never permit that
the Roman Catholic Faith, should receive the least prejudice in consideration
of it, but that it should always be preserved in such Towns as should be taken,
without making any alteration of Religion in them.

This Declaration made way for the Treaty, which was begun with great secrecy,
immediately after it, in order to the Union of the two Kings. There were some
in the Council who endeavored to oppose that Negotiation, as fearing that it
would much fortify the Party of the League, by contributing to the belief of
that report, which was already spread by the Leaguers amongst the people, that
the King had always maintained a private Correspondence with the Huguenots;
besides, that the Pope whose Friendship was necessary, would be scandalis'd at
such an Union. The King himself had a great repugnance to it, and doubtless
would much rather have compounded his differences with the Princes of the
League, if it had been possible, and thereby to have renewed his Edict of
Reunion, a thing not unknown to the King of Navarre, who easily perceived that
the Court would never apply to him, but for want of others.

In effect, the King in the beginning of March, had written to the Duke of
Lorrain, and had sent him very advantageous conditions for the Princes of his
House, with all manner of Security for them, in case he could prevail with
them, to receive the Peace and Treaty which he offered. But being refused on
that side, those of his Council, who were of opinion that the King of Navarre's
propositions should be accepted, enforced so far their strongest Argument,
which was pure Necessity, farther alleging the examples of so many Catholic
Kings and Princes, who like the great Emperor Theodosius made use of In^idels
and Heretics against their Enemies, that the King at last consented to set on
foot the Treaty.

It was concluded at Tours on the third of April, by the Sieur du
Plessis-Mornay, who capitulated on the King of Navarre's behalf, on these
conditions: That the said King, during the Truce which was made for one year,
should serve the King with all his Forces: That he should have a passage on the
Loyre, which at length was declared to be the Town of Saumur; after some
difficulties which were removed concerning the trusting it in his hands. That
he should therein have the free exercise of his Religion, and in some other
little Towns, which were left to him by way of caution, for his reimbursment of
his charges in the War.

This Negotiation of Du Plessis, could not be transacted with so much Secrecy,
but that it was vented by the Legate Morosini, who thereupon used his utmost
endeavors in three vigorous Remonstrances to hinder that blow, which he
believed would be fatal to Religion, according to the false notions which he
had of the King of Navarre. And the King having told him, that after having
tried all ways of accommodation with the Duke of Mayenne, which that Prince had
always haughtily rejected, necessity compelled him to make use of the only
remaining means to defend his Life; the Legate earnestly besought him to allow
him ten days more, that he might have opportunity of treating in person with
that Duke, whom he hoped he should be able to prevail with, to accept those
advantageous terms of Peace, which were presented him. Though the Treaty was
not only concluded, but also signed, as appears by the Memoires of Du Plessis
Mornay, yet the King to make it evident, that it was only through necessity,
that he entered into this Union with the Huguenots against the League, was
consenting that before the publication of it, there should be made a last
attempt on the inclinations of the Duke of Mayenne, to induce him to a
reconcilement. To this effect, he gave in writing to the Legate the same
Articles, which he had already proposed to the Duke of Lorrain, and which were
as advantageous to his Family, as he could reasonably desire.

For there was offered to the Duke of Mayenne, his Government of Burgundy, with
full power of placing such Governors in the Towns, as he himself should choose;
of disposing all vacant Offices, and levying on the Province forty thousand
Crowns yearly. To the young Duke of Guise his Nephew, the Government of
Champaigne, with two Cities at his choice, therein to keep what Garrisons he
pleased, twenty thousand Crowns of Pension, and thirty thousand Livres of
Income in Benifices for his Brother. To the Duke of Nemours the Government of
Lions, with a Pension of ten thousand Crowns; to the Duke of Aumale the
Government of Picardy, and two Cities in that Province; to the Duke of Elbeuf a
Government, and five and twenty thousand Livres of Pension; and what was of
greatest importance for that Family, to the Marquis du Pont, eldest Son of the
Duke of Lorrain, the Government of Toul, Metz and Verdun, with assurance, that
if his Majesty had no Issue Male, those three Bishoprics should remain to the
Duke of Lorrain. To all which, the King caused this addition to be made, that
to remove all difficulties, which might arise in the execution of this Treaty,
he would remit himself to the Arbitration of his Holiness, who might please to
join in the Umpirage with him the Senate of Venice, the great Duke of Thuscany,
the Duke of Ferrara, and the Duke of Lorrain himself, who had so great an
interest in those Articles.

With these conditions the Legate went from Tours on the tenth of April, toward
the Duke of Mayenne, who was already advanced with his Army, as far as
Chasteaudun. He was received with all manner of respect, and dureing the two
days conference he had with the Duke, employed the most powerful
considerations he could propose to win his consent to a Peace so advantageous
for all his House, and so necessary to Religion and the public welfare: or at
least to gain thus far upon him, that if any thing were yet wanting to his
entire satisfaction, he would remit his interests and those of his Party into
the hands of the Pope, as the King on his side was already disposed to refer
his own. But after all his endeavors, he could not work him to any
condescension. And whatever arguments he used, he always answered with great
respect as to the Pope and the person of the Legate, but with extreme contempt
for the King, whom he perpetually called that Wretch, that he and his would
ever be obedient to the Pope; but that he was very well assured, that his
Holiness would never lay his Commands upon him, to make any agreement to the
prejudice of Religion, with a man who had none at all, and who was united with
the Huguenots, against the Catholics. That he could not bear the mention of a
reconcilement with a perjured man, who had neither Faith nor Honor, and that
he could never trust his word, who had Murdered his Brothers so inhumanely,
and violated so per^idiously, not only the public Faith, but also the Oath
which he had taken on the Evangelists at the most holy Sacrament of the Altar.

After this, the Cardinal farther observing, (what he could not otherways have
believed,) that even more opprobrious terms than these were used of the King,
through all the Army, and in every City, which owned the League, where no man
durst presume to give him the name of King, wrote him word that he could do him
no Service with the Duke; and himself not daring to be near his person, while
the King of Navarre continued with him, went to Bourbonnois, where he waited
the Orders which he received from the Pope not long after, to return to Rome,
and there to give an account of his Legation. Thus, after all hope was utterly
lost of concluding any peace with the Leaguers, the Treaty with the King of
Navarre took place. He was put into possession of Saumur, the Government of
which he gave to the Sieur du Plessis-Mornay, who had so well succeeded in his
Negotiation: And it was from that very place that he published his Declaration,
concerning his intended passage over the Loyre, for the Service of his Majesty,
where he protests amongst other things, that being first Prince of the Blood,
whom his Birth obliged before all others to defend his King, he holds none for
Enemies, but such as are Rebels, forbidding most strictly all his Soldiers, to
commit any manner of offense against those Catholics who were faithful
Subjects to his Majesty, and particularly against the Clergy, whom he takes
into his protection.

The King also made his own at large, wherein he declares the reasons, that
obliged him to join with the King of Navarre, for the preservation of his
person and the Estate, without any prejudice which could thence ensue, to the
Catholic Religion, which he would always maintain in his Kingdom, even with
the hazard of his Life. But that which at length completed the Happiness of
this Union betwixt the two Kings, was their Enterview which was made in the
Park of Plessis, on the thirtieth day of April, amidst the acclamations of a
multitude of people there assembled, and with all the signs of an entire
confidence on both sides: Though the old Huguenot Captains who had not yet
forgot St. Bartholomew, used their best endeavors that their Master should not
have put himself in the King's Power, as he did with all frankness and
generosity.

He did yet more, for being gone back with his Guards, and the Gentlemen who
attended him to the Fauxbourgs of St. Simphorian beyond the Bridges; on the
next Morning, which was the first of May, he repa^s'd the River, followed only
by one Page, and returned to Tours, to be present at the King's Leve, who was
infinitely pleased with this generous procedure, and clearly saw by it, that he
had no occasion to suspect him, and that he had reason to hope all things from
a Prince, who reli'd so fully on his word, though he had broken it more than
once to him, by revoking the Edicts which he had made in favor of him, only
to content the League. In this manner they passed two days together, and held a
Council, where the King of Navarre caused a resolution to be taken, that for
the speedy ending of the War, they should assemble their whole Forces, with all
possible diligence, and March directly on to Paris, which was the Head of the
League, and on which the body of it depended. After which, leaving with the
King, about four or five thousand men, which he had in the Neighborhood of
Tours, he went from thence to Chinon, and into Loudunois, to bring up the
remainder of his Forces, who were as yet in doubt of his Union with the
Royalists, and by so doing, gave the Duke of Mayenne that opportunity which he
took of attacquing Tours.

That Prince had Marched out of Paris, in the beginning of April, with one half
of his Army, and after having taken in Melun, and some other little places,
which might cause an immediate hindrance to the supplies of that great City; he
went to join the rest of his Forces, which were Quartered in La Beauce; after
which, leaving on his left hand Beaugency and Blois, which it was believed he
would or ought to have attacqu'd, he advanced as far as Chasteaudun to execute
the design which he had on Vandome, and even upon Tours it self, by help of the
intelligence which those of the League had prepared for him in both those
places. Maille Benehard, who had sold Vandome, of which he was Governor, set
open the Gates of it to Rosne, the Marshal de Camp, who made Prisoners almost
all the Members of the great Council, which the King had removed thither. The
Duke of Mayenne arrived there immediately after, and having rejoined the Troops
of Rosne, went to fall upon the Quarters of Charles de Luxembourg, Count of
Brienne, who was lodged at Saint Ouin, and the Country thereabouts, within a
League of Amboise; he cut off six hundred of his Men, dispersed the rest and
took him Prisoner; afterward he went to post himself right over against
Saumur, thereby to hinder the passage of the remainder of the King of Navarre's
Forces.

But, when he had heard not long after, that the said King was removed from
Tours, he believed it would be a convenient time for him to execute his design
which he judged impossible to fail, by reason of the Correspondence which he
held in the Town: Whereupon taking his way back, he Marched with all possible
expedition, contrary to the slowness of his temper, and appeared in Battalia
all on the sudden, the seventh of May in the morning, on the Hills which
overlook the Fauxbourg of St. Simphorian. It wanted but little, that the King,
who was gone betimes that day to Marmoutier, had not been surprised by the
Scouts who were within an hundred paces of him. And it was not without great
pains and danger, that he got to his first Corpse de Guard, from whence he
returned into the Town, and there gave so good directions in all places, that
they who held Intelligence with the Enemy, durst attempt no disturbance: for
which reason the Duke, (who had spun out the time with faint Skirmishes till
four of the Clock in the Afternoon, still expecting that the Leaguers of the
Town would rise for him;) now seeing that there was not the least motion made,
gave on with his whole Army so vigorously at three several passages, that he
forced the Barricades which were made at those three Avenues, and Guarded with
twelve hundred men: this he performed in the space of half an hour, with the
loss of about an hundred of his own, and the slaughter of three or four hundred
of the King's Soldiers.

This was all that was effected by that attempt of the great Army, which was
set on foot by the League, which after this first success did nothing more, but
fell to committing all manner of Disorders, and horrible Outrages in the
Suburbs where they had no farther opposition. For when the Duke of Mayenne
found, that part of the King of Navarre's Forces were arrived in the Evening,
under the Conduct of the brave Chastillon, who was already retrenched in the
Island, over against the Fauxbourg, and that the rest would immediately be
there, with the King of Navarre who would not fail to give him more employment,
than his raw, and for the most part new raised Soldiers would well suffer, he
took occasion to Dislodge silently before day, the next Morning, after his
Troops had left their fame behind them in the Suburbs, by all manner of
Villainies which they there committed. From thence he went to gather up some
Regiments which were levying for him in Anjou and Maine; after which possessing
himself of Alanson, which surrendered without resistance for want of a
Garrison, he was forced to return hastily to Paris, where they were in a
wonderful consternation, for the loss of the Battle of Senlis, which I shall
next relate.

William de Montmorancy, Sieur de Thore, had so well negotiated while he was at
Chantilly, with the principal persons of that Town, which at the first had been
drawn along by the torrent of the League, that he had made himself Master of it
at the latter end of April, and was entered into it, with an hundred Gentlemen
of his Friends, and five hundred Foot which he had levied in the Valley of
Montmorancy. The Parisians astonished at this surprise, which took from them
their communication with Picardy, were absolutely bent on the retaking of that
place, as soon as was possible; and were so urgent with the Duke of Aumale, and
the Sieur de Maineville, Lieutenant to the Duke of Mayenne, that in three days
time they were before the Town, and besieged it with four of five thousand
Citizens of Paris, and three pieces of Cannon; to whom Balagny not long after
joined himself with three or four thousand men, some of them drawn out of the
Towns of the Low Countries, and the rest from those of Picardy, and brought
along with him a train of seven pieces of Artillery, which he had taken out of
Peronne and Amiens.

But while the Siege was thus forming, that Prudent and Valiant Captain
Monsieur de la Noue, who commanded the Troops of Sedan, the Truce being now
made with the Duke of Lorrain, had joined his Forces with those of the Duke of
Longueville at St. Quentin, with intention according to the King's Orders, to
meet and embody with the Swissers, whom Monsieur de Sancy had levied for his
Majesty's Service in the Cantons. There seemed to be offered them a fair
occasion of doing a piece of good Service to the King, by raising of that
Siege, before they put themselves upon their March. To this effect, they
advanced as far as Compeigne, where they had appointed a Rendevouz for the
Gentlemen Royallists of Picardy, who failed not of coming in at the time
prefixed. Insomuch that on the very day, which was the seventh of May, when the
Town was so battered by the Cannon, that it was laid quite open, and must of
necessity have Surrendered, if it had not been succored before Night, they
appeared at Noon in view of the place, to the number of a thousand or twelve
hundred Horse, and three thousand Foot all experienced Soldiers, and resolved
upon the point, either to force their passage into the Town, or to perish in
the attempt.

The Duke of Aumale deceived by his Spies, who assured him that the Enemy had
no Cannon, and knowing himself to be twice as strong, doubted not but he should
be able to defeat them with his Cavalry alone. Accordingly having drawn up with
much trouble his Parisian Infantry, brisk men to appearance and well armed, but
a little out of countenance, when they saw the Business in hand, was somewhat
more than bare Trayning, and that Life was at stake, he advanced so hastily
with his Horse, having Maineville on his right hand, and Balagny on his left,
that those two great Bodies of Horse and Foot, were made incapable of relieving
and serving each other in the Fight.

La Noiie, to whom for the sake of his experience, the young Duke of
Longueville had entrusted the care and conduct of the Army, having observed the
countenance of the Enemy, and finding the Parisians disordered and wavering,
was confident he could beat them with those few Troops, which he had then in
the Field, and who were imbattel'd in this order. The Duke of Longueville was
in the main Body, with his Squadron composed of a great number of brave
Gentlemen, having at the Head of them, the Lord Charles de Humieres, Marquis d'
Encre, and Governor of Compeigne, who had furnished the Army with Cannon and
Ammunition, which occasioned the gaining of the Battle. This was he who having
soon discovered the pernicious designs of the League, served the King so well
against it, that Henry the Fourth at his coming to the Crown, made him his
Lieutenant in Picardy, with an extraordinary privilege, that he should have the
full Authority of disposing all things in that Province.

His great Services, his extraordinary Deserts, his high Reputation, his
Performances on this great day, and many signal actions during the War, gained
him without any other recommendation his Commission for General of the
Artillery, which was signed not long before his Death; and he was yet in a way
of mounting higher, if his too great Courage had not exposed him to that fatal
Musket shot, which killed him at the taking of Han; though the Garrison of
Spaniards had small cause to boast of it, who were all sacrificed to the just
sorrow of the Army for the loss of so brave a Gentleman. They who came in to
the Duke of Longueville with him, were Louis Dongniez, Count de Chaulne his
Brother-in-Law, the Sieurs de Maulevrier, Lanoy, Longueval, Cany, Bonnivet,
Givry, Fretoy, Mesvillier, and La Tour.

This Squadron was slank'd on the right and left with two gross Battalions,
having each of them two Field pieces, which were not drawn out of Compeigne
till some time after the Army was Marched, on purpose to deceive the Spies, who
thereupon gave intelligence that they had none. He placed on his right Wing the
Cavalry of Sedan, at the Head of which he was resolved to Fight in Person: and
on his left, the Horsemen which were drawn out from those places, that held for
the King in Picardy. The Duke of Aumale who made such over haste to the
Victory, of which he made sure in his conceit, that he left his Cannon behind
him, was the first who founded the Charge, and Balagny with his Squadron of
Cambresians and Walloons, advanced eagerly to attacque the right Wing of the
Royallists, which was much inferior to his own in strength; but when he was
almost just upon them, the gross Battalion which covered the left side of that
Squadron, opening in a moment, he was surprisingly saluted with a Volley of
Cannon, which carried off at once whole rancks of his Squadron, and constrained
him to retire in great disorder.

Then the Duke of Aumale, who plainly saw that there was no other remedy for
this unexpected mischief, but speedily to win the Enemies Cannon, put himself
upon the gallop, followed by Maineville and Balagny, who had recovered his
disorder, and all three went at the Head of their men, to force that Infantry
of the Enemy. But they were scarce come up within an hundred paces of them,
when their other Battalion opening, a second Volley came thundering upon them,
and raking them in the Flank, did more execution than the former. A third which
immediately succeeded it, shook their whole Body, which having advanced a
little farther, the Musketeers which flanked their Horse, made their
discharge, so justly both against Man and Horse, that the Field was strewn
with dead Bodies; and in the mean time the whole Cavalry of the Royallists
charged upon them who were already wavering and half routed: and the Besieged
at the same time sallying out, fell upon the rere of the Parisian Infantry, who
had been abandoned by their Cavalry, so that now it was no longer to be called
a Battle, but a downright Slaughter, and a general defeat.

Never was any Victory more complete, with so little loss to the Conquerours:
the Field of Battle remained in their Possession, covered with above two
thousand Slain, without reckoning into the number, those who were killed by the
Peasants, or such as could not recover themselves out of the Marshes, which
are about the Abbey de la Victoire. The Camp of the Vanquished, the
Merchandises, and Commodities which had been brought thither from Paris, the
Cannon, the Ammunition, the Colors, the Baggage, and twelve hundred Prisoners
were the Conquerours reward: Who some few days after as they Marched toward
Burgundy, there to join the Swissers, saluted the Parisians from the Heights of
Montfaucon, with some Vollies of Cannon, and thereby gave them notice of their
defeat, with a truer account of it than had been given them by the Duke of
Aumale and Balagny, whereof the one saved himself in St. Denis, and the other
in Paris.

And as it often happens, that one misfortune comes on the Neck of another, to
those who are in the way of being beaten, this defeat was followed the very
next day after it, being the eighteenth of May, with the loss of three hundred
brave Gentlemen of Picardy, whom the Governor of Dourlens, Charles Tiercelin
de Saveuse, was bringing to the Duke of Mayenne; who being met in La Beauce
toward Bonneval, by the Count of Chastillon, with a greater strength, were
almost all of them Slain, after having fought like Lions without asking
Quarter, or so much as promising for safety of their Lives, that they would
never bear Arms against the King. Such violent Leaguers were these men, and
above all, Saveuse their Captain, who being carried off to Baugency, wounded in
all parts of his Body, where the King of Navarre a great lover of brave Men was
very desirous to have saved him, refused all kind of remedies, for the sullen
pleasure of Dying, having nothing in his mouth but the praises of the Duke of
Guise, and a thousand imprecations against his Murderers.

These fortunate events, accompanied by the great success which the Duke of
Montpensier had in Normandy against the Leaguers, occasioned the King of
Navarre who was advanced as far as Baugency, with part of his Forces, to return
to Tours, that he might advise the King no longer to delay the time in
fruitless Treaties, which were still counseled him by some, and were so
agreeable to his lazy and unactive genius; and to let him know, that it was now
high time to put in execution a more generous design, which was to attaque the
Enemy in their chiefest strength, by besieging Paris. He resolved on this at
last; but first he was desirous of getting Orleans into his power; which if he
could compass, he should thereby deprive Paris of the great supplies which
might be drawn from thence.

To effect this, having in the beginning of June passed his Army over the
Bridge of Baugency in La Sologne, he caused Gergeau to be assaulted: the
Governor of which place, who had the confidence to stay till the Cannon had
made a breach, which he was not able to defend, was taken, and hanged for an
example. Those of Gien, terrified by this just severity, made haste to
surrender before the Artillery had played; and the Inhabitants of La Charity
put themselves immediately into the King's hands of their own accord; so that
his Majesty, excepting only Nantz, was Master of all the passages on the
Loire, both above and below Orleans, which he invested on all parts of it.

The Sieur de la Chastre, who after the death of the Guises had promised
fidelity to the King, and not long afterward had declared a second time for
the League, in his Government of Berry, put himself into that Town, with all
the Forces he could make; and the Inhabitants, encouraged by his presence,
refused with great scorn those advantageous propositions which were made them
by the King, laughed at his threatenings, and took up a resolution of defending
themselves to the last extremity. Insomuch that it being concluded, it was but
loss of time to undertake that Siege, the first design of going directly on to
Paris was resumed. For which reason they repassed the Loire, and upon the March
without much trouble took in the Towns of Pluviers, Dourdan and Estampes; at
which last place the King received the unwelcome news of the Monitory which
Pope Sixtus had published against him; and this was the occasion of it.

Not long after the death of the Guises, the King, who clearly saw by the
Remonstrations which the Legate Morosini had made him, that the absolution which
he had received by virtue of his Breviat, would not be received at Rome; had
sent thither Claude d' Angennes Bishop of Man's to intercede for another,
notwithstanding all the discouraging Letters which had been written him by his
friends from thence, to dissuade him from it; or at least to delay a submission
of this nature, which might prove prejudicial to him. In farther prosecution of
this the Marquis de Pisany his Ambassador, and the Cardinal de Ioyeuse, acting
in joint commission with the Bishop by his order, had represented to Pope
Sixtus the most powerful reasons they could urge, to procure this favor from
him: to which the Pope who was grown inflexible on that point, had answered
them ruggedly according to his nature; that he was willing to take no
cognizance of the Duke of Guise's death, because he was the King's Subject; but
the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Archbishop of Lions whom he held Prisoners,
not being his Subjects, (since none but the Pope had a Sovereign Power over
Cardinals and Bishops,) he would never grant him absolution before he had
restored them to their liberty, or at least put them into the hands of his
Legate, that they might be sent to Rome, where himself would execute justice on
them, in case he found them guilty.

On the other side, the Commander of Diu, the Sieur Coquelaire Counselor in
Parliament, Nicholas de Piles Abbot of Orbais, and the Sieur Frison Dean of the
Church of Rheims, who were Deputies for the League at Rome, to hinder the Pope
from giving this Absolution, not only opposed it with all their force, but
also used their best endeavors to persuade him, that he would publish the
Excommunication, which he himself had said was incurred by the King for the
murder of the Cardinal of Guise; and amongst other arguments which they
alleged, to carry him to this extreme severity against a most Christian King,
they failed not to urge the Authority of the Decrees of the Sorbonne, and
principally that of the fifth of April. In that Decree, the Faculty declare
that Henry de Valois, ought not to be prayed for in any Ecclesiastique Prayer;
much less at the Canon of the Mass, in regard of the Excommunication, which he
had incurred; and that these words Pro Rege nostro, ought to be taken out of
the Canon, lest it should be believed that they prayed for him; even though the
Priest by directing his intention otherwise should call down the effect of
those Prayers on the present Governors, or on him to whom God Almighty had
reserved the kingdom. The same Decree wills, that instead of them, there should
be said at Mass three Prayers which are not in the Canon, Pro Christianis
Principibus nostris, which were Printed and remain at this day to be seen.
Lastly, it adds, that all such, who will not conform to this Decree, shall be
deprived of the Prayers and other rights of the Faculty, from which they shall
be driven out, like Excommunicated Persons: and this was approved by the
general consent of all the Doctors.

It Is most certain that these Decrees, together with what was continually
buzzed in the Pope's ears, that the King's party was absolutely ruined,
contributed not a little to the resolution which he took of prosecuting the
King by the ways of rigor, and without fear. But that which put the last hand
to his determination, was the Manifesto of the two Kings, who were now in
conjunction against the League. For being a man of an haughty temper, he was
not able to endure that the King should be united, with a person whom he had
excommunicated as a relapsed Heretic, by a thundering Bull, which he had
caused to be inserted in the Bullary, reprinted by him, for that only purpose:
he easily believed whatever reports were raised by the Leaguers to the
disadvantage of the King's party or his cause, and accordingly set up in Rome
his Monitory against him.

In which he commands him to set at full liberty the Cardinal of Bourbon, and
the Archbishop of Lions, within ten days after the publication of his
Monitory, at the Gates of two or three of six Cathedral Churches which are
named, and which are those of Poitiers, Orleans, Chartres, Meaux, Again, and
Man's, and to give him assurance of it within thirty days by an Authentic Act.
In default of which he pronounces from that present time, and for the future,
that he and all his Accomplices in the murder of the Cardinal of Guise, and
the imprisonment of the other Prelates, have damnably incurred the greater
Excommunication, and the other Ecclesiastical censures, denounced by the Bull,
In Coena Domini, from which they can never be absolved, except only in the
article of death, by giving security that they will obey the Mandats of the
Church. Farthermore, he cites them to make their appearance within two months,
before his Tribunal, the King himself in person, or by his Proctor, and the
rest personally, to give in their reasons why they believe they have not
incurred the censures, and why the King's Subjects are not absolved from their
Oath of Allegiance; and in fine invalidates all Privileges to the contrary
which the King himself, or his Predecessors have formerly obtained from the
Holy See.

This Monitory was posted up at Rome, on the twenty fourth of May; and the
Leaguers Printed it at Paris, and published it with all the formalities
accustomed, at Paris, Chartres, and Meaux on the twenty third of June; and I
have seen the Acts of it, which were Printed immediately after at Paris, with
the Monitory, by Nicholas Nivelle, and Rolin Thierry Stationers and Printers
for the Holy Union, with the Privilege of the Body of the Council General of
the same Holy Union, Signed by Senault, their Secretary.

It was then at Estampes, that the King received this information, that he was
prosecuted in this manner, both at Rome and in France by the Arms of the
Church, at the same time when the Rebels assaulted him with theirs, to pull him
from the Throne. It was told him indeed, that there were contained in that
Monitory, many heads which were nullities in their own nature, and which
consequently made the whole invalid, even though it were against a private
person. But when notwithstanding all these reasons, he still answered that it
gave him exceeding trouble; the King of Navarre, who desired nothing more than
speedily to prosecute the design of besieging Paris, told him pleasantly as
well as truly, that he had found out a sure expedient for him; And, Sir, said
he, with his accustomed quickness, it is only this, that we overcome; and the
sooner the better; for if we succeed, you may assure your self of your
Absolution; but in case we are beaten, we shall be still Excommunicated, over
and over, and damned with three pil'd curses on our heads.

This saying was much of a piece with what the Bishop of Man's, had written to
the King from Rome; that if he were desirous of the Absolution, which was
refused him in that Court, he had no more to do but to make himself the
strongest in his own Kingdom.

Thus the King thinking it his best course to dissemble his knowledge of the
Monitory, never owned that he had seen or heard of it; but marched still
forward, to pass the Seine at the Bridge of Poissy, which he forced; after
which having taken Pontoise, which was surrendered on the 25th of July, after a
fortnights siege, having been vigorously defended by the Sieur d' Alincour, who
was there grievously wounded, and the Sieur de Hautefort, who lost his life; he
went to Constans, and there received the Army of the Swisses, which was
conducted to him by Nicholas de Harlay, Sieur de Sancy; who by performing so
great and seasonable a service to the King his Master, has deserved the praise
of all posterity.

At the beginning of this War, there being a Council held, wherein were
proposed the most speedy and efficacious means that could be found to carry it
on, the King being then reduced to a very low condition; Sancy, who had been
formerly his Ambassador in Swisserland, maintained that there was no better
expedient, than to treat with the Cantons, who to defend themselves from the
Arms of Savoy, which threatened Geneva, and designed to shut it up on the side
of France, would willingly permit a great Levy of their Subjects to be made in
favor of the King, who might hereafter be in a condition to succor them, in
case they should be driven to extremity. But, because the Exchequer was wholly
drained, and No Money no Swisse was the common Proverb, his proposition was
turned into ridicule, and he was asked if he knew the man who would undertake
to raise an Army, without any other ingredient than Pen and Paper? Then Sancy,
who though he was of the long Robe, had a Soldiers heart, (for at that time,
he was only a Master of Requests) Since, said he, not one of all those who
have been enriched by the King's bounty, will make offer of himself to serve
him, I declare that I will be the man. And thereupon accepted a very ample
Commission which was given him by the King, but without a penny to bear his
charges, to treat with the Swisses and Germans for the raising of an Army.

To go through with his business, he Mortgaged all he had, and took up what he
coud procure upon his Credit; and in sequel, acted with so much fortune and
such good management with the Magistrates of Bern, of Basile, of Soleure, and
of Geneva, that after having taken from the Duke of Savoy the Baily-wicks of
Gex and Thonon, the Fort of Ripaille, and some other places, thereby to employ
him for some time, and to hinder him from molesting of his neighbors, he put
himself at the head of the Royal Army, composed of ten or twelve thousand Foot,
Swisses, Grisons, and Genevians, with near two thousand Reyters, and twelve
pieces of Cannon. With these Forces he traversed all the Country from Geneva
by Swisserland, as far as the County of Montbelliard, from whence crossing the
French County, and passing the Saone toward Ioinville, he came to Langres
which held for the King, and thence to Chastillon on the Seine, to join the
Duke of Longueville and La Noue. From whence marching through Champaigne, all
three in company, with twenty thousand men, they passed the Seine at Poissy,
and in conclusion arrived happily at the King's Army. His Majesty received
Sancy with tears in his eyes, and protested in presence of all the Officers of
his Army, that he wept for joy, and grief together, that he had not
wherewithal at present to reward the greatest service, which a Subject could
perform to his King; and that what he had done for him in making him Colonel of
the Swisses, was nothing in comparison of what he intended him, being resolved
that one day he would make him so great, that there should not be a man in his
Kingdom, who might not have occasion to envy him.

But fortune, which is pleased with persecuting of virtue, disposed quite
otherwise of the matter, by that deplorable accident, which happened three days
after, and by the misery which his own noble heartedness had drawn upon him.
For instead of those large recompenses which he might reasonably expect, after
having done so worthy an action, he was reduced so low, that he was constrained
at last to sell all he had, therewith to pay the debts which he had contracted
by Levying at his own charges that gallant Army, which put the King in a
condition of conquering his Rebels, and by consequence of triumphing over the
League. In effect, after the conjunction of the two Armies, in the general
review of all his Troops, he saw himself at the head of more than forty five
thousand Men, experienced Soldiers, with which, after having possessed himself
on the thirtieth of July, of the Bridge of St. Clou, (from whence he drove the
Leaguers with his Cannon,) he was resolved, within two days, to attaque the
Fauxbourgs of Paris, on both sides of the River.

There is all the appearance of probability, that he had carried them, at the
first onset, and by consequence the Town it self, where they were already in
extreme consternation, all the passages for provisions, being blocked up; and
the Duke of Mayenne, not having about him above five or six thousand Soldiers
at the most; who were not the third part of the number which was necessary for
the defense of the Retrenchments of so great a compass, as those which he had
made for all the Fauxbourgs; considering besides that the King had within the
Town so great a number of good Subjects, who having taken courage at his
approach, had drawn over a great party of the honest Citizens, receiving an
assurance that the punishment would only fall on the Principal of the
Leaguers, in case the King entering the Town as a Conqueror, should think fit
to remember the old business of the Barricades. Insomuch that the Duke of
Mayenne had occasion to fear, that at the same time when the Fauxbourgs were
attaqu'd there would be a sudden rising for the King, within the Town, and that
those who had thus risen, would make themselves Masters of one of the Gates,
which they would open to him, and afterward act in conjunction with his Army.

To this purpose it is reported, that the Duke who, notwithstanding all his
temper and his slowness, was very brave, being sensible of his desperate
condition, though in outward show he seemed confident of good success, still
plying the people from the Pulpits with a thousand Lies for their
encouragement; had resolved with a chosen Troup of his bravest men, who were
willing to follow his fortune, to throw himself into the midst of the Royal
Army, with his Sword in his hand, either to overcome, against all appearance of
probability, by a generous despair, (which is sometimes prosper'd by the chance
of Arms,) or to die honorably in using the only means which were now left
him, to revenge the death of his two Brothers.

In this flourishing condition the King's affairs then stood, and to this low
ebb was the League reduced, when fortune which plays with the lives of men, of
which she sometimes makes a ridiculous Comedy, and at other times a bloody
Tragedy, all on the sudden changed the Scene, as if the action had been upon a
Theater, by the most Sacrilegious blow which was ever given, I say not by a Man
but by a Devil incarnate. It Is not necessary that I should here relate every
particular circumstance of so execrable a deed, which is already known to all
the world: It Is sufficient that in performance of my duty, as an Historian, I
only say, That a young Iacobin, called Jacques Clement, a man of mean capacity,
Superstitious, and Fanatically devout, being persuaded by the furious Sermons
of the Preachers, and by a certain Vision which he thought he had, that he
should be a Martyr if he lost his life, for having killed Henry de Valois, was
so far intoxicated with this damnable opinion, that he scrupled not to say
openly, that the people needed not to give themselves so much trouble; and that
he knew well enough how to deliver Paris, in due time. And when it was known
that the King was at St. Clou, where he had taken up his quarters, and was
lodged at the House of Monsieur Jerome de Gondy, he went out of Paris, the next
morning, which was the last of July, with a Letter of Credence addressed to the
King, from the first President de Harlay, who was at that time a Prisoner in
the Bastill^; it is uncertain whether that Letter in reality was written by that
illustrious person, deluded by the Iacobin, whom he thought a fitting Messenger
to convey such intelligence, as he had to send, or whether it were
counterfeited, as an assured means of gaining him access, and opportunity to
put in practice his damnable resolution.

For being introduced the day following, about seven or eight a clock in the
morning into the King's Chamber, while that good Prince, who always received
men in Orders with great kindness, was reading the Letter attentively, and
bowing his body to listen so some secret message which he believed was brought
him by the Friar, (as was imported by his Credentials,) the Parricide who was
kneeling before him, pulling out a knife from his sleeve, stabbed him with it
into the belly, and left it in the wound; from whence the King drawing it, and
at the same time rising from his Chair, and crying out, Thrust it very deep
into the Fryar's forehead. There were at that time in the room only
Bellegarde, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and La Guesle the Attorney
General, who having the day before interrogated the Villain without finding any
thing in his discourse, that might administer the least cause of suspicion, had
brought him to the King, by his own command. But many of the forty five entering
suddenly upon the King's outcry, fell inconsiderately upon him in the first
transport of their fury, and in a moment stuck him in with many thrusts without
giving any attention to La Guesle, who after he had struck him with the handle
of his Sword, cried out as loud as he could possibly, that they should not kill
him: The wretch immediately expiring, they threw his Corpse all bloody out of
the Window, which the grand Prevost of the King's house, caused immediately to
be tied to four Horses, and dragged about till it was torn in pieces.

There are some who, not being able to believe that one in Orders could be
capable of so impious an action, have doubted that this Monster of a man was
either some Leaguer, or some True Protestant disguised into a Friar; and a
Modern Author to save the honor of the Iacobins, has endeavored of late to
renew and fortify this doubt, in the best manner he was able: But besides that
the Parricide was known by some who were of his acquaintance; it is most certain
that the same Jacques Clement, who was examined the evening before by La Guesle,
which is agreed on all sides, was introduced by himself, the next morning into
the King's Chamber; for it can never be thought, that the Attorney General, a
man of good understanding, should be so far mistaken, as to take another man
for him whom he had interrogated with so much circumspection. And yet farther,
since the King, in the Letters which he sent to the Governors of Provinces and
to his Allies, immediately after he was wounded, says positively, that when he
was stabbed by the Iacobin, there were only in his Chamber Bellegarde and La
Guesle, whom he had commanded to stand at a distance, that he might hear what
the Traitor had to say to him in private, it follows necessarily, that either
the one or the other of these two committed this detestable action, if it were
not Jacques Clement: and the former of these two suppositions, is what can never
enter into the imagination of any reasonable man.

For which reason, without losing my time either to destroy or leave doubtful
a truth so known, and so generally agreed on by all the Writers of those times,
and confirmed besides by so many authentic Witnesses; I believe it safer to
rest satisfied with the universal opinion of Mankind, without the least daubing
of the matter in regard of his profession, which can reflect no manner of
dishonor on the Iacobins. For there is no dispute but all crimes are personal;
and there is no man of good sense, who can think it reasonable to upbraid a
whole Order, with the guilt of one particular person in it; and principally
that of Saint Dominic, which is always stored with excellent men, renowned for
their Virtue, their Learning, and their Pious conversation.

Now, though the wound was great, and had pierced very deep, yet the
Surgeons at the first dressing were of opinion that the Knife had slipped
betwixt the Bowels without entering into them, and that therefore the King was
not hurt to death: of this they all assured him, and thereupon he sent advice
to the Princes his Allies, that in ten days he should be able to get on
horseback. But whether it were that the wound was not searched to the bottom,
or that the knife was empoyson'd, it was known, not long after, that the hurt
was mortal.

Never Prince was less surprised than he, at the certainty of death: nor
received it more calmly, more Christianly, or more devoutly. He confessed
himself three several times to the Sieur de Boulogne, the Chaplain of his
Closet, and being advertised by him that there was a Monitory out against him,
and exhorted to satisfy the Church in what was demanded of him, before he
could have absolution given him, I am, answered he, without the least
hesitation, the Eldest Son of the Roman Catholic Church, and will die such. I
promise in the presence of God, and before you all, that I have no other
desire, than to content his Holiness in all he can require from me. Upon which
the Confessor being fully satisfied gave him Absolution. All the remainder of
the day, he passed in his Devotions, and in Contemplation of Holy things; till
the King of Navarre being arrived from his Quarters at Meudon, it being now
well onward in the night, and throwing himself on his knees before him, with
his eyes full of tears, and without being able to pronounce one word, he raised
himself up a little, and leaning gently on his head, declared him his lawful
Successor, commanding all the Nobility, who filled the Chamber, to acknowledge
and obey him as their King, at the same time telling him, that if he would
Reign peaceably, it was necessary for him to return into the Church, and to
profess the Religion of all the most Christian Kings his Predecessors.

When he felt the approaches of death, about two of the Clock in the Morning,
he confessed himself once more, after which he called for the holy Sacrament;
which Viaticum he received with incredible devotion. After which he continued
in all the most fervent actions of Faith, Hope, and Charity, relying wholly on
the infinite merits of the Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, pardoning all
his Enemies from the bottom of his heart, and particularly those who had
procured his death; and thereupon he desired for the third time to receive
Absolution, beseeching God to forgive him all his Sins, even as he forgave all
the injuries which had been done him. After this he began to say the Miserere,
which he was not able to finish, having lost his Speech, at these words, And
restore to me the joy of thy Salvation; and having twice signed himself with
the sign of the Cross, he quietly gave up his breath, about four of the clock
in the morning, on the second day of August, and in the thirty ninth year of
his Age.

Thus died Henry the third King of France and Poland, making it appear at his
death, that during his Life he had in his Soul a true foundation of Piety, and
that those extraordinary and odd actions, which he did from time to time,
though they were not altogether regular, nor becoming his Quality, yet
proceeded not from that unworthy principle of Hypocrisy, with which the
Leaguers have so ignominiously branded him: As to the rest, he was a Prince who
being endu'd with all the Noble Qualities, which I have described in his
Character in the beginning of this History, had been one of the most excellent
Kings who ever Reigned, if he could have shown them to the World, after his
assumption to the Crown, with the same luster in which they appeared before it.

The Huguenots and Leaguers, who agreed in nothing but their common hatred to
this Prince, rejoiced equally at his Death, and spoke of it as a kind of
Miracle, and as a stroke proceeding from the hand of God. The Protestants have
written that he was wounded, and died afterward in the same Chamber, where he
had procured the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, to be resolved. Notwithstanding
which it is most certain, that the House wherein the King was hurt to Death,
was not Built by the Sieur Jerome de Gondy, till the year 1577, which was five
years after the forefaid Massacre. For which reason that imposture being
manifest, the Parliament upon the complaint, which the Attorney General made
concerning it, ordained that this passage should be rac'd out from the addition
which was made by Monliard; to the Inventaire of the History of France. But the
Zealots of Geneva have not been wanting, to restore it entirely as it was
before, in the Impression which they made of that Book.

As for the Leaguers they proclaimed their Joy so loudly, and in so scandalous
a manner, that their Books cannot be read without an extreme abhorrence to the
Writers. They published in their Narratives Printed at Paris and at Lions, that
an Angel had declared to Jacques Clement, that a Crown of Martyrdom was prepared
for him, when he had delivered France from Henry de Valois; and that having
communicated his Vision to a knowing man in Orders, he had approved it;
assuring him that by giving this Stroke, he should make himself as well
pleasing to God, as Judith was by killing Holophernes. And because his Prior
who was called Father Edm. Bourgoing, was accused to be the man, amongst all
the Preachers of the League, who was the most transported in the praises of
this abominable Parricide, his Subject, Apostrophising to him in the Pulpit,
and calling him the blessed Child of his Patriarch, and the Holy Martyr of
Jesus Christ, and also comparing him to Judith; It was not doubted but that he
was the person, by whom this young man who was under his charge, had been
advised and was afterward confirmed, in this his execrable resolution.

For which reason, being taken with Arms in his hand three Months after, at the
assault of the Fauxbourgs of Paris, his process was made, and though he
obstinately denied it to his Death, (which he suffered with a wonderful
resolution;) yet since he could not convince the Witnesses of falsehood who
Swore against him, he was judged according to the forms of Justice, as he
himself acknowledged, and drawn in pieces by four Horses, according to the
decree of the Parliament sitting at Tours.

Howsoever it were, it is certain, that the greatest part of those outrageous
Preachers of the League, said altogether as much as what was alleged against
the Prior: for Monsieur Anthoine Loysel has left it Written in his Journal,
that on the very same day whereon the King was Wounded, and before the news of
it was come to Paris, he heard at St. Merry the Sermon of Doctor Boucher, who
said by way of consolation to his Auditors, that as on that day, (namely the
first of August when the Feast of St. Peter in Prison is celebrated,) God had
delivered that Apostle from the hands of Herod, so they ought to hope, he had
the like mercy in store for them. And immediately made no scruple to maintain
this damnable proposition to them, that it was an action of great merit to kill
an Heretic King, or a favourer of Heretics.

The rest of the same fraternity of Preachers, joining in the Consort, on the
same day, held forth in the Pulpits with more violence than ever, against Henry
de Valois, and gave the people (says the same undeniable Witness,) a hope
almost in the nature of a certainty, that God would speedily deliver them,
which gave just occasion for many to believe, that the devilish design of that
Assasinate had been communicated to them. And when it was known that the Blow
was given, it was ordered that public Prayers should be made in all the
Churches of the City, together with a solemn action of thanksgiving to Almighty
God. For a whole Week together they made Processions from all the Parishes, to
the Church of the Iacobins, and exhorted the people to distribute their Alms
liberally to the Religious of that Cloister, for the sake of Friar Jacques
Clement; as also to extend their Charity to his poor Relations.

To conclude, Doctor Roze, Bishop of Senlis an old man, and most outrageous
Leaguer Preached there, according to the direction of the Council of Sixteen,
which was sent in Tickets to all the Preachers in the City, on Sunday the sixth
of August, wherein they were appointed to insist particularly on three Heads,
which I will here set down as they are expressed in the Tickets themselves;
that it may be notorious with what an Egyptian blindness, that infamous Cabal
of the League was then struck. Take them in their own Words. 1. You are to
justify the action of the Iacobin, because it is a parallel to that of Judith,
so much magnified in the Holy Scriptures. For he who hears not the Church,
ought to be accounted as an Heathen or an Holofernes. 2. Cry out against those,
who say that the King of Navarre is to be received, in case he goes to Mass:
Because he can be but an Usurper of the Kingdom, being Excommunicated, and also
standing excluded from that of Navarre. 3. Exhort the Magistracy, to publish
against all those who shall maintain the King of Navarre, that they are
attainted of the crime of Heresy, and as such to proceed against them.

But after all these doings, this brutal joy of the Leaguers for the Death of
Henry the Third, was immediately after turned into sadness, and at the last
into despair, by the wise management, and incomparable valor of his Successor
Henry de Bourbon, to whom God had preordain'd the Glory of restoring the
happiness of France, by the utter destruction of the Leag^e, which had laid it
desolate. The relation of which, is the Business of the fourth and last part of
my present History.

THE HISTORY OF THE LEAGUE.
LIB. IV.
THough Henry King of Navarre, Ann. 1589.
whom the deceased King had at his Death declared his Lawful Successor,
immediately took upon himself, the Sovereign Title of King of France, yet was
he not acknowledged for such, at the same time by the whole Army. The Hugonots,
whom he had brought to the Assistance of his Predecessor, were the first to
render him Homage, as no ways doubting, but that the World was now their own,
and that Calvinism should be the predominant Religion in France, under a
Protestant King. But this very Consideration, gave great trouble and anxiety of
Mind to that prudent Prince; who plainly saw, that the Catholics foreseeing
this Misfortune, of which they were extremely apprehensive, might possibly
reunite themselves against him; and that the Huguenots, who were without
Comparison the weaker Party, could never be able to support him on the Throne.

In effect, there was, during all that day, and the whole night following, a
great Contestation of Opinions, amongst the Catholic Lords of the Army, in
relation to this Affair. Many of them, who considered more their private
Interest, than the public Good, were de^irous to make advantage of a
Juncture, so favorable for the establishment of their Fortunes, and to sell
their Obedience at the highest Rate they could, by raising their Governments
into Principalities, which had been to cantonize the Monarchy. There were great
numbers of them, led by different Motives, some by a true Zeal for Religion,
others by the Aversion which they had for this new King, which they disguised
with a specious pretense of Zeal, who would absolutely have it, that he should
instantly declare himself a Catholic; which could not possibly be done,
either with the Kings Honor, or with Provision of security to the Catholics;
because too much of Constraint was evident in such an Action. Some there were
also, who maintained, that since his Birth, and the Fundamental Law of the
Land, had brought him to the Throne* of which his Heroic Virtues had rendered
him most worthy, it was their Duty to acknowledge him, and to obey him
cheerfully, without imposing on him the least Conditions. But this was it,
which the greatest part of them thought too dangerous to Religion, which they
were unwilling to hazard by such a Complement.

In conclusion, after this important Affair had been thoroughly examined in the
Kings Council, and in the general Assembly of the Catholic Princes and Lords,
which was held in the Lodgings of Francis de Luxembourg, Duke de Piney, they
came to an Agreement the next Morning, by holding a just Temperament betwixt
the two Extremes. For, without insisting on their private Interests, that they
might act frankly, and like Gentlemen, it was determined that the King should
be acknowledged; but upon condition, that he should cause himself to be
instructed within six months time, by the most able Prelates of the Kingdom;
that he should restore the Exercise of the Catholic Religion, in all places
from whence it had been banished, and remit the Ecclesiastiques into the full
and entire Possession of all their Goods; that he should bestow no Governments
on Hugonots; and that this Assembly might have leave to depute some persons to
the Pope, to render him an account of their Proceedings.

This Accommodation was signed by all the Lords, excepting only the Duke of
Espernon, and the Sieur de Vitry; who absolutely refused their Consent to it.
Vitry went immediately into Paris, and there put himself into the Service of
the League; which he believed at that time, to be the cause of Religion. As for
the Duke of Espernon, he had no inclination to go over to the League, which had
so often solicited his Banishment from Court. But whether it were, that being
no longer supported since his Masters Death, he feared the Hatred and
Resentment of the greatest Persons about the King, and even of the King
himself, whom he had very much offended during the time of his Favor, in which
it was his only business to enrich himself; or were it that he was afraid he
should be required to lend some part of that great Wealth, which he had scraped
together; he, very unseasonably, and more unhandsomly, began to raise Scruples,
and seemed to be troubled with Pangs of Conscience, which never had been
thought any great grievance to him formerly; so that he took his leave of the
King, and retired to his Government, with 2 or 3000 Foot, and 500 Horse, which
he had brought to the Service of his late Master.

This pernicious Example was followed by many others, who under pretense of
ordering their Domestic Affairs, asked leave to be gone (which the King dared
not to refuse them) or suffered themselves to be seduced by the Proffers and
Solicitations of the League; so that the King, not being in a condition any
longer to besiege Paris, was forced to divide his remaining Troops,
comprehending in that number, those which Sancy still preserved for his Use and
Service. Of the whole, he formed three little Bodies; one for Picardy, under
the Command of the Duke of Longuevill^, another for Champaigne, under the
Marshal d' Aumont; and himself led the third into Normandy, where he was to
receive Supplies from England; and where, with that small Remainder of his
Forces, he gave the first Shock to the Army of the League, which at that time,
was become more powerful, than ever it had been formerly, or than ever it was
afterward.

In effect, those, who after the Barricades had their eyes so far opened, as to
discover, that the League in which they were engaged, was no other than a
manifest Rebellion against their King, seeing him now dead, believed there was
no other Interest remaining on their side, but that of Religion, and therefore
reunited themselves with the rest, to keep out a Heretic Prince from the
Possession of the Crown. And truly this pretense became at that time so very
plausible, that an infinite number of Catholics, of all Ranks and Qualities,
dazzled with so specious an appearance, made no doubt, but that it was better
for them to perish, than to endure that he whom they believed obstinate in his
Heresy, should ascend the Throne of St. Lewis; and were desirous that some
other King might be elected. Nay farther, there were some of them, who took
this occasion, once more, to press the Duke of Mayenne, that he would assume
that Regal Office, which it would be easy for him to maintain, with all the
Forces of the united Catholics, of which he already was the Head; but that
Prince, who was a prudent man, fearing the dangerous consequences of so bold an
Undertaking, liked better at the first, to retain for himself all the
Essentials of Kingship, and to leave the Title of it to the old Cardinal of
Bourbon, who was a Prisoner, and whom he declared King, under the Name of
Charles the Tenth, by the Council of the Union.

At this time it was, that there were scattered through all the Kingdom, a vast
number of scandalous Pamphlets, and other Writings, in which the Authors of
them pretended to prove, that Henry of Bourbon, stood lawfully excluded from
the Crown; those who were the most eminent of them, were the two Advocates
general for the League, in the Parliament of Paris; Lewis d'Orl^ans, and
Anthony Hotman. The first, was Author of that very seditious Libel, called The
English Catholic. And the second, wrote a Treatise, called The Right of the
Uncle against the Nephew, in the Succession of the Crown. But there happened a
pleasant Accident, concerning this: Francis Hotman a Civilian, and Brother to
the Advocate, seeing this Book, which passed from hand to hand in Germany,
where he then was, maintained with solid Arguments and great Learning; The
Right of the Nephew against the Uncle; and made manifest in an excellent Book,
which he published on this Subject, the Weakness and false Reasoning of his
Adversaries Treatise, without knowing that it was written by his Brother, who
had not put his Name to it.

The League having a King, to whom the Crown of right belonged, after Henry the
Fourth his Nephew, in case he had survived him, by this Pretense increased in
Power* because the King of Spain and the Duke of Lorrain and Savoy, who, during
the Life of the late King their Ally, durst not declare openly against him, for
his Rebellious Subjects; now, after his Death, acknowledging this Charles the
Tenth for King, made no difficulty to send Supplies to the Duke of Mayenne,
insomuch that he, after having published through all France, a Declaration made
in August, by which he exhorts all French Catholics to reunite themselves with
those, who would not suffer an Heretic to be King, had raised at the
beginning of September, an Army of 25000 Foot and 8000 Horse.

With these Forces he passed the Seine at Vernon, marching directly toward the
King, who after he had been received into Pont del' Arch, and Diepe, which
Captain Rol^t, and the Commander de Chates, had surrendered to him; made a show
of besieging Rouen, not having about him above 7 or 8000 Men. This so potent an
Army of the Leaguers, composed of French and G^rmans, Lorrainers and Walloons,
which he had not imagined could have been so soon assembled, and which was now
coming on to overwhelm him; constrained him to retire speedily toward Diepe,
where he was in danger to have been encompassed round without any possibility
of Escape, but only by Sea into England, if the Duke of Mayenne had taken up
the resolution, as he ought to have done, from the first moment when he took
the Field, to pursue him eagerly and without the least delay. But while he
proceeding with his natural slowness, which was his way of being wise, trifled
out his time in long deliberations, when he should have come to Action, he gave
leisure to the King to fortify his Camp at Arques, a League and half from
Diepe; enclosing with strong retrenchments the Castle, and the Bourg situated
on the Brow of an Hill, which overlooks the little River of Bethune, the Mouth
of which forms the Haven that belongs to Diepe.

He had scarcely finished this great work, wherein all his Army was employed,
after the Example of their King, during three days with incredible diligence;
when the Duke of Mayenne, who had squandred away his time, yet once again, in
retaking those little Places round about, of which the King had lately
possessed himself, drew near to Arques, with purpose to dislodge him. But when
he had observed that he was too strong on that side to be forced, he turned on
the Right Hand, passing the Bethune somewhat higher, and went to post himself
on the other Hill, which is over against Arques, with the River betwixt both
Parties; from whence he might more easily attacque the Bourg below, and possess
himself of Polet, the Fauxbourg of Diepe, on the same side.

But the foresight of the King had provided for all Events in every place; for
he had carried on his Retrenchments as far as an Hospital for sick People,
called the Maladery, near the River, and placed Chatillon, Colonel of the Foot,
with 900 Men in Polet, which also was retrenched. In the mean time, the Duke
having fixed his resolution to win the Fauxbourg, and to force the Quarters at
Arques, appeared in Battalia the sixteenth of September, on the Hills, marched
the one half of his Army at daybreak toward Polet, and lodged the other half
at the Village of Martingli^e, in the Valley, to attacque the fortified Maladery.

The two attempts which he made that day, proved very unsuccessful to him: For
the King, who in Person hastened to Polet, putting himself at the Head of his
Forces, on the outside of the Retrenchments, maintained the Skirmish with great
bravery during the whole day, the Enemy not daring all the while to close with
him, nor being able to gain the least inch of ground from him, and at last,
forced them to retire shamefully in the Night, into the ruins of a Village
which was burned, after having killed and made Prisoners a great number of
their most forward men. And the next morning, his Soldiers encouraged by his
presence, and by the contempt which they had of their cowardly Enemies, went to
attacque them in their barricaded Village, where they killed above an hundred
of them, without the loss of a single man.

Those of the Enemy, who were posted at Martinglise, behaved themselves much
better than their Fellows, and accordingly they came off with greater loss: For
having maintained the skirmish for some time, and endeavoring to dislodge
those, who had lined the Hedges that were near the River, they drew out a great
detachment of their Men, who gave an Assault to the Corpse de guard of the
Maladery, in hope to carry the Retrenchments. But the Marshall de Byron, who
commanded in Arques, and who was advanced to the Maladery, to sustain those who
defended it, gave orders to the Grand Prior of France and Damville, to charge
those bold Leaguers, with a chosen Squadron of his bravest Men; who gave in
upon them with so much fury, that he forced them back to Martinglise in much
disorder, after having killed them 150 of their best Soldiers, and wounded a
much greater number. The Cornet of the Duke de Nemours was taken in this Fight,
and 20 Gentlemen of Note made Prisoners.

This double Misfortune having discouraged the Army of the League, the Duke of
Mayenne lay still four or five days together in his Quarters, that he might
give his Soldiers a little time to recover of their Fright; after which, having
reassembled all his Forces, he commanded them to pass the River somewhat after
Midnight, in order to attacque the Retrenchments, from which some of them had
been repulsed so vigorously, and which he now hoped he might carry by surprise:
For this Attempt was to be made at break of Day, and with his whole Army, which
was thrice the number of the Royalists. But the King having had timely notice
of his Design, was gone in Person into the Trenches two or three hours before
day, and had disposed all things in good order for their Reception; having
strongly manned the Trenches with his Infantry, and drawn up his Cavalry without
the Lines, to break the first Onset of the Enemy.

This hindered no^ the Duke of Mayenne from pursuing his Enterprise, till he
brought it to an Engagement; which was very long, and exceeding sharp betwixt
the two Armies. The Kings Cavalry, gained immediately some Advantage against
that of the League. The Grand Prieur, who was afterward Count of Anvergne, and
Duke of Angoulesme, having killed with his Pistol, the Sieur de Sagonne, who
was Colonel of the Leagu's Light Horse, drove back that Squadron, consisting of
four or five hundred men, as far as the Standard of the Union; and the Duke of
Aumale, who with a Gross of six hundred Horse, had put him to the Retreat,
together with three Troops of Men at Arms, who sustained him as far as to the
edge of the Retrenchments, was then constrained to give back himself in some
disorder, to get out of danger from the Cannon, which furiously played upon his
Squadron. But the second Onset, which the Duke of Mayenne commanded to be given
by the Lansquenets of Colalte, and Tremble-court, having the Count of Belin at
their Head, sustained on the Right, by the Duke of Nemours (who had brought
from his Government of Lions three thousand Foot, with a brisk Body of Cavalry)
and on the Left, by the Duke of Aumale, with twelve hundred Horse, was much
more successful.

For while they were furiously combating, both on the Right and Left, with the
French and Swisses of Galati, and Meru Montmorancy-Damville their Colonel, the
Lansquenets of the League, whether it were by Stratagem, or through Cowardice,
cried out to the Royallists, who defended that Quarter, that they would come
over to their Side, and were thereupon received within the Lines. Their
Captains in like manner, made solemn Protestation to serve the King, provided
they might have Security, that their Musters should be paid, which was
promised them by the King. But while that gallant Prince went hastily from
place to place, giving out his Orders to repulse the Enemy, these perfidious
People, observing that the Duke of Nemours had broken the Battalion of the
Swisses, immediately turned their Arms against those who had received them; and
possessed themselves of that part of the Lines, which they delivered to the
Leaguers, who pursuing their Fortune, made themselves Masters of the Maladery.
Insomuch, that the Kings Forces having at the same time to deal with their
Enemies who were without, and those who were within; if the Duke of Mayenne,
whose business it was to have sustained those who made the Attaque with the
Gross of his Army, had taken hold of that happy Opportunity, to break into the
Lines after them, with all his Forces, it is exceeding probable, that the
greater number must have oppressed the less, by multitudes poured in upon them,
and that he had that day obtained an absolute and decisive Victory.

But as he never did any thing in have, but when he fled for safety of his
Life, his March was to slow, to make fitting use of so fair an Occasion, where
also his good Fortune depended on his Speed; which occasioned the loss of that
Advantage. For the Count of Chastillon on the one side, running to the Succor
of the King with the two Regiments, which were in Arques; and on the other side
the Duke of Montpensier, and the brave La Noue, ranging themselves with their
Gendarmery by his side; that valiant Prince, who had already rallied the
greatest part of his Soldiers, whom the Surprise had affrighted and put into
disorder, so furiously charged the Regiments of Colalte, and Tremblecour, that
they were forced to quit the Retrenchments and the Maladery, with more speed
than they had entered them, and to retreat toward the Duke of Mayenne, who
seemed by his heavy March and slow Advance, as if his Business was only to
receive them, and not to sustain and second them. And, at the same time, the
Cannon of the Castle, which had him fair before them, playing terribly into his
Army, constrained him to take his way back to his Quarters, and leave the
Victory to the King, who still maintained the Possession of Arques, from which
his Enemies had endeavored to dislodge him.

And what was yet a greater disgrace to the Duke of Mayenne, four or five days
after this, fetching a long compass, and posting himself before Diepe, with
purpose of besieging it, he was himself besieged by the little Army of the
King, who being lodged out of the Town over against his Camp, plied him night
and day with perpetual Alarms, without his daring once to come forth and make
his Approaches. Insomuch, that after ten days stay, without having performed
any thing, he raised this pretended Siege, re-pass'd this River, and retired
into Picardy, under pretense that his Presence was necessary in those Parts, to
hinder the associated Towns of that Province, from putting themselves into the
Protection of the Spaniards, who were laboring underhand, to beguile the
Simplicity of those poor People.

This was the success of that Enterprise of the League, which, with their
thirty thousand men, boasted that they would take the King of Navarre, or the
Bearnois, as those Rebels insolently called him, and bring him Prisoner to
Paris, where the Duchess of Montpensier and other Ladies had already hir^d
Windows and Balconies in St. Dennis-Street, from whence they might have the
Pleasure, to see him grace the Triumph of the Duke de Mayenne with his
Captivity. But God had otherwise ordained, and that memorable Fight at Arques,
wherein, according to all humane probability, the King with that handful of
men, should have have fallen under the weight of so formidable a Power, was the
fatal point of declination to the League. For though their General had not lost
above seven or eight hundred men in that Engagement, yet he lost in it, the
Honor and Reputation of the party, which since that day, never did any thing
considerable, but what made for the glory of their Conqueror; by furnishing him
with new occasions, to make appear his Clemency in pardoning, or his Valor in
subduing them, which succeeded not long afterward, to his immortal Fame.

For as soon as he had received the Succors, which he expected from England,
of four thousand men; and that the Duke of Long^eville, and Marshal Biron had
joined him with their Forces, which they brought from Picardy and Champaigne,
he marched upward against the Course of the Seine, as far as Meulan, where
perceiving that the Duke of Mayenne (who might have marched directly toward
him, if his Heart had served him for the Combat) appeared not in those Parts,
he passed the River, and on the thirty first of October, took up his Quarters
in the sight of Paris, at the Villages of Isly, Vaugirard, Montrouge and
Gentilly, with resolution, the next morning to attaque the Fauxbourgs of that
great City, which the Parisians had fortified.

In order to which, he divided all his Infantry into three Bodies, that the
Assault might be made at the same time, in three several places. The first
under Marshal de Biron, on the side of the Fauxbourgs St. Marceau, and St.
Victor; the next, commanded by Marshal d' Aumont, assisted by Damville the
Colonel of the Swisses, and Bellegard the Grand Escuyer, at the Head of the
Fauxbourg St. Iacques, and at that of St. Michael; and the third led on by the
Sieurs de Chastillon and La No^e, right over against the Gates of St. Germain,
Bussy, and Nesle. They were sustained by as many gross Squadrons of Cavalry; at
the Head of which, was the Count de Soissons, on the right hand, the Duke of
Longueville on the left, and the King himself in the midst; on the side of the
Fauxbourg St. Iacques: and four pieces of Cannon followed each of these great
Bodies, to discharge against the Gates of the City, so soon as the Fauxburgs
should be won.

Never was any Enterprise better laid; so that the success of it already seemed
infallible. For besides the strength of the Assailants without the Town, they
held a secret Intelgence within it, which was dexterously managed by the
President Nicholas Potier, de Blanc Mesnil, who who having freed himself out of
the Hands of Bussy, by a great sum of Money, had gained a good number of those
whom the Leaguers suspected to be Royallists, and whom they called Pollitiques,
by whose Assistance, he was to make himself Master of one of the Gates, and
then deliver it to the King.

The invincible courage of that President, and his inviolable fidelity, in the
service of the Kings his Masters, in those troublesome and rebellious times,
will perpetuate his Memory in all Ages, and raise a Veneration to his Name in
France, particularly in Paris, his Native Town, which he honored as much by
his singular Virtue, as he was honored by it in his Birth, being descended
from one of the most Ancient Families of that Great City. He had the
generosity, for the service of his Prince and the safety of the State, to
expose himself to the imminent danger of death, by the fury of the Sixteen. For
those brutal Wretches fearing his great parts, his Courage and his Virtue,
which they knew was never to be diverted from the plain ways of Honesty and
Honor, put him twice in Prison, once in the Bastile, and again in the Tower of
the Louvre, where he ran the hazard of his Life, if he had not been delivered
by the good Offices which were done him by some Persons, who had the resolution
to oppose the fury of those Tyrants. And when in process of time, he found he
could do no more service to the King in Paris, he retired to him who made him
President of that part of his Parliament which was established at Chaalons. He
had the happiness to be Son to a Counselor, who acquired so much reputation in
the exercise of his Office, that the Chancellor de l' Hospital has said of him
in one of his Poems, that he deserved the Court should erect his Statue in the
Temple of Justice; and at this day, after his death, has the honor to be
Grandfather to another Nicholas de Potier, whom the Wisest and Greatest of all
Kings, who understands the merit of Men, and understands also to reward it, has
placed at the Head of his Parliament of Peers.

All things then being well disposed (by means of the Intelligence which was
held with the President, De Blanc Mesnil) to make the Kings Enterprise succeed;
on All Saints day, very early in the morning, and under covert of a thick mist,
the Fortifications, and the Head of the Fauxbourgs were attacqu'd at once in
three several parts, with so much vigor and resolution, that they were all
carried by plain force, in less than an hour. Seven or Eight Hundred of the
Defendants were slain in the Assault, Thirteen Pieces of Cannon were taken, and
if the Kings Artillery had come up at the time which he designed, it is certain
that this great Prince, who at Seven of the Clock entered the Fauxbourg of St.
Iacques, and was there received with the loud acclamations of Vive Le Roy, had
made himself Master of the Quarter of the University, without much difficulty
or hazard.

But the Sieur de Rosne, who commanded at that time in Paris, having had the
leisure to fortify the Gates, by reason of that delay, and the Duke of
Mayenne, to whom he had given notice of the Kings approach, being entered into
the Town the next morning, with all his Forces; the King satisfied himself with
letting the Parisians know by what he had done, that the News which was
industriously spread amongst them of his defeat at Diepe, was notoriously
false. And after having staid three long hours in Battalia before the Town, as
it were, to reproach the weakness or cowardice of their Commanders, who durst
not venture without their Walls, he went to retake, during the Winter, in
Vandomois, Tourain, Anjou, Main, Perch, and the Lower Normandy, the greatest
part of the Towns and Strong Places which held for the League; which now began
to destroy it self by the same means which were intended for its preservation.
In this following manner.

Those of the Union endeavored all they could, to oblige his Holiness and the
King of Spain, that they would openly espouse their Party, in which at length
they succeeded, through the protestations which were made by their Agents at
Rome and at Madrid, that in case they were not speedily and powerfully assisted
by both of them, they must of necessity make an Accommodation with the King of
Navarre; which neither the Pope nor King Philip could bear with patience. The
First, for fear that France should fall under the Dominion of a Prince who was
an Heretic: And the Second, because he was desirous to foment the divisions
which were amongst us, hoping to make his advantage of them, either by reducing
the whole Kingdom into his power, or at least by dismembring a great part of
it. In this manner, Pope Sixtus, as intelligent as he was, being deluded by the
Commander of Diu, and by his Partners, who made him believe, that the Navarrois
could not possibly escape from the hands of the Duke of Ma^enne, who had cooped
him up and surrounded him in a corner of Normandy, sent Cardinal Cajetan his
Legate into France, who was born Subject to the King of Spain, and was also a
Spaniard in his Principles, and by his Obligations; who came to Paris in the
beginning of January, bringing with him Bills of Exchange for 300000 Crowns,
together with an Express Order, to cause a Catholic King to be Elected.

On the other side, Don Bernardin de M^ndoza, Ann. 1590.
King Philip's Ambassador, being supported by the Faction of the Sixteen, the
Preachers of the League, and the Monks, of which the greatest part were
entirely devoted to the Spaniard, made, in the General Council of the Union, on
the part of his Master, very plausible and advantageous Propositions for the
ease of the People, with promise of assisting them with all the Forces of that
Monarchy: Protesting also, that his King, who was Master of so many Countries,
the Titles of which he haughtily set forth, pretended not to that of France,
either for himself or for his Son; and that in recompense of those great
Succors which he intended to give the Catholics, he demanded nothing more,
than the honor to be solemnly declared, The Protector of France. Now this was
in effect the very thing which most contributed to the ruin of the League, and
the safeguard of the State; because this artificial Proposition, joined with
the Instructions of the Legate, fully opened the Duke of Mayenne's Eyes, and
gave him the means of discovering the intentions of the Spaniards, whose design
was to establish their Kings Authority on the ruins of his; and consequently,
he took up a firm resolution of opposing their endeavors, as he always did
from that time forward, by the advice of some honest men about him, and
particularly Monsieur de Villeroy.

That wise and able Minister of State, who served five of our Kings, with so
much Fidelity and Reputation, having observed, that by reason of some ill
Offices which were done him to the Late King his Master, he could no longer
remain with safety in the Towns which obeyed him, nor at his own House during
the War, and that he had not been able to procure so much as a Passport for his
departure out of the Kingdom, was constrained to make his retreat to Paris with
his Father, and to enter into the Party of the Union. But it may be truly said
of him that he entered into it, as did the Loyal and Wise Hushai into that of
Absalom at Jerusalem; there to destroy all the devices and pernicious Counsels
of the wicked Achitophel, which only tended to the total ruin of David the
lawful King, against whom the Capital City of his Kingdom was revolted. In the
same manner, the Sieur de Villeroy embraced, not out of pure necessity, the
Party of the League, and placed not himself with the Duke of Mayenne in Paris,
who was in Actual War with his King, but only to obtain the means, by his good
Counsels, to undermine the purposes of the Spaniards; who under pretense of
endeavoring the preservation of Religion in France, designed the Subversion of
the State. And as David thought it fitting, that Hushai should continue at
Jerusalem, without leaving Absalom, because he well knew that he would be more
serviceable to him there, than if he kept him near his Person; in like manner
Henry the Fourth, who knew the dexterity and faithfulness of Monsieur de
Villeroy, would not that he should go out from Paris, after the death of his
Predecessor, or be with him, because he was satisfied that this Great Man,
would be able to do him greater Service by staying with the Duke of Mayenne,
where by his wise Remonstrations, and the credit which he had acquired with
that Prince, he might break the measures of the Spaniards and their Adherents.

He continued this politic management to the end, and principally on that
occasion, whereon depended either the felicity or the unhappiness of this
Kingdom, according to the resolution which should be taken: For the Duke of
Mayenne having asked him his opinion, in relation to what the Legate and Mendoza
had proposed, he gave him easily to understand, that all those plausible
Propositions which were made by the Legate, by Mendoza, and the Sixteen, were
intended only to deprive him of his Authority, and to subject him, and the
whole Party of the Union, under the domination of the Spaniards, who would not
fail to usurp upon the French, and to perpetuate the War, thereby to maintain
their own greatness. That in his present condition, without suffering an Head
to be constituted above him, he had War and Peace at his disposing, together
with the glory of having sustained, himself alone, both Religion and the State;
but by acknowledging the King of Spain for Protector of the Kingdom, he should
only debase himself, under the proud Title of a powerful Master, who would
serve his own interests too well, to leave him the means, of either continuing
the War, or of concluding a Peace, to the advantage of his Country.

There needed no more to persuade a man so knowing, and so prudent, as was the
Duke of Mayenne: It Is to be confessed, that he was a Self lover, which is
natural to all men; but he was also a Lover of the Common Good, which is the
distinguishing character of an Honest Man. Since he could not himself pretend
to the Crown, which he clearly saw it was impossible for him to obtain, for
many reasons, he was resolved no Foreigner should have it, nor even any other
but that only Person to whom it belonged rightfully, Religion being first
secured. He thereupon firmly purposed from that time, both in regard of his
particular interest, and that of the State, to oppose whatsoever attempts
should be made by the Spaniards, or by his own nearest Relations, under any
pretense or color; which was undoubtedly one great cause of the preservation
of the State.

For which reason, that he might for ever cut off the Spaniards from all hope
of procuring their Master to be made Protector of the Realm of France, and
consequently of having in his hands the Government of the Kingdom, and the
concernments of the League, under this new Title, as the Sixteen, who were
already at his Devotion, had designed; he politickly told them in a full
Assembly, that since the cause of Religion was the only thing, for which the
Union was ingage'd in this War which they had undertaken, it would be injurious
to the Pope, to put themselves under any other protection than that of his
Holiness: Which Proposition was so gladly received by all, excepting only the
Faction of Sixteen, that the Spaniards were constrained to desist, and to let
their pretensions wholly fall.

And to obviate the design of causing any other King to be Elected, besides the
Old Cardinal of Bourbon, under whose Name he governed all things; he procured
the Parliament to verify the Ordinance of the Council General of the Union, by
which that Cardinal, was declared King, and caused him so to be Proclaimed, in
all the Towns and Places of their party; retaining for himself by the same
Ordinance, the Quality and Power of Lieutenant General of the Crown, till the
King should be delivered from Imprisonment. And at the same time, to ruin the
Faction of Sixteen, which was wholly Spaniardiz'd, he broke the Council of the
Union: Saying, That since there was a King Proclaimed, whose Lieutenant he also
was, there ought to be no other Council but his, which in duty was to follow
him wheresoever he should be.

Thus the Duke of Mayenne having possessed himself of all Royal Authority,
under the imaginary Title of another, and having overcome all the designs of
the Spaniards, took the Field; and after having taken in the Castle of Bois de
Vincennes by composition, which had been invested for a year together, he
retook Pontoise, and some other places, which hindered the freedom of commerce;
and being afterward willing to regain all the passages of the Seine, thereby
to establish the communication of Paris with Rouen, and to have the Sea open,
he went to besiege the Fort of Meulan, where he lost much time to little
purpose; while the Legate, against whom the Kings Parliament at Tours had made a
terrible Decree, was laboring at Paris with all his might, that no
accommodation should be made with the King, not even though he should be
converted.

To this effect, seeing that the Faction of Sixteen, and the Spaniards, were
extremely weakened, after what the Duke of Mayenne had done against them, and
that the Royalists, who were generally called Politiques. had resumed courage,
and began to say openly, that it was the common duty of all good Subjects, to
unite themselves with the Catholics who followed the King; he opposed them,
with a Declaration lately made against them by the factious Doctors of the
Sorbo^ne, on the tenth of February, in the same year 1590. For by that Decree
it was ordained, That all Doctors and Batchelors should have in abhorrence, and
strongly combat, the pestilential and damnable Opinions which the Workers of
Iniquity endeavored, with all their force, to insinuate daily into the Minds
of Ignorant and Simple Men, principally these Propositions. That Henry de
Bourbon might, and ought to be honored with the Title of King: That it
Conscience men might hold his Party, and Pay him Taxes, and acknowledge him for
King, on condition he turned Catholic, etc. And then they added, That in case
any one shall refuse to obey this Decree, the Faculty declares him an Enemy to
the Church of God, Perjured and Disobedient to his Mother, and, in conclusion,
cuts him off from her Body, as a gangreen'd Member which corrupts the rest.

A Decree of this force was of great service to the Bigots of the League,
because it deprived the wiser sort of the License they had taken, to persuade
the people to make peace: And the Legate, that he might hinder any from taking
it for the time to come, bethought himself, that a new Oath should be imposed
on the Holy Evangelists, betwixt his hands, in the Church of the Augustines, to
be taken by all the Officers of the Town, and the Captains of the several
Wards, which was: That they should always persevere in the Holy Union; that
they should never make Peace or Truce with the King of Navarre, and that they
should employ their Lives and Fortunes in deliverance of their King Charles the
Tenth: Which was also enjoined to be taken by all the Officers of Parliament,
and the other Companies, no one man daring to oppose it: So much had Fear
prevailed over Courage and Virtue at that time, even in those who knowing and
detesting in their hearts the injustice of that Oath, ought rather to have
dyed, than basely to have acted against their Consciences.

But the good success of the Kings Arms, was in the mean time preparing the
means for them, of receiving one day an happy dispensation from himself, of
that abominable Oath by which it is most manifest they never could be tied. For
after having made himself Master of all the Lower Normandy, he made haste to
relieve the Fort of Meulan, and thereby constrained the Duke of Mayenne to
raise his Siege. After which, having taken the Bridge of Poissy by plain force,
and in view of the Enemy; he led his Victorious Army before Dreux, which
occasioned the memorable Battle of Ivry.

Since the taking of that Town had extremely straightened Paris, by excluding it
on that side from the passage and the commerce of Normandy, La Beauce, and the
Country about Chartres; the Duke of Mayenne resolved to relieve it with all his
Forces. For this purpose, having received a recruit of 1500 Lansquenets and 500
Carabines, which King Philip (who at the same time published his Manifesto in
justification of his Arms) had given to the League by the Duke of Parma, under
the conduct of the Count of Egmont, he passed the Seine at the Bridge of Mant,
and advanced toward Dreux; yet resolving only to put succors into the Town,
and to keep always on this side the River of Eure, that he might avoid the
hazard of a Battle. But upon the false intelligence which he received from his
Scouts, that the King (who had really quitted the Siege because he designed to
Fight him) was gone from Nonancour, and had taken on the left hand the way to
Verneuil, as if his intentions had been to return to the Lower Normandy, he was
constrained, against his own opinion, by the clamours of the Superior Officers,
and especially by the young Count Philip of Egmont, to pass over the Bridge of
Ivry, and to pursue the King in his feigned retreat, till he brought him to a
Battle.

But as the King, who wished for nothing more than to come to a pitched Field
with him (which he feared he would have declined) was pleasingly surpised to
find that he had already passed the River; so the Duke was not a little amazed,
when he perceived that, far from shunning the Engagement, the King was marching
directly toward him, and that he must be forced to make good his challenge.
But as the day was already far spent, that every moment there came in to the
King some Gentlemen or Soldiers from the neigbouring Garrisons, who were
desirous to have their share of honor in the Battle, and that the Duke of
Mayenne on his side moved not forward, but only kept his ground, observing the
nature of the Place, and what advantages might be taken from its situation;
the two Armies which were but a League distant from each other, after some
light skirmishes, retired to their Camps, resolved on both sides to decide the
quarrel the next day, which was Wednesday the fourteenth of March.

Betwixt the River of Eure and that of Itton, which passes by Evreux, there
lies right over against Ivry a fair Plain, of about a League in breadth, free
from Hedges, Ditches, Mounds, or even so much as Bushes, to hinder an open
passage through it, on all sides, bounded on the East with a little Wood, and
the River of Eure, on which the Borough of Ivry is situate; and on the West
by the Villages of St. Andr^ and Fourcanville, where the King was quartered the
Night before the Battle: In this Plain, the Royal Army, and that of the League,
were drawn up almost at the same time, betwixt the Hours of Eight and Nine, in
the following order.

The King advancing five or six hundred paces before the Villages of St. Andre
and Fourcanville, which he had at his back, formed his gross Squadron of 600
Horse in five Divisions, each of 120: The first of which, wherein he intended
to Fight in Person, was composed of Princes, Dukes, Counts, Marquesses, Blew
Ribbands, and great Lords, for the most part Catholics, the strength of his
Army consisting chiefly in those of that Religion: For when it was known that
the League, for the maintenance of their cause, was turned Spaniard, the French
Nobility and Gentry, whose hearts were too generous to suffer that such a
reproach should be fastened on them, abandoned that Party, and every day came
over in great numbers to the King: So that he soon found himself in a condition
of overpow'ring the League and Spaniard, with the assistance of their Arms,
even though there had not been an Huguenot in his Army; who in reality were but
an incosiderable number, in comparison of that great multitude of Soldiers, and
especially Gentlemen Catholics, which came in by whole Troops together from
all parts, and made up almost all the strength of his Army. And that which drew
down the Blessing and Protection of God Almighty on it, was, that the day
before the Engagement, when it was evident that the Enemy, who had passed the
River, could not avoid coming to a Battle; these Princes, Lords,
Gentlemen-Catholiques, and Soldiers, who followed their example, were all at
the celebration of Mass at Nonancour, and there communicated together. The
King, for his part, having already in his Soul great inclinations to be
converted, protested the same day to those Princes and Great Persons, that he
humbly prayed the Almighty God, who is the searcher of all hearts, to dispose
of his Person in that bloody day, accordingly as he should please to judge it
necessary for the universal good of Christendom, and in particular for the
safety and repose of France.

With these pious thoughts, he placed himself the next morning at the Head of
his gross Squadron, of six hundred Horse; he was flanck'd on the right hand
with a gross Battalion of two Swisse Regiments, raised from the Cantons of
Soleure; and on the left, with another Battalion of two Regiments, of the
Canton of Glaris and of Grisons; these Battalions being sustained, that on the
right hand, by the Regiment of Guards and of Brigneux, and that on the left, by
the Regiments of Vignoles, and of St. Iean. The Duke of Montpensier followed
them, drawing a little toward the left, with his Squadron of betwixt 5 and 600
Horse, betwixt two Regiments, one of Lansquenets, and the other of Swisses,
covered by two Battalions, which were the Flower of the French Infantry; the
Marshal d' Aumont closed his left, having in his Squadron 300 good Horse,
flanck'd with two French Regiments, and before him, the light Horse, in two
Troops, each consisting of 200 men, commanded by the Grand Prior their Colonel,
and by Givry their Marshal de Camp; and these last had on their right hand, on
the same Line, the Baron de Biron; who, with his Squadron of 250 Horse, covered
that of the Duke of Montpensier; and the Artillery of four Cannons and two
Culverines, was placed upon their Left.

On the other side, the Marshal de Biron, with 250 Horse, and two French
Regiments which flanck'd him, stood on the right hand of the gross Squadron of
the King, after the Regiment of Guards and that of Brigneux; but somewhat
backward, that his Men might be for a Body of reserve: And the Count Theodorick
de Schomberg, who commanded the Squadron of Reiters, flanck'd in the same
manner by two small Bodies of French Infantry, made the right Wing a little
hollowed, in form of a Crescent, like the left. Thus was the Royal Army
Marshalled, which consisted of betwixt 9 and 10000 Foot, and 2800 Horse,
divided into seven Squadrons, each of them with a Plotoon of Forlorn Hope
before them.

The Army of the League appeared at the same time but posted on somewhat higher
Ground, and more backward toward the River, than it was the day before; being
Marshalled much after the manner of the Kings Forces, unless it were, that
being more numerous, as consisting of 4 or 5000 Horse, and of 12000 Foot, the
Wings of it advanced farther, and bent more inward, in the form of a larger
Crescent. The Duke of Mayenne with his Cornet of about 300 Horse, (to which the
Duke of Nemours, his Brother by the Mothers side, joined his own Squadron, of
the like number of Gendarms) placed himself just opposite to that of the King,
in the very bottom of his Crescent, betwixt two gross Squadrons, each of them
of 6 or 700 Lanciers, which were Flemmings and Walloons, commanded by Count
Egmont. They were flanked on their Right and Left, with two gross Batta^ions of
Swisses, raised from the Catholic Cantons, covered with French Infantry, and
flanck'd with two Squadrons of Walloon Carabins.

Those were followed by two other Squadrons, one of 5 or 600 Horse on the Right
hand, and the other by 3 or 400 on the Left; where their Artillery was placed,
consisting of two Culverines, and two Bastard Cannons. The Light Horsemen,
commanded by the Baron de Rosne, extended themselves on the right hand, before
a gross Squadron of Gendarms, which sustained them, and two Squadrons of
Reiters, led by the Duke of Brunswick, and Bassompierre stood on the right
Wing, with the Regiment of Horse, commanded by the Chevalier de Aumale, who put
them under the Conduct of his Lieutenant, that he might have liberty to fight
by the Duke of Mayenne's side, in that formidable gross of 1800 Lanciers, which
were opposed to the Kings Squadron, not so strong as themselves by two thirds,
and only armed with Sword and Pistol, there not being in the whole Army of the
King, so much as one single Lance. The Lansquenets of the League, and the rest
of the French Infantry, were divided into many Battalions, which, like those of
the King, were placed on the Flanks of their Squadrons; betwixt whom, and their
Battalions, there was not interval enough, to make room for the Reiters, when
they were to wheel about after discharging, which occasioned their great
disorder.

The two Armies being thus Marshalled about ten of the Clock, stood viewing,
and considering each other for some time, but in very different Postures. There
was scarcely any thing to be seen in that of the League, but Gold and Silver
Embroideries, upon costly and magnificent Coats of Velvet, of all sorts of
Colors, and an infinite number of Banderolles fluttering about that thick
Forest of Lances, which seemed to threaten the Overthrow of their Enemies at
the first Shock, before they could come up so close, as to single out their
Men, and discharge Breast to Breast; or even so much as to hold out their
Pistols. On the other side, the Kings Army had no other Ornament than Iron; but
their Joy sparkled in their Eyes, and all the Soldiers marched to the Fight, as
to a certain Victory; especially that invincible Troop of 2 or 3000 Gentlemen,
which were the Flower of the Army; and whom the King himself, in plain Armor
like the rest, inspired with Vigor by his only Presence, and the sprightfulness
of his Behavior.

In the mean time, when he had observed, that if he approached not nearer to
the Enemy, there would be no Battle, because they were resolved on the other
side, to stand their Ground, without quitting their advantageous Post; he
advanced toward them above 150 Paces, leaving no more distance betwixt the two
Armies, than what was necessary for the Charge; and by that motion, which he
made with so much judgment, and Military Skill, drawing somewhat on the left
hand, that he might have the Wind in his Back, which otherwise had blown the
Smoke of the Powder in the Faces of his Soldiers, he came up so close to the
Enemy, that it was no longer possible to avoid the Battle.

Then putting on his Head^piece, the Crest of which was shaded with three white
Plumes, which might easily be discerned from far, and being mounted on a large
N^apol^t^an Courser, whose Color was of a brown Bay, adorned with a Tu^t of
Feathers, which proudly distingui^h'd him from the rest; he made a short
Ejaculation to God, which was followed by the loud Cries of Viv^ l^ Roy. As to
those Florid, long Orations, which our Historians, on this occasion, make for
him and the Duke of Mayenn^, as if they had spoken them at the Head of their
Armies, it is most certain, they were invented in the Studies of their Authors.
For one who was present in the Battle, has assured us, that the King spoke only
with his Gesture and his Looks, to those who were more remote, and said no more
but these few Words, to the great Lords, who charg^d with him in the first Rank
of his Squadron. See, my Companions, the Enemy before us; Now we have ^ound
them, our business is to ^ight them, and God is for us. If you loose the sight
of your Colors, look about for my Plume of Feathers, and rally there: you will
find it in the direct way to Honor and to Victory.

For the Duke of Ma^enne, who was both a great Captain, and in spite of his
natural Heaviness, a brave Soldier, when he was once come to a Resolution of
fighting, all he did, was to show to the first ranks of his Army, the Crucifix,
which a jolly Friar, who had said public Prayers, carried before him: He would
have it understood by this only gesture, without loss of time in tedious
speeches, which could never have been understood, that it was for Religion that
they fought against Heretics and Promoters of Heresy, who were the declared
Enemies of Jesus Christ, and of his Church.

It was almost Noon, when the King was told that Charl^s d' H^mieres, Marquess
d' Ancr^, he who was in part the cause of gaining the Battle of Senlis, was
coming up within a quarter of a League of the Field of Battle, with 2 or 300
Gentlemen, whom he brought with him out of Picardy; in which Country, almost
all the Noblemen and Gentlemen, who had been the first to sign the League, had
now totally relinquished it. But that the courage of the Soldiers might not
cool, who were eager to be at blows with the Enemy, he satisfied himself with
bidding the Sieur de Vic, who was Sergeant Major General, to show them the Post
he had appointed for them, which immediately, on their Arrival, they too^ up,
with resolution to signalize themselves that day. This being ordered, without
more delay he gave the sign of Battle, and the work began with the discharge of
their Cannon, which was so well performed by the Master of the Ordnance,
Philibert de la Guiche, that before those of the League began to play, nine
Cannonades were given by ^he Royalists, which did great execution on the Enemy,
and particularly shattered the Squadrons of the Reiters.

Thus, after three or four vollyes on either side, two gross Squadrons, made up
of Italians and French, and flanked with Lansquenets, advanced, and came up to
the charge, against the Left Wing of the Royal Army, that they might put
themselves under covert from the storm of the Great Guns. But the Marshal d'
Aumont, who was in that Wing, having advanced likewise the better half of the
way to meet them, drove upon them so furiously, that they turned their backs,
and pursuing them with slaughter to the entry of the little Wood, which bounds
the Plain, he immediately returned to his Post, according to the Orders which
he had received from the King.

While these men were so ill treated, the Reiters on the Right Hand, being
desirous to gain the Cannon, by which their Squadron had been so miserably
torn, went to Charge the Kings light Horsemen with so much fury, that they
forced them immediately to give back; and at the same time two other Squadrons
of Flemmings and Walloons, seeing them already shaken, advanced to break them.
But the Baron of Biron on the one side, and the Duke of Montpensier on the
other, charging them on the Flanks, first stopped them, then broke in upon
them, and afterward pierced quite through them; and the Light Horse, who had
this time given them to rally, returning to the charge, the Rei^ers gave
ground, most basely abandoning the Walloons; and not being able to make their
retreat, or rather to save themselves, through the intervals which were too
narrow, they overturned their own men, and put all things in a terrible
con^usion, notwithstanding the care which was used by the Duke of Bru^swick,
their Colonel, who was never able to rally them, and therefore put himself into
the Squadron of Walloons; desiring rather to perish with those valiant men, who
were enclosed on all sides, and cut in pieces, than to save himself by flying
with his own Runaways.

In this manner the Battle was maintained on either part, with extreme
obstinacy for some time, and all the Squadrons of both Armies fell in so
vigorously, that they were mixed with each other; excepting only that of
Marshall d^ Biron, who with his Body of Reserve, made it his business to
hinder the Enemy from rallying, which he performed. But that which decided the
fortune of this great day, and assured the Victory to the King, was his own
Heroic Valor, which he made conspicuous, by combating that formidable
Squadron of 1800 Lanciers, which the Duke of Mayenne had made so strong for no
other reason, than to charge with great advantage of number upon that of the
King, not at all doubting but if he could break that Body, the Victory would be
his own.

Observing then that the Reiters were absolutely routed, and fearing lest they
should disorder his men, by falling back upon them; he drew after him that
great Body of Horse, and caused 400 chosen Carabins to advance first, who were
all of them armed Head and Breast, whom the Count d^ Tavann^s, who led them up,
commanded to discharge within five and twenty Paces of the first Rank of the
Royal Squadron, with intention to clear it. And at the same time, the Duke of
Mayenne, who appeared at the Head of his Men, mounted on a Turkish Horse, the
most beautiful that could be seen, made up furiously, with his Lance couched,
and followed by the gross of his Cavalry, to the Kings own Troop, which he
believed to be already well shaken, by that sudden and terrible Discharge: who,
nevertheless, sustained the fury of that Shock, keeping firm in their Saddles;
and some there were, who had three Lances broken on them, without loosing of
their Stirrups.

But the most admirable part of this Encounter, was, that the King advancing
twice the length of his Horse before the Front of his Squadron, with his Pistol
in his hand, thrust into the midst of that thick Wood of Lances, and charged
with so much ardour of Courage into their Body, that he gave them to understand
by this wonderful Action, he was no less, a most valiant Soldier, than a most
expert and great Commander. And indeed, he was so bravely followed, by the
Princes and Lords of that Squadron, whom his Example had raised to emulation,
that after an obstinate Dispute, which endured a long quarter of an hour, and
was maintained with Swords and Pistols, in that confused Medly, where the
Lances were of no farther use; this great Squadron of the Duke of Mayenne, was
broken, dispersed, and cut in pieces, or wholly routed; neither could the Duke
(who that day performed all the parts of a valiant Soldier, and a great
General, even in the opinion of the King himself) either stay their Flight, or
rally them afterward, with all the endeavors he could use: Insomuch, that
seeing himself almost enclosed, he retired amongst the last of his men, to the
Bridge of Ivry, which he caused to be broken down, after he had passed the
greatest part of his routed Army over it, and then for his own safety fled to
Mant. The rest, with the Duke of Nemours, the Chevalier d' Aumale, Rosne,
Tavannes, and Bassompierre, having taken the way of the Plain, escaped to
Chartres.

In the mean time, the Victorious Party were in great trouble for the King, who
had vanished out of their sight in that gross Squadron of 1800 Lances, into
which he had charged before the rest; when at length they beheld him returning,
and bearing aloft his bloody Sword; having defeated three Cornets of VValloons,
which were left amongst the two Battalions of Swisses, and came desperately
upon him, after he had Charged through the Duke of Mayenne's Squadron. At his
appearance, the whole Field of Battle rang wi^h loud Acclamations and Shouts of
Vive Le Roy. Then, the Victory being assured and absolute, no other Enemies
remaining in the Field but those Swisses, (for the rest of the Foot, and
particularly the Lansquenets, being forsaken by their Cavalry, had been cut in
pieces, excepting those who provided early for their safety) the King, that he
might gratify the Cantons, took them to mercy, on condition they should
henceforth keep more faithfully the Treaty of Alliance which they had made with
the Crown of France, and never more bear Arms against him. After which, being
accompanied by the Prince of Conty, the Duke of Montpensier, the Count of St.
Paul, the Marshal d' Aumont, and all the rest of the Lords and Gentlemen, he
pursued the Enemy as far as Rosny, leaving the Body of his Army, which marched
slowly after him, under the Command of the Marshall de Biron.

This was the success of that famous Battle of Ivry, wherein the League lost
both its reputation and its strength. Almost all the Infantry of that Party was
cut in pieces, or taken Prisoners: Of their Cavalry more than 1500 were killed
upon the place, or drowned at the Foord of Ivry, the passage of which is
extremely dangerous. Count Egmont, General of the Spanish Troops, and William
of Brunswick, Colonel of the Reiters, Natural Son to Duke Henry, were found
amongst the slain, and a short time after honorably interred by the King's
Order, in the Church of Eureux: Besides the French Soldiers, whom the King
commanded to be spared, and who took quarter amongst his Troops, there were
above 400 Prisoners of Quality, amongst whom was a Count of East Friez^land,
who fought amongst the Reiters, the Baron of Huren, the Sieurs of Medavid, Bois
Dauphin, Castelier, Fontain Martel, Sigogne, who yielded himself, with the Duke
of Mayenne's Standard to Rosny (the same who was afterward Duke de Sully) and
many other Lords and Gentlemen, as well Foreigners as French.

The Cannon, Ammunition, Baggage, and Standard of the Flemmings, twenty
Cornets, the Standard of the Reiters, and above sixty Ensigns of Foot, without
putting into the reckoning the fourscore Swisse Colors, which the King sent
back to their Superiors, were the illustrious Testimonies of so glorious a
Victory; which cost the Conqueror but little Blood: For there were killed on
the Kings side, of men of Quality, only Clermont de Entragues, Captain of the
Guards, who was slain near the Person of his Majesty; the Count de Schomberg,
the Sieurs de Feuquieres, de Crenay, Cornet to the Duke of Montpensier, and de
Long auny, an old Norman Gentleman, aged threescore and twelve years, the only
man who was slain by the Cannon of the League, and five and twenty or thirty
Gentlemen more, who were killed in the Kings Squadron. Amongst the Wounded, was
Francis de Daillon, Count de Lude (Son to that Prudent and Valiant Guy de
Daillon, Governor of Poitou, who defended Poitiers with so much reputation
against the Admiral Coligni, and preserved that Province to the King, with so
much Fidelity and Valor against the Hugonots and Leaguers, to whom he was
always a professed Enemy) Henry de Laval, Marquess de Nesle, the Count of Choisy,
the Sieurs d'O, de Rosny, Lauvergne, Monlouet, and about twenty other
Gentlemen, who were all cured of their Wounds.

That which was yet more wonderfully remarkable, and which demonstrates the
peculiar care which God Almighty took of his Majesty's rightful Cause, was,
that on the same day, Iean Louis, de Rouchefoucault, Count of Randan, General
of the League in Auvergne, who besieged the Town of Issoire, lost both his Life
and his little Army; which was entirely defeated by the Marquess of Curton,
Head of the Royalists; and that the Sieur de Lansac, who endeavored to have
surprised Man's for the League, whose Party, after having once abandoned it, he
had again espoused, was bravely repulsed from before the Town. To conclude,
since that happy day, the Royal Party had a continued series of prosperity, in
every Province of France, and in a multitude of occasions, which it is not my
business to relate paticularly; because my Design is only to relate the most
essential affairs of the League, and not to involve my self too far in the
History of France, which comprehends much more than I have undertaken.

Following therefore this Model, which I have proposed to my self, that which I
ought to observe on this occasion, is, that this glorious Victory, had caused
the immediate and total ruin of the League; if after the Surrender of Vernon,
and Mant, which yielded the next day, the King, who was now Master of all the
Passages of the Seine, as far up as Paris, had presented himself, with his
victorious Army, before that Capital City of his Kingdom, which at that time,
was neither provided with Victuals, nor Ammunition, nor Governor, nor
Garrison, and wherein the People, who found themselves destitute of all these
things, were already wavering in a general Consternation. For it is exceeding
probable, that the Politiques, doubly encouraged by his Victory and by his
Presence, had carried it over the Sixteen, and had opened the Gates to him. And
indeed this very Counsel was given him by the wise La Noue; but whether it were
that the Marshal de Biron, who had no great inclinations to retire to his
Country House, and mind his Gardening, desired to spin out the War, and
therefore gave him a contrary Advice; or that perhaps it was his own Opinion,
as not believing himself yet strong enough for such an Attempt, he continued
fifteen days at Mante, without enterprising any thing against the Leaguers; to
whom he gave leisure by that means to recover Courage, and put themselves into
a condition of Resistance.

In effect, the false Relations which were spread amongst the People, to sooth
them into a Belief, that the Loss which they had received, was not so
considerable as was at first reported; the Sermons of their Preachers, the
Promises of the Spaniards, the Presence of the Legate, and of the Archbishop
of Lions, who not long before had been ransomed by the League, and the good
order which the Duke of Mayenne had caused to be established in Paris, which he
left well garrisoned with his Soldiers, before he went from St. Dennis, to
draw near to the Law-Countries, from whence he expected new supplies: all these
Considerations put together, buoyd up their sinking spirits, and gave them new
courage, so that there appeared no manner of commotion in the Town: but all was
hushed and peaceable, and a resolution taken to defend themselves to the last
Extremity.

As indeed they did not long time after, during the Siege of Paris, so much to
the wonder and amazement of Mankind, that it may be placed in the number of
those extraordinary and admirable accidents which may be called the Miracles of
History; and which would never enter into the belief of men, if they were not
supported with an infinite number of most credible witnesses. For, in
conclusion, the King well knowing, that the end of the War, and of the League,
depended absolutely on the taking of Paris, resolved to defer no longer the
laying hold on that occasion, which he believed to be still within his reach,
not perceiving that already he had let it slip by his long delay. He departed
therefore out of Mante on the last of March, with his Army, consisting at that
time, of 12000 Foot, and betwixt 3 and 4000 Horse, and during the Month of
April, made himself Master of Corbeil, Melun, Bray, Montereau-faut-Yonne,
Lagny, Beaumont upon Oyse, Provins, and the Bridges of St. Maur, and Charenton.

The Intelligence which he held in Sens, having not succeeded, he gave two
brisk Assaults to it, in both which, his men were vigorously repulsed, by the
Lord Chanvallon, Jacques de Harlay, who there commanded for the League.
Notwithstanding which, that great Prince, who was a true lover of all brave
men, being afterward acquainted with his excellent Parts, and his inviolable
fidelity, reposed great confidence in him; insomuch that he placed him with the
Duke of Lorrain, to retain him, as he always did, in the Interests of France.
But the King, unwilling to loose more time, on a place which was so well
defended, and which, if he should take, would contribute nothing to the
Execution of his main Design; as also knowing, that by means of the Towns and
Bridges, of which he already stood possessed, he held shut up the four Rivers
that supplied Paris; he went from thence, to besiege that City, about the end
of the Month, without expecting certain Conferences which the League proposed,
as he believed, either to delay, or to divert him. And that he might have the
freedom of sending out Parties through the whole adjoining Country, on both
sides of the Seine, thereby to hinder the Town from receiving Provisions by
Land, he made a Bridge of Boats somewhat below Con^lans; so that Paris was
immediately invested on all Quarters.

There were some, and amongst others La (...), with the greatest part of the
Hugonots, who had not much kindness for the Parisians, desired that the Town
might be assaulted as imagining it might be carried by plain force at the first
attempt, and that the Citisens, who are never so very stout, as when they have
got behind their Barricades, would not be altogether so courageous upon the
Works. This was their Opinion; but it manifestly appeared, by the Skirmishes
and other Trials which were made in the beginning of the Siege, and by which,
the Kings Party were no great gainers; that those Gentlemen had taken no just
measures. La (...) himself, who would needs attacque the (...) St. Martin, was
beaten off with loss; and learnt, to his cost, by a Musket Shot, which wounded
him in the Thigh, and disabled him from fighting, that he had to do with
galiant men, who were neither to be vanquished at the Breach* nor by scaling,
so easily as he believed. There were at that time in Paris, not above two
hundred and thirty thousand Souls; because almost half the Inhabitants
apprehending the consequences of a Siege, were departed out of it and the
wealthier sort of Citisens, who had the Courage to continue there, had sent off
their Wives and Children to other Places. But a Garrison which the Parisians
had received, of 5 or 6000 old Spanish Soldiers, Lansquenets, Swisses, and
French, and 50000 Citisens well armed, and resolved to perish in the Defense of
their Town and Religion, (for which they were persuaded that they fought) had
not easily been forced by that little Army, which rather seemed to block them
up, than to besiege them.

And besides the young and valiant Duke of Nemours their Governor, had
exellently well provided for all things, during more than a month, which he
had to prepare himself for the sustaining of this memorable Siege, wherein by
his Courage and good Conduct, he acquired the Reputation of an old experienced
General. For he had fortified all the weakest parts, repaired the Breaches of
the Walls, new raised the Ramparts and the Terrasses, drawn large
Retrenchments, both within and without the heads of the Fauxbourgs, prepared
Chains, and Barrels filled with Earth, to make Barricades for all the Streets,
that the Enemies might be stopped at every Passage, while, in the mean time,
they were to be slaughtered with Musket Shot, and Stones from Windows, after
they should have enterd the Town. He had eathed up the greatest part of the
Gates, beaten down the Houses, which might have been of Service to the Enemy;
cast and mounted above threescore pieces of Cannon, which were planted on the
Ramparts, and shut up the River both above and below, by massy Chains,
sustained by Palisades, and defended by strong Corpse de Guard, to preserve the
Town from being surpised, and to hinder the Entrance into it at low water. In
conlusion, he had forgot nothing, that could possibly be necessary for a stout
Defense, and for the repulsing Force by Force.

For which cause, the King, who understood the difficulty better than those
about him, who, at that time, listened rather to their Passion than their
Reason, being not of Opinion, that his Enterprise could succeed by Assault, in
the present condition of his Affairs, always rejected that Advice; besides
loving his Subjects with a paternal Affection, and principally Paris, as he has
always made it manifest, he could never resolve on the Destruction of the
fairest Flower in his Crown, and the noblest City in the Universe, by taking it
in the way which they advised; which had been to expose it to the Fury of his
Men of War, and especially of the Hugonots, who, in revenge of their Massacre
at St. Bartholomew, would have laid it desolate with Fire and Sword.

He resolved therefore to take it by Famine, not doubting, but that all the
Passages for Provisions being shut up, it would soon be forced to a Surrender
for want of Bread. And certainly his Design was very reasonably laid, and
according to all appearances ought to have succeeded, if his Expectation had
not been deceived, by one of the most wonderful Prodigies of invincible
Patience, or rather extreme Obstinacy, in that almost unimaginable Distress, to
which they were reduced.

I shall not here describe it in all the exactness of its Cir^umstances; it is
enough if I barely say, what is generally known to all the World, that the
common Provisions, which were well husbanded, and distributed very sparingly,
were consumed in the month of June; that the Fauxbourgs being taken in July,
they were shut up in the Town, and restrained from going out to search for
Herbs, Leaves, and Roots, in the neighboring Fields, and in the Ditches: that
after they had eaten their Horses, Asses, Dogs, and Cats, they were reduced in
August, to Rats and Mice, and then to Skins and Leather, and an abominable kind
of Bread, which instead of Meal, was made of the Powder of dead men's Bones,
taken out of the Churchyard of St. Innocent; that there were some, whom that
Famine (by which twenty thousand persons dyed) brought to those horrible
Extremities which are mentioned in the Sieges of Samaria and Jerusalem.
Notwithstanding all which Miseries, it is wonderful to consider, that the
Parisians, accustomed to Plenty, and even to live luxuriously, chose rather to
endure this dreadful Famine to the end, and to expose themselves to certain
Death, whose terrible Image they had daily before their Eyes in every Street,
than to hear the least word of a Surrender.

And questionless, they had many Inducements, which contributed otheir
obstinate Resolution of suffering so long and so contentedly. The Examples of
the Princesses and great Ladies, who satisfied Nature with a very small
Pittance of Oat Bread, taught them to bear those Miseries with constancy of
Mind, which their Superiors of a more delicate and tender Sex, supported with
so much cheerfulness of Spirit. Add to this, the great Care and Vigilance of
their Heads, to hinder Tumults and Seditions, and the immediate Execution of
Mutineers. Then the Awe and Terror which was struck into them by the Sixteen,
who had resumed their first Authority in the Town; and who commonly threw into
the Seine, without judicial Process, or form of Law, all such as were suspected
to hold Intelligence with the King, or to make the least mention of a Treaty.
But the most comfortable consideration, was the great Alms, which were daily
distributed amongst the Poor, by the Order, and at the Charges of the Legate
Cajetan, the Archbishop of Lions, the Spanish Ambassador, the Wealthiest of the
City Companies, and the Cardinal Gondy Bishop of Paris, who voluntarily
enclosed himself within those Walls, for the Relief and Ease of his poor Flock.
Besides, they had no small Encouragement from the false Reports which the
Duchess of Montpensier, who was very skilful in coining News, caused daily to
be spread about Paris, and the Assurances by Letters, whether true or forged,
which she said she had received from her Brother the Duke of Mayenne, from time
to time, of speedy Succors: All which Considerations, served not a little to
encourage the People, and to inure them to that wonderful sufferance of their
Miseries.

But after all, it must be ingenuously acknowledged, that the Cause which
principally produced this great Effect, was the Zeal of Religion, which was
easily inspir^d into the People of Paris, and the great care which they took to
persuade them, as really they did, that it was no less than to betray it, and
expose it to the inevitable danger of being utterly destroyed, as had happened
in England, if they should submit themselves to a King, who made an open
Profession of Calvinism. For in fine, they omitted no manner of Arts, and of
Persuasions, to make this Opinion be swallowed by the Multitude, and
consequently to harden them against the fear of Death it self, rather than
endure the Dominion of a Prince who was an Heretic. In the first place, they
made use of the Sorbonnists, which (as their Liberty was then oppressed)
immediately made a new Decree, on the seventh of May, in which it is declared,
That Henry de Bourbon, being a relapsed Heretic, and excommunicated personally
by our Holy Father; there was manifest danger, that he would deceive the
Church, and ruin the Catholic Religion, though he should obtain an exterior
Absolution, and that therefore the French are obliged in Conscience, to hinder
him with all their Power, from coming to the Crown, in case King Charles the
Tenth should dye, or even if he should release his Right to him; and that, as
all such who favor his Party, are actually Deserters of Religion, and continue
in mortal Sin, which makes them liable to eternal Damnation; so also, by the
same reason, all such as shall persevere to the Death in resistance of him, as
Champions of the Faith, shall be rewarded with the Crown of Martyrdom.

On the occasion of this new Decree, a General Assembly was held at the
Townhouse, where all the Assistants were sworn to dye, rather than to receive
an Heretic King. This Oath was renewed yet more solemnly on the Holy
Evangelists, betwixt the Hands of the Legate, at the foot of the great Altar of
the Church of Nostredame, after a general Procession, at which, besides the
Clergy, were present, all the Princes and Princesses, and all the Companies,
the Bishops and Abbots, the Colonels and Officers, and the Persons of Quality,
followed by vast Multitudes, of People, where the Relics of all the Churches
in Paris were carried. This Oath, reduced into Writing, was sent to every
House, by the Overseers of the several Wards, who obliged all persons to take
it. After which, the Parliament made an Ordinance, prohibiting, on pain of
Death, that any one should speak of making a Composition with the King of
Navarre. and above all the rest, the Preachers of the League, and the famous
Cordelier Panigarole, Bishop of Ast, with Bellarmine the Learned Jesuit, who
both acted in Conjunction with them; the Divines of the Legate Cajetan, who
preached like the rest, during the Siege, encouraged their Auditors to suffer
all Miseries, rather than subject themselves to an Heretic, assuring them,
according to the Decree of the Sorbonne, that if they should loose their Lives
for such a Cause, they died undoubtedly for the Faith, and were to be esteemed
no less than Martyrs.

There also happened an Accident, which as fantastical and ridiculous as it
appeared, was yet of use to animate the People, and to fortify them in their
Belief, that it was their Duty to make opposition, even to Death, against the
setting up an Heretic King. For above twelve hundred Ecclesiastics, as well
Seculars as Regulars, amongst whom, were the most reformed, and most austere of
every Order, such as were the Carthusians, Minimes, Capuchins, and Feuillants,
made a kind of Muster, marching in Rank and File through the Streets, wearing
over their ordinary Habits, the Arms of Foot Soldiers, having William Roze the
Bishop of Senlis at their Head, and the Figures of the Crucifix and the Blessed
Virgin flanting in their Standard, to make it appear, that since Religion was
the Matter in dispute; their Profession, as peaceable as it was, gave them no
Dispensation in that Case, from hazarding their Lives in War like other Men,
and that they were all resolved to dye with their Brethren, in the Defense of
Faith.

All Paris ran to this Spiritual Show, which was like to have proved fatal to
the Legate; for making a Stop with his Coach at the end of Pont Nostredame, to
behold this noble Spectacle of the Church Militant; while they were giving a
Salve in honor of him, one of those good Fathers, who had borrowed his Musket
from a Citisen, and knew not that it was charged with Bullets, let fly, with no
worse Intention than to show his Manhood, and fairly killed one of his men who
sat in the Boot; which caused the Prelate, who liked not that unchristian
Proceeding very well, to make haste away for his own Security. But this made no
other Impression in the Parisians, than to confirm them in their Resolution:
For when they beheld their Confessors and Guides of their Consciences, in that
Warlike Posture, they believed such men would never have appeared in Arms,
unless they were satisfied that it was for the Cause of God, in which it was
their common Duty both to live and dye.

But what most confirmed them in this Belief, was, that the King, whose hour of
Conversion was not yet come, would never hear speak of it, in any Overtures
which were made to no purpose for a Peace. And though the Duke of Nemours, whom
he had invited by a kind Letter to Submission, since he had already satisfied
his Honor to the full, had protested, that he would be the first to throw
himself at his Feet, and that he would make it his Business too, that Paris
should acknowledge him, provided he returned into the Church, he always
rejected that Proposition. On which account, whatsoever solemn Promises he
made, that he would maintain the Catholic Religion; the Parisians, (to whom
their Preachers, who had an absolute Dominion over their Consciences, still
represented the Example of England) could never resolve to confide in him.
Thus, being persuaded that it was impossible for them to surrender, without
giving up their Religion by the same Act; they had the Courage, in the midst of
their Sufferings, to expect the great Succors which the Duke of Parma brought
to their Relief at the end of August. And that excellent Commander, without
giving Battle, (to which the King, who was constrained to retire with all his
Forces from before Paris, could never force him, so well he was retrenched at
Clay) had the Glory to execute his own design, and after his own manner, by
taking Lagny in the sight of the King, and freeing Paris, which was the end of
his Undertaking. It belongs to the general History of France, to describe all
the particular Passages of that famous Expedition; I shall only say (that I may
omit nothing which precisely concerns my Subject) that before the King had
licensed the Nobility and Gentry which attended him, to depart, and divided his
Forces into several small Bodies, as he afterward did, he would needs make a
last Attempt upon the Town.

To which effect, on Saturday night, the eighth of September, he conveyed
secretly three or four thousand chosen Soldiers into the Fauxbourgs, St.
Iacques, and St. Marceau, under the Leading of the Count de Chastillon, to
scale the Walls betwixt those two Gates after Midnight, while the Town was
buried (as it were) in the depth of Sleep. For he believed not that the
Parisians, who knew that his Army was drawn up in Battalia on the Plain of
Bondy, all Saturday, would keep themselves upon their Guard, on that side which
he purposed to attaque. But as some notice had been given of his Design, and
that besides, his Troops could not possibly enter those Fauxbourgs, without
noise, the Allarm was immediately taken, the Bells were rung, and the Citizens
in Crowds mounted the Ramparts, especially, where he meant to have planted his
Ladders. But at last, when after a long Expectation, no Enemy appeared, and
that no more noise was heard, because the Kings Soldiers, who were covered by
the Fauxbourgs, made not the least motion, and also kept a profound Silence, it
was taken only for a false Alarm. The Bells ceased ringing, and every man
retired to his own Lodging, excepting only ten Jesuits, who being more
vigilant than the rest, continued all the remainder of that Night on the same
Post, which was not far distant from their College.

In the mean time, the Soldiers of Chastillon, who were softly crept down into
the Ditch, began about four of the Clock in the Morning, to set up their
Ladders, being favored by a thick Mist, which hindered them from being
discerned. The Design was well enough laid, for there needed not above ten or
twelve men to have got over into the Town, who might have opened the Gate of
St. Marceau to their Fellows, by means of a Correspondence which was held with
a Captain belonging to that Quarter; after which it had been easy to have
possessed themselves of the University, and consequently both the Town and the
City, would have submitted themselves to the King, rather than have exposed
Paris as a Prey to two great Armies, by admitting that of the Duke of Parma, at
the Gate of St. Martin.

But the Vigilance of the ten Jesuits, broke all these Measures which were so
justly taken; for having heard a Noise in the Ditch, which was made by thos^
who were setting up their Ladders against the Walls; they cried out as loud as
they could stretch their Voices, to Arms, to Arms. Notwithstanding which, the
Soldiers were still getting up, and the first of them, who was ready to leap
upon the Rampart, happened to show his Head, just where one of those honest
Fathers was placed; who gave him such a lusty knock, with an old Halbard, which
he had in his hand, as he stood Centry, that he broke it in two upon his Head,
and tumbled him down with the Blow into the Ditch. The Companions of this
valiant Jesuit, did as much to two other Soldiers, and a fourth, who was
already got up, and held his Ladder with one Hand, to descend into the Town,
and with the other a broad Curtle-axe, to cleave the Head of the first who
should oppose him, was stopped short by two of these Fathers, who, each of
them, with a Partizan, so vigorously pushed him, that notwithstanding all the
Blows which he made in vain, at too great a distance, for fear of their long
Weapons, they forced him at the last to quit his Ladder, and having hurt him in
the Throat, overturned him backward into the Ditch after his Fellows.

The two first Citizens who ran to their Relief, Ann. 1591.
were the Advocate William Balden, and the famous Bookseller Nicholas Nivelle;
these two, finding one of those Jesuits grappling with a Soldier, who was
getting up in spite of the poor Fathers weak resistance, came into the rescue,
and lent him their helping Hands to kill him: And the Advocate immediately
turning himself to another, who had already got upon the Ramparts, discharged
so terrible a Reverse upon his right hand, with his Fauchion, that he cut it
sheer off, and sent him headlong to the Bottom; in the mean time, the Alarm
being once more warmly taken in the Town; the Citizens and Soldiers made haste
to Man the Walls, especially on that side, and heaps of kindled Straw were
thrown down to light the Ditch, and make discovery what was doing below;
whereupon the Kings Soldiers being easily discerned, left both their Ladders
and their Attempt, which now could not possibly succeed, and retired to the
Body of their Army.

So little was there wanting to bring about so great an Enterprise: For it is
most certain, that if these ten Jesuits had done like the Townsmen* and had
gone back to take their rest in their College, after the first Alarm which was
held for false, the King had that day entered Paris. But the Divine Providence
had reserved that happiness for a time more favorable to Religion, and to that
City; into which the King, being Victorious over the League, was ordained to
make a peaceable entrance, after he had solemnly professed the Catholic Faith.

In the mean time, the affairs of the League, far from being advanced after
this expedition, which was so glorious to the Duke of Parma, were soon after
reduced into a worse estate than formerly, by reason of that horrible division
which arose among their Party, and by the prudent conduct of the King. For
perceiving that his hopes were frustrate of drawing them to a Battle, who were
now at their ease, after the taking of Lagny, and had their Quarters securely
extended in La Brie; he remanded one part of his Forces to refresh themselves
in the Neighboring Provinces, and put another into Garrisons, in such places
as might serve to hinder the commerce with the Parisians, and particularly in
St. Denis, which he had taken during the Siege of Paris, and where the
Chevalier d' Aumale, who endeavored to retake it some small time afterward,
was killed when he was almost in possession of the place.

Himself, in the mean time, with a flying Army beat the Field, to cut off
Provisions from Paris, and from the Army of the Duke of Parma; who having lost
much time in taking Corbeil, which was immediately retaken from the League, was
constrained to return into Flanders, having always the King at his heels, who
perpetually harassed him, and put him to very great inconveniences and
hardships, during his march to the Frontiers of Artois* for so far he took the
pains to bring him on his Journey. After which he made another attempt on Paris,
which he hoped to have surprised by the Gate of St. Honor, with many Wagons
laden with Meal, and driven by stout Soldiers disguised in the habits of
Countrymen. The stratagem not succeeding, because there was some suspicion of
the design, he reassembled all his Forces, and went to lay Siege to Chartres,
which after a vigorous defense of more than two months, not being relieved by
the Duke of Mayenne, was constrained at last to come to a surrender.

It was particularly by the Valor, Policy, and Industry of the Brave Count of
Chastillon, Colonel of the French Infantry, that this considerable place was
taken: For that young Lord, who had as much understanding as courage, and was
very knowing, especially in the Mathematics, invented a kind of wooden Bridge,
which he cast by a new sort of machine, over the Ditch; by means of which they
could pass under covert, and without danger, as far as the foot of a great
breach, which he had made on the side of Galardon. After which, Monsieur de la
Bourdaisiere, who had bravely defended himself till then, seeing there was no
longer a possibility of resistance, made his capitulation; which the King,
always generous, and a great Lover of valor even in his Enemies, granted him
on very honorable terms.

This was the last action of Chastillon, who having served his Prince all along
with so much gallantry, ended his Life in the flower of his Age; dying not long
after at his House of Chastillon on the Loire, of a disease which he had
brought upon himself, by his over-labour at a Siege, wherein he had acquired so
just a reputation and so much glory. He was extremely lamented even by the
Catholics, who had observed in him a great inclination to renounce his
Calvinism in short time, as he who already had begun to find out the falsities
of that opinion; though the Admiral de Coligny his Father, who was a strong
Huguenot, had caused him to be carefully instructed in that way. But that
happiness which he lived not to enjoy, was reserved for his younger Brother,
Monsieur d' Andelot, who, like another Jacob, succeeded to the blessing which
was denied to the Elder Son.

He was happy also in his Posterity, who by serving their King and the True
Religion with great zeal, have repaired the mischiefs which have been done to
both, by the Admiral their Predecessor. And certainly it is one great sign of
this good fortune, that we have seen in our own days, the Forces of the King,
commanded by the Count of Coligny, for the assistance of the Emperor against
the Turk, obtain a glorious Victory over them, at that memorable Battle of
Raab, the gaining of which preserved the Empire, and delivered it from the
imminent danger of being overrun by Infidels.

But to proceed. This last piece of service which was performed by Chastillon
for the King, was of great importance to the happy success of his Affairs: For
having already in his hands the passages of all the Rivers, which discharge
themselves into the Seine, for the supply of Paris; and also being absolute
Master of La Beauce, by the reduction of Chartres, and of the other small
places of the same Province; that great City was on the sudden, as it were,
invested on all sides: And about the same time he received intelligence, of the
great successes which his Commanders had in other places against the Leaguers:
Les diguieres in Dauphine, where he was received in Grenoble: La Valette in
Provence, the Marshall of Matignon in Guyenne, where Bourdeaux, which had
hitherto maintained it self in a kind of neutrality, returned to the Obedience
of the King, and the Dukes of Montpensier and of Nevers, in Normandy and in
Champaigne.

But that which, in conclusion, ruined the League, which was already weakened by
Arms, was the furious division kindled amongst the Heads of it; the occasion of
which I shall next relate. The Duke of Parma had sufficiently taken notice,
that the Duke of Mayenne, of whose carriage he was not otherwise well
satisfied, had designed to make use of the Spaniards, in order to his support
against the King, but not to be of use to them, in making them Masters at least
of some part of France, which was their intention, or to assist them in the
Election of a new King, who should absolutely depend on them, now that the old
Cardinal of Bourbon was deceased in Prison at Fontenay le Comte. For which
reason he failed not to give notice to King Philip, that he ought not to build
any assurance hereafter on that Prince, who had besides, lost much of his
reputation, by the ill success of his affairs; and that it was much more
expedient for him, to get an interest in the Corporations of great Towns, and
above all in the Sixteen of Paris, who to compass the restoration of their
Authority, which the Duke of Mayenne had once more taken from them, would
easily consent to what he pleased.

The King of Spain followed this advice, and the Sixteen, who mortally hated
the Duke of Mayenne, seeing themselves supported by the Spaniards, with whom
they had entered into a strict League of Interest and Friendship, openly
enterpris'd, what contempt soever he had of them, in despite of him, to
re-establish themselves in their first Authority. And that which raised their
courage to a greater height, and made them more boldly put their resolutions in
practice was, that Gregory the Fourteenth, who was newly exalted to the Papacy,
had declared in ^avour of them; imitating the Spaniards in that particular, and
going quite contrary to Sixtus the Fifth.

That Pope Sixtus, who had so ill treated the King of Navarre, by the thundering
Bull which he had published against him, and who afterward opposed his being
King of France, had very much altered his opinion, after he had been better
informed of the French affairs: For having made solid reflections on the past,
without suffering himself to be prepossessed, he clearly understood the great
merits of the King, whom he then endeavored to reconcile to the Church by
gentle usage: The Ambition of the Heads of the League, the indirect dealing and
cousenages of their Agents, (who had so often deceived him by false Relations;
and more than all the rest, the pernicious designs of the Spaniards, who that
they might irrevocably engage him in their Interests, were vehemently urgent
with him to Excommunicate all the Catholics who followed the King, and that
he should bind himself by Oath, never to receive him into the Bosom of the
Church, what submission soever he should make;) had opened his eyes, and caused
him to take much other measures. For they proceeded at length to plain
threatenings, that if he denied them this satisfaction, they would protest in a
full Assembly against him, and make provision of other means for the
preservation of the Church which he had abandoned. This so far enraged him, as
he was the Man amongst all the Popes, who was the least capable of bearing such
affronts, that opposing threatenings to threatenings, he told the Ambassador
Olivares in plain terms, he would out off his Head if he should presume to stir
any farther in that matter. Which fair warning he was wise enough to take, as
well knowing the fiery temper of the Pope, who was like enough to have kept his
word.

Nay, there are some who are apt to think, that far from joining with the
League against the King, to which the Spaniards perpetually solicited him for
their own interest, he had resolved to employ the five Millions of Gold, which
he had heaped up in the Castle of St. Angelo, during his Popedom, to make War
against them, and to beat them out of the Kingdom of Naples. But his measures
were all broken by a sudden death, which carried him off on the twenty seventh
day of August, in the Year precedent.

The Leaguers, who observed not even common decency, so little dissembled their
joy for his death, that the news of it being brought to Paris, on the fifth of
September, Aubry, the Curate of St. Andre des Arcs, an harebrain'd Fool,
declaring it to the people in his Sermon, was impudent enough to say, that his
death came by miracle, betwixt the two Feasts of our Lady. And added these his
very words: God has delivered us from a wicked Pope, and an ill Politician: If
he had lived longer, you would have been all amazed to hear Sermons Preached in
Paris against a Pope; and yet it must of necessity have been done. Behold, how
much these Preachers of the League were intoxicated with their passions, which
they easily infused into the people; who followed quietly, like blind men,
their Guides, who were blinder than themselves, and who led them to the
Precipice, where they all perished.

Gregory the Fourteenth, a Milanois, who was exalted to the Papacy after Urban
the seventh, who enjoyed that honor but thirteen days, proceeded in direct
opposition to the conduct of Sixtus the Fifth. He joined with the Spaniards,
and declared openly in favor of the League, according to the manner they
desired: For laying aside the Duke of Mayenne, and the other Princes of his
House, for whom the Spaniards little cared, he writ immediately to the Sixteen,
to encourage them to persevere in the resolution which they had always
testified, and never to submit themselves to Henry de Bourbon. He promised them
fifteen thousand Crowns by the Month, for so long a time as he should judge it
necessary for their supply, and an Army of 12000 men to be raised and
entertained at his own charges, which he would suddenly send them, under the
Conduct of Hercules Sfondrato his Nephew, whom he made Duke of Montemarciano.
And that he might join his Spiritual Arms with his Temporal, he sent into
France (by the Referendary Marcelin Landriano) a Monitory, by which he
Excommunicated all Prelates, and all other Ecclesiastics of the Kings Party,
depriving them of their Benefices, if within a certain short space of time they
did not forsake him, and retire out of all places under his obedience: He
obliged the Nobility and Gentry, the Magistracy and the People, to do the same;
and, in conclusion, declared Henry of Bourbon to be a relapsed Heretic,
Excommunicated, and to have forfeited the Crown and all his Possessions and
Lordships.

There are sometimes Thunders, which make a rattling noise and do no harm,
because the fiery exhalation which breaks out of the Clouds, is evaporated,
whether by the thinness of its body, or by the violent agitation of the Air,
which disperses it before it reaches us. Of all the Thunderbolts which have
been darted from the Vatican, against Sovereign Princes, there will be found
but few which have been so noisy as this, which was accompanied with an Army
that was to Act in conjunction with the League and Spaniards: All which
notwithstanding it had little or no effect, by the care which was taken to make
evident, by many Writings which were spread abroad, the nullities of this Bull;
and by the vigorous resolutions of the King^s Council of Parliament, sitting at
Tours and at Chaalons, and of the Clergy of France, assembled at Mante, who
condemned it as erroneous, every one of them after their own manner. Insomuch,
that not a Man of all the Catholics, on that account forsook the Party of the
King, whose conversion was continually hoped, as soon as he had the means and
opportunity of causing himself to be instructed. So strongly were our Ancestors
persuaded, that the power of Popes, as Heads of the Church, extends not at all
upon the temporal, and much less on the Rights of the Crown; and that it can
ordain nothing to the prejudice of that Fidelity and Allegiance which is due to
Princes, in those things which are not manifestly against God.

It Is true, that the Parliament at Paris being for the Le^gu^, received that
Bull, and repealed the Decrees of Chaalons and Tours: But it is manifest, it was
then no free Court, as being at that time oppressed under the Tyranny of the
Sixteen, who had fettered it (as I may say) by the fear which every Member of
it had, to be led Captives in Triumph to the Bastile. In this manner, those
turbulent Spirits, who may justly be called the sixteen Tyrants of Paris,
finding themselves supported by the Protection of a Pope, became daily more
insolent and haughty, in opposition to the Duke of Mayenne's Authority: and
their Boldness was increased yet more, by a most surprising Answer, which the
King of Spain made to the Deputies of the Lorrain Princes. Those Princes being
assembled at Rheims, where was present the Cardinal of Pelve, whom the Duke of
Mayenne had made Archbishop of that Place, found themselves (in that low
Condition to which they were reduced) unable by their own Power to resist the
King, or to procure their safety by any other means, than obtaining from King
Philip, the Assistance of all his Forces, to the end that they might be able to
maintain that King, who was to be elected in the States General, which were to
be assembled for that purpose; each of them in his own Person pretending to
that Honor, yet none of them daring to own his Ambition openly, for fear of
drawing on himself the Hatred of his Rivals, who would certainly unite and band
themselves together to exclude him.

The Person who was chosen to negotiate in Spain, was the famous Peter Iannin,
President of the Parliament of Bourgogne, a man of great Integrity, exquisite
Understanding, rare Prudence, and inviolable Fidelity, which had caused the
Duke of Mayenne to repose an absolute Confidence in him; who, for his own part,
in the Honesty of his well meaning Soul, had followed him, and the Party of the
League with an implicit Faith, that it was for the safety of Religion and of
the State: for on the one side, he believed not that Religion could be
preserved in France, if the King were not a Catholic, and therefore he argued
that he ought to be such; and on the other side* being an honest Frenchman, he
would like his Master, make use of the Spaniards to compass his ends, but not
serve them, by favoring their unjust Designs in the least circumstance, to the
prejudice of the State.

Being such as I have here described him, it was not hard for him to discover
the Intentions of King Philip: who holding himself assured of the Sixteen,
which he believed to be the prevailing Faction, and much more powerful than in
effect it was, laid himself so open, as to make his Intentions be clearly
understood, which the great Prudence and Policy, whereon he so much valued
himself, should have kept undiscovered for a longer time, in expectation of a
fitting opportunity to make them known, when all things were disposed, and in a
due readiness for the Execution of his Designs. After the President had
represented to him in his Audiences, the weakness and necessities of the
League, the Forces and Progress of the King, the extreme danger in which
Religion then was, and the immortal glory which he might acquire by preserving
it in the most Christian Kingdom, by the Assistance which was expected from his
Zeal and Power, that Prince who was willing to sell his Aid at a higher Price
than bare Glory, without more advantage, opened his mind, without any reserve,
after a most surprising manner. For he caused him to be told by his Secretary
Don John D' Idiaques, that he had resolved to marry his only Daughter the
Infanta Isabella, to the Archduke Ernestus, and to give him in Dowry the
Low Countries, and since that for the Preservation of Religion in France, it
was necessary they should have a Catholic King, they could not make a better
Choice than of that Princess, who, being Niece to the three last Kings, and
Granddaughter to Henry the Second, was without contradiction more nearly
related to them than the Bourbons: that with her Person, all the Low Countries
would be re united to the Crown, and that having, besides these Advantages, the
whole Forces of the House of A^stria in favor of her, the Heretics would soon
be exterminated, and the Prince of Bearn expelled from the Kingdom.

The President overjoyed, that he had wherewithal to disabuse the Duke of
Mayenne, by means of this strange Proposition, and confirm him in those good
Opinions which the Sieur de Villeroy had infused into him; answered King Philip
with great Prudence, and no less Policy; and faintly putting him in mind of the
Salique Law, on which he did not much insist, seemed rather to encourage, than
dash his Hopes, in the prosecution of of his Purpose. Insomuch, that he drew
him to a Promise of great Supplies, both in Men and Money, which he failed not
to send, with more speed than usual. And the Duke being satisfied, that
according to that ambitious Design of the Spaniards, he could never pretend to
the Kingdom, used all his Endeavors for the future, that the Election might
not fall on any other; not even on a Prince of his own Family, who might marry
the Infanta. On the contrary, the Sixteen, who were altogether at the Devotion
of the Spaniards, by whom they were powerfully protected against him, wrote to
King Philip, by one Father Matthew (not the Jesuit of that Name) a large
Letter, the Original of which, being intercepted near Lions, was brought to the
King; in which, after their humble Acknowledgments to his Catholic Majesty, of
the many Favors and Benefits which they had received from him, they earnestly
petition him, that in case he should refuse to accept the Crown of France, he
would give them a King of his own Family, or at least some other Prince, whom
he should please to elect for his Son in Law.

It Is farther observable, that the Division which was betwixt the Duke of
Mayenne, and his nearest Relations, exceedingly increased the Power, and by
consequence, the Audacity and Insolence of those factious men: For on one side,
the Duke of Nemours (who was much incensed, that after he had so bravely
defended Paris, the Government of Normandy should be refused him, which
Province he thought to have erected into a Principality, like that of Bretagne,
of which, the Duke of Mercoeur had made himself a Sovereign Prince) was retired
with a good part of the Forces into Lionnois, and by the Correspondence which
he held with the Sixteen, did his best endeavors to supplant him; and cause
himself to be chosen Head of the Party; on the other side, the young Duke of
Guise, who had made his escape from the Castle of Tours where he was detained
Prisoner, having been received with great Acclamations by the Leaguers, who
believed, that in his Person, they had recovered his dead Father, their great
Patron and Protector; gave him much anxiety, and filled his mind with jealous
apprehensions, especially when he observed that the great Name of Guise, so
much reverenced by the Parisians, drew after it not only the Crowd of common
People, but also the Nobility and Gentlemen of the League. But above all things
it grated him, that his Nephew had made a strict Alliance with the Faction of
Sixteen, who were overjoyed to have him at their Head, in opposition to his
Uncle, whom they hated: All these Considerations put together, swelled them to
so great an arrogance, that they resolved to rid their hands of all such as
were in a Condition of hindering them from being Absolute in Paris.

To this effect, they bethought themselves of inventing a new kind of Oath,
which excluded from the Crown all the Princes of the Blood; and presenting it
to such, whom they knew to be too well principled to sign it, on their Refusal,
they made Seizure of their Estates, and banished them. In fine, having by this
abominable Practice, driven away all those who stood suspected by them, and
even the Cardinal of Gondy their Bishop, who, together with the Curats of St.
Merry, and of St. Eustache, endeavored to incline the People, by gentle
Persuasions, to return to their Obedience; they committed a most barbarous and
inhumane Action, which by the just Judgment of God and Men, was in conclusion,
the ruin of that execrable Faction.

For, to intimidate the Parliament, which opposed their unjust and violent
Undertakings, and had newly acquitted one of those, whom they accused of
holding Correspondence with the Royalists, and to revenge themselves of the
President Brisson, who had advertised the Duke of Mayenne, that those Villains
had written to the King of Spain, and offered him the Crown; on the fifteenth
of November, very early in the Morning, they seized that worthy Gentleman,
together with the Sieur Larcher a Counselor of Parliament, and the Sieur
Tardif, his great Friends and Confidents; carried them one after the other, to
the Petit Chastelet, and there having first declared them by their own private
Authority, without other form of Process, to be attainted and convict of
Treason, for having favored the Party of the King of Navarre, they ordered
them to be hanged on a Beam of the Council Chamber, and the next day tied them
to three Gibbets, in the Place of the Greve, having each of them an Inscription
fastened to him, signifying that they were Traitors to their Country, and
favorers of Heretics.

They believed that by this means, the People imagining that those unfortunate
men intended to have sold them to the Enemy, would approve that action; but on
the contrary, every one shook with horror at so piteous a Spectacle. Even those
who were of their Faction, detested in their hearts this horrible Cruelty, and
there were none who had not reason to fear that their own Lives might every
moment be exposed to the fury of those Tyrants, if some speedy stop were not
put to the course of their outrageous Proceedings. For which reason, when the
Duke of Mayenne had received Notice of it at Laon, where he then was, and was
withal advertised, that those furious People had incurred the general Hatred,
and that they said openly, that they would do as much to him, as they had done
to others; he came at length to be of Opinion, that he might sa^ely punish
them, without fear of a Rising in their Favor. Upon which, he entered Paris
with the Forces which he had about him, forced Bussy le Clerc to surrender the
Bastile into his hands; and after having laid the Faction asleep, by a seeming
negligence for some few days, while they believed that he had satisfied
himself, with the Reproof which he had given them in the Townhouse, where he
only advised them to be more moderate, he condemned nine of them to death,
without observing more formalities than they had used on the like occasion.

Four of them, namely, Ameline, Emonot, Anroux, and Commissary Louchard, who
were apprehended on the fourth of September betimes in the morning at their
houses, were brought to the Louvre, where the Duke of Mayenne, as they were
told, desired to speak with them. But upon their entrance, they found the Sieur
de Vitry, who caused their Sentence to be read to them: And at the same time,
the Executioner, who stood ready with his Servants, his Halters, and his
Ladder, hung them up all four on a Beam, in the Swisses Hall. The remaining
five, amongst whom was Bussy Le Clerc, having received intimation that they
were to be taken, saved themselves by flying into Flanders, where they died of
want, being unreliev'd and forsaken by all mankind.

The Duke was contented to punish the rest in their purses, by forcing them to
refund the wealth which they had scrap^d together during their Tyranny, with so
much rapine and oppression. And to cut up by the roots, those evils which
proceeded from the licentious meetings of the Sixteen, particularly at the
houses of the two Curats, Bouch^r and Pelletier, as also to free the Citizens
from their arbitrary power of commanding them to Arm when they thought good,
which they durst never disobey; he caused to be verified in Parliament, and
published an Ordinance by which all persons were prohibited on pain of Life,
and especially those who were called The Council of Sixteen, to hold any more
Assemblies. And all the Officers, Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns of
the Town, and most considerab^e Citizens joining with him, to take from that
accursed Race of factious men, all farther power of harming either the public
or private persons, they all swore, and made a promise to Almighty God, on the
Holy Evangelists, neither to take Arms themselves, nor permit others to take
Arms, or to assemble themselves together, unless by authority from the Duke of
Mayenne, or the Provost of Merchants and the Sheriffs, who were his Creatures:
To fall on all such who should presume to Arm, or to Assemble, and to use them
like Traitors, Mutineers, and Persons guilty of Impiety and High Treason: And
if they should discover any attempt or secret conspiracy, to give notice of it
to the Magistrates, to the end the Authors and Accomplices of it might be
brought to condign punishment, and themselves might live in peace and
quietness, in the fear of God, and under the protection of the Laws.

I have seen in the Library of Monsieur Colbert, (which is stored with great
numbers of excellent Manuscripts, and most authentic pieces) the Original of
this Oath in Parchment^, signed by five hundred fifty eight Persons, whereof
two hundred sixty four signed on the fifth of September, (the day after the
Execution of the four, who were hanged at the Louvre) and the rest on the
twenty third of December, and the tenth of January, in the year following. This
was the fatal blow, which beat down the Faction of the Sixteen, which from that
time forward, was so far disarmed and weakn'd, that it never durst offer at any
thing more: which was one of the principal Causes of the Freedom; and in
consequence of the peaceable Reduction of Paris, to the Obedience of the King.

For which reason, I believe my Reader will be glad to be acquainted with the
Names of some amongst them, who, by the great Zeal which they testified on that
occasion, to assure the Peace and Liberty of Paris, had the Happiness and Glory
to have much contributed to the accomplishment of so good a Work. I could not
here insert five hundred Names, without tiring the Patience of my Reader, who
will therefore satisfy himself with those few, which I have selected from so
great a number, bebecause they appear to me to be the best known, and the most
remarkable amongst them. Nicholay, Thiersaut, Le Fevre, L' Huillier, Parfait,
Rouilliard, Pasquier, Boulanger, Blondel, Rolland, Hebers, Des Cominges,
Amelot, D' Aubray, and P. Le Tellier.

The Duke of Mayenne, having in this manner reestablished his own Authority,
and the security of Paris, by the pulling down, or rather the total ruin of
the Sixteen, would also repair the Loss which the Parliament had suffered of
its only President, remaining now without an Head: and acting with absolute
Power, in the nature of a Sovereign Monarch, he created four new Presidents,
out of their number, whom he believed to be entirely in his Interests, not
doubting but they would employ themselves on all occasions, to maintain his
Power in that Body. after which he was obliged to take the Field, and to beg,
as he had done formerly the Assistance of the Spaniards against the King; who
having made great progress during those Troubles and Divisions, which were
likely at that time to ruin the Party of the League, had laid Siege to Rouen.

He had already taken Noyon in view of the Enemies Army, which which was then
stronger than his own: And having lately received the Supplies of Money, and of
three thousand men, which the Earl of Essex, the Queen of Englands Favorite
had brought him, he went with twelve hundred Horse to join upon the Frontier,
on the Plains of Vandy, five or six thousand Reiters, and above ten thousand
Lansquenets, which the Vicount de Turenne had brought him from Germany; where
he negotiated so well with the three Protestant Electors, and William
Landtgrave of Hesse, that he obtained this considerable Succor,
notwithstanding all the Endeavors which the Emperor Rodolphus had used to
hinder him. Which important Service, with many others which he had constantly
performed from time to time, during the space of eighteen years that he had
served the King, was immediately recompensed by his Royal Master, who having
given him the Baston of Mareshall, made him Duke of Bouillon, and Sovereign
Prince of Sedan, by giving him in marriage the Princess Charlotte de la Mark,
Sister and Heir to the Duke deceased. He also on his side, being desirous to
let the King understand, that he would endeavor to deserve that Honor which
was done him by his Majesty, and what he might expect hereafter from him, did
like David, who married not Saul's Daughter, till he had killed an hundred
Philistims; for, as a Preparatory to his Marriage, in imitation of that
Scripture-Hero, he took the Town of Stenay by Scalado, the day before his
Marriage. The King now finding himself strengthened with so considerable a
Supply, went to re-joyn the Gross of his Army before Rouen, which the Marshal
de Biron had invested. As that Town was well attaqu'd, so was it better
defended, during the space of six months, by Andrew Brancas de Villars, who was
afterward Admiral of France, and at that time Lieutenant General in Normandy,
and Governor of Rouen and Havre de Grace, for the League. He performed on that
occasion, all that could be expected from a great Captain, for the defense of a
Town committed to his Charge; and by his long and vigorous Resistance, twice
gave leisure to the Duke of Mayenne, to bring him the Relief which he had
obtained from the Spaniards. It was not without much difficulty that he gained
these Succors; but at length, having artfully insinuated into the King of
Spains Ministers, that he would procure the Election to fall upon the Infanta,
which thing they passionately desird, though he fed them only with false hopes
of it; the Duke of Parma received such express Orders to march once more into
France, for the Relief of Rouen, that it was impossible for him to resist them,
though he would gladly have been dispensed with, from that expedition.

He therefore advanced but very slowly, Ann. 1592.
with a strong Army of thirteen or fourteen thousand old Soldiers, Spaniards
and Walloons, and seven or eight thousand French, Lorrainers and Italians,
which last, were the remainders of the Duke of Mayennes, and Montemarciano's
Forces. The King in person, went to meet them on their way, with part of his
Cavalry, to harrass them in their March, and advanced as far as Aumale, that he
might defend that Passage against them. But considering that he had not
strength enough to maintain it, and that their whole Army, which he went on
purpose to view and to observe, was coming to fall upon him, and might easily
enclose him, by passing the River, either above or below that Borough, he
thought it necessary to make a speedy Retreat. It Is true, that this Retreat
which he made in view of so great an Army, was very brave, and that he never
showed the greatness of his Courage and undaunted Resolution, more than on this
occasion, which was the most dangerous in which he had ever been engaged; but
the great Captains of that time, all concurred in one Opinion, that he
performed it rather like a valiant Soldier, who was well seconded by Fortune,
than like a prudent General, whose duty it is, to take his Measures so justly,
that he may not absolutely depend on the inconstancy of chance, which often, by
one sudden blow, has ruined the most fixed and solid Undertakings. For, that he
might give his men the leisure of retiring with the Baggage, he placed an
hundred Arquebusiers, at the en^rance of the Borough, and putting himself at
the Head of two hundred Horse, he advanced almost half a League toward the
Enemy, coming up within Pistolshot of them, and made many discharges upon the
Carabins, which marched at the Head of the Army, whom he immediately stopped.
But the Duke of Parma, having received information, that he was there in
Person, so weakly attended, and out of his Generals Post, first sent out his
Light Horse against him, and after them, the Body of his men at Arms, who drove
him back into Aumale. His hundred Arquebusiers were there almost all of them
cut in pieces, and he was in danger to have been enclosed, and either killed or
taken, had not the night come on apace, during which, the Enemies unwilling to
engage themselves any farther, without having first discovered the Country, he
fortunately brought off his men, in that dangerous Retreat; in which he was
shot in the Reins with a Pistol^Bullet; but the Discharge being made at too
great a distance, it only razed his Skin, without farther harm: His Enemies
themselves, and principally the Duke of Parma, in this Combat, admired his
Valor, and his good Fortune, but gave no great commendations to his Conduct,
and the Marshal de Biron, who used to speak his mind freely, could not hold
from telling him at his return, that it was unbecoming a great King to do the
duty of a Carabin.

In the mean time Villars, willing to make advantage of his Absence, performed
one of the most gallant Actions which were done in the course of the whole War.
For being informed by his Spies, in what order the Camp of the Besiegers lay;
he on the twenty sixth of February, made a furious Sally out of all the Gates
which were opposite to the Key; which, in effect, was worth to him the gaining
of a Battle. For having surprised the Enemy, and carried all the Quarters which
looked toward those Gates, at a brisk Charge, which he made on them severally,
at the same time, he possessed himself of the Trenches and all the Camp which was
on that side; where, during almost two hours that he was Master of them, his
Infantry beat down, overthrew, wasted and burnt the Tents, Gabions, Batteries,
Utensils, Ammunition, Powder and Baggage; filled up the Trenches, spoiled the
Mines, nailed the Cannon, destroyed or made useless almost all their Labor,
while himself advancing with four Squadrons of chosen men, against the Marshal
de Biron (who was hasting thither, though somewhat of the latest, from his
Quarters at Dernetal, to the Succor of his Men) made good his Retreat with
great bravery, returning often to the Charge, that his Infantry might have
leisure to make havoc of all things, and afterward to retire with him, which
they did, and he re-enter'd the Town in triumph, with more than an hundred
Prisoners, and five great pieces of Cannon, having killed above five hundred
men, twelve Captains, two Colonels, and disordered and routed the greatest part
of the Camp, without the loss of more than thirty men.

After this great Success, Villars held himself to be in so good a Condition of
defense, that he sent, to desire of the two Dukes, to supply him only with
Money for Payment of the Garrison, as believing that he should need no other
Succors. But the King, who at his return, soon redressed the Disorders, and
forwarded the Siege, having shut up the River both above and below the Town,
with a great number of Barques, which were well equipped, and ten great Holland
Vessels, which were brought him by Count Philip of Nassau, the Town was reduced
to a want of Provisions, in two months time. Insomuch, that Villars was
constrained to give notice to the Dukes, who were refreshing their Army beyond
the Sum, that the Citizens were not of the same mind with the Parisians, to
dye of Famine, and that therefore he should be forced to capitulate, in case he
was not relieved within eight days.

At this News, the Dukes, who on the other hand understood, that the Kings Army
was much weakened with hard Duty and Suffering at so long a Siege, in one day
reassembled all their Forces, marched without their Baggage, re-pass'd the
Sum, made thirty Leagues in four days time, and on the twentieth of April,
appeared in Battalia within a League of Rouen. The Head-officers entered the
City that Evening, because the King, (who was not able to make Ressistance at
one time, against a great Army which lay without, and a Garrison within the
Town, encouraged by the presence of so powerful a Relief) was constrained to
raise the Siege, and to retire to Pont de l' Arch, where the Nobility, and the
Troops which he had before sent off, to refresh themselves in the adjacent
Country, reassembled within five or six days, to the number of three thousand
Horse, and six thousand Foot. Then finding himself superior in strength to the
Army of the Dukes, who having taken the small Town of Caudebec, were gone to
take up their Quarters at Yvetot, and to cover it; he marched directly toward
them, with a Resolution, either to force them to a Battle, or to enclose them
within a little corner of the Country of Caux, cutting them off from all
manner of Provisions, and taking from them all means of their Retreat.

And truly his Design in all probability must have succeeded; for having forced
them, after many small Skirmishes, wherein he had still the advantage, to
forsake their Quarters at Yvetot, and to retire by night to a more secure Post,
within a quarter of a League of Caudebec, he surrounded them, and shut them up
so straightly, that they could neither subsist any longer, all the Passages for
Victuals being seized, nor yet retire, having at their Back an Arm of the Sea,
and before them an Enemy, who was stronger than themselves* nor could they
fight, without being evidently exposed to a total Overthrow. But the good
Fortune, the Skill and great Genius of the Duke of Parma, overcame all these
Difficulties, and in one night drew them out of that imminent Danger of
perishing, when no appearance of safety was remaining to them. For under
protection of two great Forts, which he had raised on the two Banks of the
River, with Redoubts, which commanded the Water, and great Outworks, which on
his side were advanced toward the Kings Army, as if he had intended to have
expected them within his Retrenchments; on the twelfth of May at night, he
passed over his whole Army, his Baggage, and his Cannon, in a great number of
large Boats, covered with Beams and Boards, which he had ordered to be conveyed
down from Ro^en. Insomuch, that at break of Day, every thing was in safety on
the other side the Seine; and the King, who discovered this wonderful Stratagem
too late, was not able to hinder the Prince Ranuccio Farnese, who with fourteen
or fifteen hundred men had covered this Retreat in the great Fort, and in the
Outworks, from filing off with his Men, and passing them them all over
together with his four pieces of Cannon, on the Boats and Ferry-boats, which he
afterward set on fire.

Thus the Duke of Parma found the means in one night, to put a great River,
which in that place was a mile and a half broad, betwixt his Army and that of
the King, who admired that Action, as the Masterpiece of one of the greatest
Captains in the World. And without giving the King leisure to pursue him by
Pont de l' Arche, he prevented him in such manner by his diligence, that in
four days he was got into La Brie, by repassing the Seine on a Bridge of Boats,
right over against Charenton. After which, having re-inforc'd Paris with
fifteen hundred Walloons, and taken the Town of Epernay, where he passed the
Marne, he re-conducted his Forces into the Low Countries, having acquired
immortal Glory, by performing his Designs at two several times, against a great
King, without hazarding his Army, and forcing him to raise his Sieges from
before two the greatest Cities in the Kingdom, Paris and Rouen.

Now, as it often happens, that evil is the unexpected occasion of good, so the
Siege of Rouen, which succeeded not happily to the King, produced a
Negotiation, which disposed all things so well, in order to his Conversion,
that it may be said to have sowed the Seeds, which not long afterward produced
so excellent a Fruit. The Duke of Mayenne mortally hated the Spaniards, who had
openly declared, they would not succor him, in case he did not oblige himself,
to act in such manner, that the States should elect the Infanta, with that
Person, who should be given her for Husband; of which he had been constrained
to give them Hopes, though he had resolved beforehand to do nothing in it. He
had likewise joined with the Politics, who were now the strongest in Paris,
against the shattered remnants of the Faction of Sixteen: Those Politics had
also admitted him to be their Head, but on condition that a Treaty should be
set on foot with the King, provided he made himself a Catholic; to which
terms, the Duke, who plainly saw that he could no longer pretend to the Crown,
had at length submitted.

On the other side, the King found himself very uneasy, and much perplexed,
betwixt the Hugonots and Catholics of his Party; for the first perpetually
apprehending that he would escape out of their Possession, kept close about
him, and growing more and more jealous of his Carriage, were thinking to choose
themselves another Protector. And the greatest part of the Catholics, some of
them really despighted, and others seemingly, that he delayed too long to be
instructed in the Catholic Religion, and consequently converted to it, formed
amongst themselves a new Union, which they called by the Name of the third
Party, of which the young Cardinal of Bourbon was declared Head; who expected,
that if the King should continue obstinate in his Heresy, those who had
hitherto followed him only in hopes of his Conversion, would in conclusion
abandon his Party, and place him on the Throne. And truly it might reasonably
be feared, that the Duke of Mayenne, who was strongly solicited to have joined
that Party with his own, in order to elect a King of the Royal House, would at
length have consented to that Proposition, rather than endure the Spaniards
should elect that Person who was to espouse their Infanta, even though he were
a Prince of his own Family.

Things being thus favorably disposed on both sides, toward the conclusion of
a Peace, the Sieurs du Plessis Mornay, and de Villeroy, were chosen to labor
in this Treaty, which was to be kept exceeding private. In the beginning of it,
there was started a great preliminary Difficulty, which was of necessity to be
surmounted before any thing could be proposed, touching the Conditions and
Articles of the Treaty it self. For Villeroy was resolved not to enter upon it,
till in the first place, the King gave assurance, that he would embrace the
Catholic Faith, immediately after he had been instructed in it; and du Pl^ssis
remonstrated on the other side, that this Proposal shocked both his Honor and
his Conscience, because in case he held not both Religions to be indifferent to
him, and by that means wou^d pass for an Atheist, he ought not to be obliged,
to make choice of one in particular, before his Doubts were removed, and his
Conscience satisfied that it was the true Religion. But in conclusion, a
temperament was found, which was, that the King, without offending either his
Honor or his Conscience, should cause himself to be instructed within six
Months, with a true desire to be converted; that, in the mean time, he should
grant leave to the Catholic Princes and Lords of his Party, to send a
Deputation to the Pope, to petition him, that he would confirm by his
Authority, this holy Resolution; and that in expectation of its Accomplishment,
the treaty of Peace should still proceed; which being once concluded, the King
should be acknowledged by the Princes of the League. He consented without
making any difficulties, to these two preliminary Articles, without which,
there was no entering into the Negotiation. And with the same ease they came to
an Agreement on the Articles, which concerned in general the Party of the
League; but when they proceeded to the particular Interests of the several
Confederate Lords, the Duke of Mayenne made such high and exorbitant Demands
for himself and them, as were manifestly tending to the dismembring of the
State; so that in conclusion, seeing he would abate nothing of them, they were
forced to break off the Conference, after two Months that were spent in the
Negotiation.

It procured notwithstanding, this good effect, that the King continued fixed in
the Resolution which he had taken, to cause himself to be instructed in good
earnest, and to permit his Catholic Lords to send their Deputies to the Pope,
who were the Cardinal de Gondy, and the Marquess de Pisany. Innocent the Ninth,
who had succeeded Gregor^ the Fourteenth the year before, had, like him,
declared openly in favor of the League. He had also created Cardinal Philippo
Sega, Bishop of Placentia, and made him his Legate in France; whom Cardinal
Cajetan, returning to Rome after the death of Sixtus Quintus, had left at Paris
in his place, there to be serviceable to the League, as in effect he was to the
utmost of his power. Clement the Eighth, having succeeded this Pope, who
enjoyed not the Papacy above two months, at the beginning followed the steps of
his two Predecessors, and suffering himself to be prepossessed by the
Spaniards, would not so much as give Audience to those Deputies; yet their
Deputation, as shall be manifest in due time, failed not to produce those happy
effects which were expected from it, and which were fatal to the League.

In the mean time, the King always pursuing his point, went to retake the Town
of Epernay, after the Marshal de Biron, who was set down before it, and had
begun to form the Siege, was slain by the shot of a Falconet, which took off
his Head as he was going to observe the place. In pursuance therefore of his
design, that he might make himself Master of all Brye, he besieged and took in
the space of three days the Town of Provins, which is the Capital of that
Country: After which he built a Fortress in the Isle of Go^rnay, betwixt Meaux
and Paris, within four Leagues of that great City; thereby to hinder it from
being any ways supplied by the Marne, which brings into it a great part of the
Commodities of La Brie and Champaign.

On the other side, the Duke of Mayenne, who having not strength sufficient to
oppose this progress of the Kings success, was unable to do any thing for the
relief of Paris, but only to take Crespy in Valois, resolved at last to employ
that formidable machine against the King, with which he had so long been
threatened; I mean, the Assembly General of the States, therein to proceed to
the Election of a new King, who should be of the Catholic Religion; of which
all the Kings of France, as Eldest Sons of the Church, have made a constant
profession since the time of Clovis the Great, who after his Baptism deserved
the glorious Surname of Most Christian, which he has transmitted without the
least interruption, to all his Successors, during the space of almost twelve
hundred years, from him to King Henry the Third deceased.

The Duke had solemnly obliged himself, more than once to call this Assembly,
but he had always delayed it with great Art, both for the Interest of the
State, and for his own particular concernment. For on the one side, he always
feared that the Spaniards (who spared for nothing to gain the Deputies from
him, partly by Bribes, and partly by the presence of a great Army, which they
intended yet once again to send into France, under the Duke of Parma, to
protect the States as they gave out) at length should compass their design,
which was, to procure their Infanta to be Elected: And on the other, plainly
foreseeing that he should not be Elected himself, because he could not marry
the Infanta; he resolved no other should be chosen, that he might not lose that
Sovereign Authority, which he could maintain no longer than till the States had
made an Election of a new King.

But after all, he could no longer resist the pressing solicitations, which the
great Cities of his Party, the Spaniards, the Pope himself and his Legate made
him continually, putting him in mind of the promise he had so often given of
calling that Assembly. And that which fixed him at last in this determination,
was, that the Duke of Parma, who was assembling his Forces to enter France for
the third time, dyed in the midst of these consul^ations, on the fifth of
December: For he believed that the Spaniards, having now no General, who was
any way comparable to the Genius of that great Man, would leave him the command
of their Armies, or at least, not being able to make any great progress, would
be no longer so formidable to him, which fell out accordingly. On which
consideration, he made no longer scruple to assemble the Deputies, which
already had been chosen in the Provinces and in the Towns, not doubting but
since he had for him, besides a great part of those Deputies, the Parliament,
the Town house, the greatest part of the Colonels, and the Faction of the
Politiques; that he should be able with ease, to break all the measures of the
Spaniards, and those few Malcontents which were yet remaining of the Sixteen,
whom he no longer regarded but as a sort of Rabble, whose impotent fury he
contemned. And it was for this very reason, that he at last resolved the
Assembly should be held at Paris, notwithstanding all the Artifices of the
Spaniards, who endeavored that it should be at Rheims, or at Soissons, where
the Duke could not secure to himself those great advantages which he had at
Paris.

The Assembly then was appointed to be held in the Month of January: Ann. 1593.
And while the Deputies were coming to Paris, the Duke of Mayenne published an
ample Declaration, bearing date the fifth of January, in which, after he had
justified the Arms of the League, by all the most plausible reasons he could
urge, and principally by the great motive of Reli^ion, which at last must give
place to Heresy, if an Heretic King should be received; he invited all the
Princes, Prelates, Lords, and Catholic Officers, who were of the opposite
party, to meet the rest of that Assembly, that they might all cooperate
without other consideration, than only the Glory of God and the public good,
in choice of those means, which should be found most proper for the
preservation of Religion and the State; making his pr^^^^tation against such
who should refuse so reasonable a way, that they were to be esteemed the cause
of all those mischiefs and misfortunes, which from that time forward should
ensue.

The Legate made his Declaration apart, but in a much more odious manner;
because instead of containing himself within the general terms of the good of
Religion and the State, as the Duke of Mayenne had done, he invited the
Catholics to meet in the States, for the Election of a King, who should be a
Catholic in practice as well as in profession, and who, by his power, was able
to support Religion and the State: By which words he seemed evidently to point
out the King of Spain.

It was not hard for the King to answer these two Declarations, with solid
Arguments, and to make a like protestation against the Authors of them, by an
Edict of the same Month. And in the mean while, the Deputies being almost all
arrived they went in procession to the Church of Nostre-Dame, where having
received the holy Communion, they heard a Sermon, which was Preached to them by
the famous Genebrard, to the great scandal of all true Frenchmen, and
wellmeaning people in that Congregation.

This Doctor was certainly one of the most able Men of the Age, but especially
in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and the Hebrew Tongue, whereof he was
the Kings Professor at Paris: But by that unhappy fatality, or rather excess of
immoderate Zeal, which drew almost all the Doctors of Paris into the League, he
embraced it so passionately, that he was always one of the most fiery, and
headstrong defenders of it; which quality, joined to his profound Learning, was
the cause that Gregory the Fourteenth, that great Protector of the League, gave
him the Archbishopric of Aix, after the death of Alexander Canigrany; who dyed
at Rome.

Now, he being one of the principal Deputies for the Order of the Clergy, and
having acquired much Reputation and Authority by his rare knowledge, was
desired to Preach this Sermon: In which, instead of exhorting the Deputies
according to Gods Word, that they should have nothing before their eyes, in all
their Debates and Consultations, but only the preservation of the State and of
Religion, which is the strongest support of it; he enforced himself to prove by
weak, sophistical reasons, that their Assembly had power to change and abolish
the Salique Law, that is, the fundamental Law of the Realm, which has been
always inviolably observed, since the establishment of the French Monarchy even
to this day: As if the States, who have no other power than that of
representing by way of Petition, what they believe to be necessary for the good
and maintenance of the State, had the authority of destroying it, by ruining
and undermining the foundations which support it, and which preserve it from
falling into the hands of strangers. But the reason of this was, that the
Doctor, being a true Leaguer, and a false Frenchman, as one who was devoted to
the service of King Philip, like the Sixteen, in whose Faction he was engaged,
endeavored to incline the Minds of the Deputies, to dispose of the Crown of
France to the Infanta of Spain, according to the intentions of the Spaniards,
who had given him instructions to Preach up this wicked and notoriously false
maxim, for sound Doctrine and for Gospel Truth.

The Duke of Mayenne, who notwithstanding that he was Head of the League, had
the Soul of a good Frenchman, and was one who loved his Country, as the King
himself acknowledg^d, had a much different prospect of things, and without
concerning himself at this idle discourse, because he knew it was in his power
to hinder it from taking effect, opened the States General on the Twenty sixth
of January, in the Great Hall of the Louvre; where all Ceremonies were
punctually observed in the same manner, as they are always practis^d in States
which are lawfully Assembled. And all that pleasant turn of Burlesque, which is
given to the description of it, by the ingenious Author of the Catholicon of
Spain, is no other than pure invention of a great Wit, who under those
delightful Fictions, hides many sharp Truths, which justly decry the Party of
the League.

For indeed there was no other Procession, than that which was made by all the
Deputies, when they went in a Body to perform their Devotions at Nostre-Dame.
As for that other of Monks, who were armed, over the different habits of their
Orders, which is described so pleasantly in the beginning of the Catholicon,
and which is still to be seen in several Prints, it means no more than the
Muster of those Ecclesiastiques and Religious, whom the Author of that Satyr
has tra^sported from the Siege of Paris, to those States, disguising his Fable
into a Procession, to make his Work more divertising to the Reader.

The Formalities there were according to the usual custom, excepting only that
the Duke of Mayenne, as Lieutenant General of the State, and Crown of France,
was seated under a Canopy of Clo^h of Gold, which was never seen practiced in
former times. The three Orders took their places, after the usual manner: That
of the Clergy was very numerous: There was but a thin appearance of Lords and
Gentlemen in that of the Nobless: But to add more luster to it, Monsieur de
Mayenne, as if he were invested with Sovereign Power and Authority, took that
Prerogative which belongs only to the King; which was, to create an Admiral,
namely, the Marquess de Villars; and four Marshals of France, the Sieurs de
Ch^stre and de Boisda^phin, whose Families are well known to be ancient; (...)
a Gentl^man of Lorrain, Younger Brother of the House of Savigny, Lord of (...)
in the Duchy of Bar, and St. Paul, a Soldier of Fortune, who by his Valor and
Military Skill, had acquired the Title of Nobless.

Monsieur de Mayenne, after the death of the Duke of Guis^, whose Creature this
Captain was, had entrusted him with the Government of Champaigne, where after
having made himself Master of Rheims, Mezieres, and Vitry, he had the boldness
to possess himself by force of the Duchy of Rhetelois, and to hold it in
quality of Duke, by virtue of the Donation which he said he had from the Pope,
as the King writ word to the Duke of Nevers from the Camp before Chartres: But
at last his intolerable pride, accompanied with the Tyranny which he exercised
in that Province, cost him his Life by the hand of the young Duke of Guise, who
laid him dead at his feet by a thrust of his Sword which pierced his heart;
because that Prince having civil^y requested him to withdraw the Soldiers out
of Rheims, which he had placed there to assure himse^f of that City; this
pretended Ma^shal, who would in contempt of him be absolute, had told him in a
haughty manner, and laying his hand on his Sword, that he would not do it.

To proceed, the Duke of Mayenne, as Lieutenant General of the State, having
thus created an Admiral, and four Marshals of France, thought what he had done
would be of great consequence to the Authorizing these mock-States of Paris,
and to confirm his own power together with the establishment of his Party. But
the Lord of Chanvallon, who had as much Wit as he had Courage, and who foresaw
the consequences of that action, said freely to him: Look well to your self,
Sir, for by this new Creation, you have begotten so many Bastards, as wi^ one
day ^egitimate themselves at your cost and charges. And this indeed was
verified not long after, in the Persons of Villars, La Chastre, and
Boisdauphin, who forsook the Duke, and made their Treaty with the King, that
they might be maintained by a lawful Authority, in those high dignities which
the King alone, to the exclusion of all others, can bestow. And if the Baron of
Rosne, who was of Birth and Merit sufficient to have been Marshal, had been
possessed of Towns like the others, which he might have surrendered to the King
after their example, he might have been legitimated as well as they; and then
those Cities had not been lost, which the Spaniards (to whom he went over,
after having been refused by the King) took under his conduct and by his
valor, in the Province of Picardy.

Thus I have given an account of the Order of the Nobless in these States: As
for the third Order, it was composed of a few considerable persons, and of a
great number of such as were packed together, and who served only to make a
show of a full Assembly. The Speeches which are to be seen in the Catholicon,
as if made by Rapin, Monsieur Gillot, Counselor of the Court, Florent
Chrestien, and Mr. Pierre Pithou, are only invented for the pleasure of the
Reader. For there were spoken only four, according to the usual custom of other
States: Monsieur de Mayenne opened these by a Speech of his own; wherein to
answer the expectation of the Deputies, he declared, that this Assembly was
only called, that therein they might proceed to the election of a Catholic
King; which notwithstanding was far from his intention, for his whole
endeavors were to frustrate that choice, as in effect he did. The Cardinal of
Pellev^, who began very much to decline in his Parts, said nothing that was
material in speaking for the Order of the Clergy, which he represented: The
Baron of Senecey for the Nobless, and the Sieur de Laurence, Advocate General
of the Parliament of Provence, for the third State, spoke incomparably better,
each of them after his own manner; the last like a great Orator, and the former
like a prudent Gentleman.

In the mean time, the King, who was unacquainted with the secret drift of the
Duke of Mayenne's intentions, was very much in fear that in this Assembly they
would elect a King, who being owned for such by the Pope, the King of Spain,
and the greatest part of the Potentates of Christendom, by all the Catholics
of the League, and perhaps also by those of the third Party, whom he ever
suspected, would at least prolong the War, and might possibly remain Conqueror.
In order to the prevention of so great an evil, he thought good that the
Catholics of his Party should send a Trumpet to the Assembly with an
Authentic Act, by which they gave them to understand, that since the Duke of
Mayenne had signified by his Declaration, that he had called that Assembly with
intention to find the means of preserving Religion and the State; they were
most ready to send their Deputies, to confer with theirs at some place near
Paris, which should be agreed on by both Parties, to the end they might compass
so great a blessing, which was the aim of their desires; protesting that in
case they refused this reasonable Proposition, they should be held guilty of
all those evils, which should be produced by the continuation of so bloody a
War.

It Is a wonderful kind of blindness, which a strong passion produces in a Mind
that suffers it self to be prepossessed with it; that how clear-sighted soever
it be naturally, yet it sees not those things which are obvious to the most
common capacities at the first glance. The Proposition was made in the plainest
and most intelligible terms, without the least ambiguity in their meaning, that
there should be a conference betwixt the Catholics of the two Parties, to
consider of the safest ways which could be found for the preservation of
Religion and the State; yet the Cardinal Legate consulting only the violent
passion which he had to support the Faction of the Sixteen against the King,
and to exclude him from the Crown, cried out, that this Proposition of the
Catholic Royalists was contrary to the Law of God, who forbids any
communication with Heretics; and the Doctors, who were devoted to the League,
to whom that message was sent to be examined, declared it to be schismatical
and Heretical. But the Duke of Mayenne, who had another prospect of things than
the Leaguers and Spaniards, and who was resolved to hinder the election of a
King, managed that affair so dexterously, that it was concluded in the States,
that the conference should be accepted, betwixt those only who were Catholics
of the two Parties, in the same manner as it was proposed. Notwithstanding
which, it was not held till two months after, at the end of April, in the
Borough of Surenne, because the Duke of Mayenne, who desired only to gain time
for the compassing his ends, was gone, before he returned his answer, to meet
the Spanish Army, which was commanded by Count Charles of M^nsfield. That Duke
was of opinion, that with their assistance he might take all the places on the
Seine, both above and below, which inconvenienc'd Paris. But the Army being so
very weak, that with his own Forces which were added to it, there were not in
all above 10000 Men; all that he could do was only to take Noyon, which
employed his time; after which, it was so much diminished by the protraction of
that Siege which had cost so much blood, that the Count was forced to return to
Flanders.

As for the Conference, though it was made with much more preparation and
magnificence than all the former, it had yet the same destiny attending it,
because the two Heads of the Deputation on either side, Renaud de Beaun^,
Archbishop of Bourges, for the Royalists, and Peter d' Espinac, Archbishop of
Lions, for the League, two of the most dextrous and eloquent men of that Age,
were both of them somewhat too well conceited of their own parts, and
maintained their opinions with too much wit and too great vehemence, to come to
an agreement in their disputations against each other. The Archbishop of
Bourges, in the three Speeches which he made for the establishment of his
Proposition, and for the confirmation of it, by refuting those answers which
were made him, omitted no force of Arguments, which could be drawn from Reason,
to induce those of the League to a belief of these three points, which he
maintained constantly, and with great vigor, to the end, as Truths indubitable.

The First was, That there is an indispensable obligation of Acknowledging and
Honoring as King, Him to whom the Crown belongs, by the inviolable right of
Lawful Succession, without regard to the Religion he professes, or to his way
of Life. And this he proved first by the Testimonies of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, who command us to honor Kings and Higher Powers, and to pay them
that obedience which is due to them, even though they should be Unbelievers and
wicked men; declaring that every man ought to submit himself to the powers
which are ordained by God, and that to do otherwise is to resist his Will, and
trouble the order and tranquillity of the Public. Secondly, By examples drawn
from the Old Testament, where we see that Zedekiah was sharply reprehended and
punished by God, for having revolted against the King of the Chaldeans; that
the People of Israel obeyed Nebuchadnezzar in the Babylonish Captivity by the
Command of God; and that the Prophets Ahijah and Elijah, were content to
reprove those Kings, who believed not in God, as Jeroboam and Ahab, without
ever revolting against them. Thirdly, By the Example of the Christians in all
Ages, who had suffered peaceably the dominion of Idolatrous Emperors, Tyrants,
and Persecutors of the Church; and had not refused to acknowledge for their
Sovereigns, those Emperors who had fallen into Heresy, such as Constantius,
Valens, Zeno, Anastasius, H^raclius, Constantine the Fourth, and the Fifth, Leo
the Third and Fourth, Theophilus, and the Gothique Kings in Italy, the Vandals
in Africa, and the Visigoths in Spain, and in Gaul, though they were all of
them Arians.

From thence passing to the second point, he added, That by a more convincing
reason, they were bound to obey the present King, who by Gods Grace was neither
Pagan nor Arian, nor a Persecutor of the Church and of Catholics, whom he
protected and maintained in all their Rights; who believed with them in the
same God, the same Jesus Christ, and the same Creed: And though he was divided
from them by some errors, which he had sucked in, as we may say, with his milk,
and which he had never renounced but by a forced conversion with the Dagger at
his Throat; yet this notwithstanding it could not be said, that he was
confirmed in them with that obstinacy which constitutes Heresy, since he was
wholly resolved to forsake them as soon as he should be instructed in the
truth; which occasioned him with all modesty to maintain, that he ought not to
pass with them for an Heretic. That for the rest, by Gods blessing there was
great probability of hope, that he would suddenly be converted; that he was
already altogether inclined to it, as appeared by the permission which he had
given to the Catholic Princes and Lords, to send at his proper costs and
charges, the Marquess of Pisany to our Holy Father, and to make this present
Conference with them: That he had even uncovered his Head with great respect,
in beholding a Procession at Mante, which passed by his Windows; that not long
before this time, he had solemnly renewed the promise which he had made, to
cause himself to be instructed, and that he would infallibly accomplish it with
the soonest.

And upon this, to acquit himself of what he had proposed in the third place,
he set himself to adjure them, with the strongest reasons, and the most tender
expressions he could use, that they would join themselves with the Kings Party,
for the accomplishment of so good a work, and bear their part in that
Instruction, and consequently Conversion of so great a King; who receiving at
their hands that duty to which they were obliged, would assuredly give them the
satisfaction which they wished, and which he was not in a capacity of giving
them, at a time when they demanding it with Arms in their hands, it would have
appeared that he had done it only on compulsion.

On the other side, the Archbishop of Lions, who was not endu'd with less
Eloquence and Knowledge than the Archbishop of Bourges, answering in order to
those three points which were proposed by that Prelate; said, in the name of
all his Colleagues, That they acknowledged they ought to own for King,
Sovereign Lord, and Head of the French Monarchy, Him to whom the Kingdom
belong^d by a lawful Succession: But since Religion ought to be preferred
before Flesh and Blood, this Monarch of necessity must be a Most Christian
King, both in name and reality; and that according to all Laws both Divine and
Humane, it was not permitted them to give obedience to an Heretic King, in a
Kingdom subjected to Jesus Christ, by receiving and professing the Catholic
Religion. That God in the Old Testament had forbidden a King to be set up, who
was not of the number of the Brethren, that is to say, of the same Religion,
which constitutes a true Brotherhood: That in prosecution of this order, the
Priests and Sacrificers of Israel had withdrawn themselves from the obedience
of King Jeroboam, as soon as he had renounced the worship of the true God. That
the Towns of -- and Libnah, which were the portion of the Levites, who were the
best instructed in the Law of God, had forsaken Ioram, King of Judah, for the
same reason: That Amaziah and Queen Athaliah, having abandoned the Religion of
their Forefathers, had been deposed by the general consent of all the Orders of
the Kingdom; and that the Macchabees were renowned and praised through all the
World, as the last Heroes of the ancient Law, because they had taken Arms
against Antiochus their Sovereign Prince, for the defense of their Religion.

That the people of the Jews did indeed obey the King of the Chaldeans, but
they had bound themselves by Oath so to do, according to the express command
which God had given them by his Prophets, for pupunishment of their
abominations; for which reason he subjected them to the dominion of an Infidel:
But as for themselves, they were so far from having entered into such an
engagement, that they had made one, by the Authority of his Holiness, quite to
the contrary, that they would never acknowledge an Heretic for their King.
And as for the Christians, who threw not off their obedience to their Emperors
and Kings who were Heretics, it is most certain that they obeyed only out of
pure necessity, and because they wanted power; but that their Hearts and
Affections had no part in it: Witness the harshness with which the Holy Fathers
have treated them in their Writings; where they call them Wolves, Dogs,
Serpents, Tigers, Dragons, Lions, and Antichrists, in conformity to the Gospel,
which wills, that he who is revolted from the Church, should be held and
treated like a Pagan; so far it is from authorizing us to hold him for a King,
much less a Most Christian King. For what remains, besides the Councils
received in France, and the Imperial Laws, which declare Heretics to be
unworthy of any kind of honor, dignity, or public office, much more of
Royalty: The Fundamental Law of the French Monarchy is most express in this
particular, by the Oath which the Most Christian Kings take at their
Coronation, to maintain the Catholic Religion, and to exterminate all
Heresies; in consideration of which, they receive the Oath of Allegiance from
their Subjects; and that the last States had decreed, with the general applause
of all good Frenchmen, that they would never depart from that Law, which was
accepted and sworn to solemnly, as a fundamental of the State.

In fine, to close up all which he had to say, in relation to this first point,
he added, That without this, it was impossible to preserve Religion in France,
because an Heretic Prince would not be wanting to establish Heresy in his
States; as well by his example which would be leading to his Subjects, as by
his authority which could not long be resisted: As it was too manifest in the
Kingdom of Israel, which Jeroboam turned to Idolatry; and as it has since been
seen in Denmark, Sweden, the Protestant States of Germany, and in England;
where the people following the example of their Princes, and bending under
their authority, have suffered themselves to be unhappily drawn into that Abyss
of Heresies, in which they are plunged at this very day.

And thereupon, passing to the other points of the Archbishop of Bourges his
Speech, he said in few words, That it could not be doubted but the King of
Navarre was an obstinate Heretic, and no way inclined to be converted, since
for so long a time he had continued to maintain Errors condemned for Heresies
by General Councils, and that he still favored the Huguenots more than ever,
and especially his Preachers; that he had been often invited, but still in
vain, to reconcile himself to the Church; after which it would be lost labor
for them to exhort him, particularly after being first acknowledged, as he
thought to be; that therefore they would never endeavor it, and that they had
all sworn, not only not to acknowledge him, but also to have no manner of
commerce with him, so long as he should remain an Heretic.

Now when the Archbishop of Bourges, who was pre-acquainted with the Kings
secret purpose, saw, that after a strong reply which he had made to that noisy
Harangue, they still held fast to that one point, from which it was impossible
to remove them; he was of opinion, that by yielding it to them, the business
would soon come to an happy conclusion. For which reason, having demanded time
to consult thereupon, the Princes and Lords by whom they were deputed, as soon
as he had received the answer, which he knew before hand they would make, he
told the Deputies of the League, at the seventh Session, which was the
seventeenth of May, That God had at the last heard their prayers and vows, and
that they should have whatsoever they had required for the safety of Religion
and the State, by the conversion of the King, which they had been encouraged to
hope, and which at present was assured to them; since the King, who was
resolved to abjure his Heresy, had already assembled the Prelates and the
Doctors, from whom he would receive the instruction, which ought to precede
that great action, which all good Catholics of both Parties had so ardently
desired, for the reunition of themselves in a lasting peace. And to the end
that it might be to the satisfaction of every man in particular, they might
treat with them concerning the securities and other conditions, which they
should demand for their interests: Assuring them, that in order to remove all
occasion of distrust, nothing should be done on their side, till the King had
d^clar'd himself effectually to be a Catholic.

This Proposition which the Deputies of the Union little expected* and which
ruined all the pretensions of their Heads, disordered them so much, that after
they had consulted amongst themselves for an Answer, not being able to conclude
on any, they thought themselves bound to report it to the Assembly of the
Estates at Paris. And then it was clearly to be seen, that the Heads of the
Party, who thought on nothing but how to satisfy each man his Ambition, under
the specious pretense of great Zeal for the Catholic Faith, were much more
afraid than desirous of the king's Conversion. Though it had been made evident
to them, by invincible Reasons, supported by the Authority of the most learned
Doctors, that Absolution might be given to the King in France, without recourse
to Rome, especially since it would be given only ad Cautelam, and that
afterward they would send to the Pope for his Confirmation of it; they
returned this Answer by the Archbishop of Lions, That they ardently d^sir'd the
Conversion of the King of Navarre, but that they could not believe it sincere,
till his Holiness, to whose Judgment they submitted themselves, and who alone
had the power of absolving him, had reconciled him to the Church: before which
time it was not permitted them to enter into any Treaty of Peace, or to take
any Securities, because that would be to prevent the Judgment of the Pope, and
to treat at least indirectly with him, who was yet out of the Pale of the
Church, which would be directly against the Oath which they had taken. And
thereupon, the Duke of Mayenne, who only ^ought the means of retaining as long
as possibly he could, that almost sovereign Authority which he had usurped,
together with the greatest part of the Princes and Lords of his Party, took a
new Oath, betwixt the Hands of the Legate, that they would never acknowledge the
King of Navarre, even though he should turn Catholic, unless by the
Commandment of the Pope. Thus remaining always fixed in that Resolution, which
absolutely hindered any farther progress in the Conference, after seven or eight
Sessions held at Surenne, and two more at Roquette, an House belonging to the
Chancellor de Chiverny, without St. Anthonies Gate, and at La Villette, betwixt
Paris and St. Denis, they concluded on nothing that was tending to the Peace,
while the Spaniards still employed all their Cunning and their Friends, in the
Estates, to perpetuate the War by the election of a King.

For even before the Conference of Surenne was begun, the Duke of Feria,
Ambassador Extraordinary from the King of Spain to the General Estates at
Paris, accompanied by Don Bernardin Mendoza, Ambassador in Ordinary, Don Diego
d' Ibarra, and John Baptista Tassis, presented in a full Assembly, (where he
was received with great Honor) his Masters Letters, in which he exhorted them
to proceed without delay to the election of a Catholic King. 'Twas that
indeed, which King Philip infinitely desired, as well thereby to continue the
Enmity betwixt the two Parties, which doubtless would have been effected by the
choice of a new King, as to procure the Crown for his Daughter the In^anta, as
he had explained himself more than once already. In effect, those Spaniards
were not wanting some time after, to propose her pretended Right of Proximity,
as being issued from the Daughter of King Henry the Second. But seeing
afterward, that they were bent upon a King, they renewed the Proposal of
marrying her to the Archduke Ernestus; till at last perceiving, that both these
Propositions were ill relished, even by their most zealous Partisans, who
adhered to all the rest, in the election of a King who should be* a Frenchman,
and to whom the King of Spain might give his Daughter in Marriage; they made a
new Overture, after they had taken time to deliberate on an Affair of that
importance, and said, That the King their Master, that he might give them full
satisfaction, was ready to agree on the Marriage of the Infanta, with some
French Prince, whom he would nominate, therein comprehending the Family of
Lorrain, since it was but reasonable that himself should have the choice of the
Person whom he intended for his Son in-law: but that it was also necessary that
the Estates should elect them, and should declare both of them King and Queen
of France, for the whole and every part of it; and that he would employ the
whole Forces of his Kingdoms to maintain them in it.

As almost all the Deputies were desirous of nothing more than to elect a new
King who should be a Frenchman, this Proposition which seemed very
advantageous, was received by them with so great Applause, that the Duke of
Mayenne, who was newly returned to the Estates, there to frustrate the Designs
of the Spaniards, durst not undertake to oppose it directly, though he was
strongly resolved to hinder it from taking effect, by all the ways in his
power, because the Election could not possibly fall on him.

And while he was plo^ting the means in order to it, that part of the
Parliament of Peers, which was at Paris for the League, having still retained,
notwithstanding the division of their Members, those generous Thoughts and
inviolable Maxims, which they have always made appear, on all occasions, and
in whatsoever condition they were, to maintain the fundamental Laws and
Prerogatives of the French Monarchy, furnished him with an excellent Expedient.
For that Court, being informed that the Proposition of the Spaniards seemed to
be approved by the Estates, on the 18th. day of June, made this memorable
Decree, which contains in substance, That not having, as indeed they never had,
any other intention, than the maintenance of the Catholic, Apostolic, and
Roman Religion in France, under the Protection of a Most Christian King, who
should be both Catholic and French, they have ordained, and do hereby ordain,
that it shall be this day remonstrated to Monsieur de Mayenne,
Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, in the pres^nce of the
Princes and Officers of the Crown, being now at Paris, that no Treaty shall be
made for the transferring of the Crown into the Hands of foreign Princes or
Princesses, and that he should employ the A^thority committed to him, to hinder
the Crown from being transferred into a foreign Hand, against the Laws of the
Realm, under the pretense of Religion; and that the said Court, has from this
present time declared, and does hereby declare, all those Treaties which are
made, and which shall be hereafter made, for the establishment of any foreign
Prince or Princess, to be null, and of no effect and value, as made in
prejudice to the Salique Law, and other fundamental Laws of the Realm of France.

The Duke of Mayenne seemed to be very much incensed, that they had made this
Ordinance without his Participation; and vehemently upbraided Monsieur, the
first President Iean le Maistre, whom he had constituted in that Office: who
not being acquainted with his secret intentions, answered him with that Gravity
and Resolution, which is becoming the Head of so venerable a Company, when he
performs his Duty. But in reality that dextrous Prince was glad of such an
occasion, because he well hoped, this Ordinance would at least put a block in
the Spaniard's way. But he found the contrary; for when they saw by this
Decree, and by the taking of Dreux, (which the King had besieged, and after
carried by force, during these Agitations) that if they made not haste in their
election of a King, 'twas very probable that it would be out of their power to
elect one afterward, they used their utmost Endeavors to have one chosen, in
the same manner as they had first proposed it. To put by this Blow, the Duke of
Mayenn^, who believed the Spaniards had been empowered only with general
Instructions, and not to name him whom they judged most proper for their
Interests, told them, that of necessity they were to expect a more particular
Order from their Master, wherein he should declare the individual Person, whom
he chose for his Son in law.

But he was much surpised, when they, who in all appearance had many Blanks,
which were ready signed, and which they could fill up with any Name to serve
their occasions, showed him before the Cardinal Legate, and the principal
Members of the Assembly, at a meeting in his House, that they were empowered, in
due form, to name the Duke of Guise: yet he strove in the best manner he could
to conceal his inward Trouble and Anxiety for this Nomination, which his Wi^e
the Duchess was not able to endure, but counse^l'd him rather to make a Peace
with the King, than to be so mean-spirited as to acknowledge that raw young
Creature (for so, by way of contempt, she called her Nephew) for his King and
Master. But the Duke of Mayenn^, who at that time could not bear any Master
whomsoever, took another course, and required eight days time to give in
writing his Demands, for his own indemnifying, which the Spaniards allowed him
as fully as he could desire. And in the mean time, he knew so well to manage
the Minds of the greatest part of the Deputies, the Lords and Princes, and even
of the Duke of Guise himself, by making them comprehend how unseasonable it was
to create a King, before they had Forces sufficient to support him against a
powerful and victorious Prince; that in spite of all those who were of the
Spanish Interest, the Ministers of Spain were answered, that the Estates were
resolved to proceed no farther in their Election, till they had received those
great Supplies which had been promised them by the King their Master. In this
manner the Election was deferred by the Address of the Duke of Mayenne; which
Dr. Mauclere, a great Leaguer, most bitterly bewailed, in a Letter which he
wrote from Paris, to Dr. de Creil, another stiff Leaguer then residing at Rome,
to manage the Interests of that Party; and therein discov'rd the whole Secret,
which in effect overthrew all the Cabals of the Spaniards, and the League, and
utterly destroyed their whole Fabric. For many things afterward happened,
which broke off all speech of an Election; of which the first and most
principal, was the Conversion of the King, which is next in order to be related.

Above 9 years were already past, since he, though Head of the Hugonots, had
been endeavoring the means of reuniting himself, together with his whole
Party, to the Catholic Church. For, in the year 1584. a little before the
Associated Princes of the League had taken Arms, the late King, having sent
Monsieur de Bellievre to Pamiers, to declare to him, that he would have the
Mass re established in the County of Foix, and in all the other Countries which
he held under the Sovereignty of the Crown of France, he caused one of the
Ministers of his Family, who was already well inclined, to sound the
Dispositions of the other Ministers of that Country, and to try if there were
any hope, that they would use their Endeavors uprightly and sincerely, to find
the means of making a general Reunion with the Catholic Church. They gave up,
without any great difficulty, all the Points in Controversy, excepting one
which they laid to heart; namely, their Interest, demanding such vast
proportions of Maintenance, as he was not then in a condition to give them,
saying with great simplicity these very words: That they would not go a begging
for their Living, (or live upon charity) like so many poor Scholars.

Many of his Counsel, and amongst others the Sieur de Segur, one of those in
whom he most confided, were of opinion, nevertheless, that he should not give
over that Undertaking; and that he should endeavor to bring it about quietly,
and without any bustle, by gaining the leading men of his Party. And he was so
well inclined to do it, that he could not curb himself from protesting
frequently, after his coming to the Crown, and particularly after the Battle of
Ivry, that he wished with all his heart, they were reunited with that Church
from which they had separated, and that he should believe, that he had done
more than any of his Predecessors, if God would one day enable him to make that
Reunion which was so necessary, that he might live to see all Frenchmen, united
under the same Faith, as well as under the same King. But there is great
probability for us to hope, that God had reserved that Glory for King Louis the
Great his Grandson, whose unbloody Victories, which he daily obtains, in full
Peace, over Heresy, by his prudent management and his Zeal, which have found
the means of reducing the Protestants in crowds, and without violence, into the
Church, may under his Reign, show us the final accomplishment of that great
Work, which his Grandfather so ardently desired.

It is also known, that this Prince being then only King of Navarre, at the
time when he projected that Reunion, of which I have spoken, said one day in
private to one of the Ministers, That he could see no manner of devotion in his
Religion, which all consisted in hearing a Sermon delivered in good French, and
that he had always an opinion, that the Body of our Lord is in the holy
Sacrament; for otherwise the Communion was but an exterior Ceremony, which had
nothing real and essential in it. It Is in this place, that I cannot hinder my
self from rendering Justice to the merit of one of the greatest Men, whom any of
our Kings have employed in their most important Negotiations, and who most
contributed to the infusing these good Inclinations into the King of Navarre;
namely, Francis de Noailles, Bishop of Acq's, who has gained an immortal
Reputation, by those great Services which he performed for France, during 35
years, under four of our Kings, in fifteen Voyages out of the Kingdom, and four
solemn Embassies into England, Venice, Rome, and Constantinople. In which last
Employment he did so much for the interest of our Religion, with Selim the
Grand Signior, the 2d. of that Name, and by traveling into Syria, Palestine,
and Egypt, where he procured great Advantages and Comfort to the poor
Christians, that the greatest Princes of Christendom thought themselves
obliged, to make their thankful Acknowledgements of his labor to our King.
Pope Gregory the 13th. commanded his Nuncio himself to thank the Ambassador
from him, at his passage from Venice, on his return to France: and to desire
him, that he would use his Interest with his Brother the Abbot of L' Isle, who
had succeeded him in many of his Negotiations, and in that Embassy, as he also
did in the Bishopric of Acq's, that he would follow the worthy Examples which
he had given him.

It Is true that Pope Pius the 5th. Predecessor to Gregory, thought it very
strange at first, that a Bishop should be Ambassador for the most Christian
King at the Ottoman Port. But, besides that the Bishop of Agria, a most prudent
and virtuous Prelat, had exercised that Charge during five years, for the
Emperor Maximilian the 2d. without the least fault found with it, he very much
changed his opinion, after the Bishop of Acq's, by his credit with the Grand
Signior, had obtained from him, that an express Prohibition should be made to
Piali Bassa, General of his Navy, of making any descent on the Territories of
the Church: in consideration of which Benefit, his Holiness made him a promise
to promote him to the highest Dignities, with which a Pope can recompense the
greatest Services that are rendered to the Church.

These were the Employments of that Bishop, whose Deserts were not less eminent
than those of his elder Brother, Anthony de Noailles, Head of that illustrious
Family, which is one of the most ancient and remarkable in Limousin; who was
Ambassador in England, Governor of Bourdeaux, and Lieutenant for the King in
Guyenne, where he served the State and Religion with the same Zeal, which
appears at this day, with so much Success and Glory in his Posterity.

It was then by the Motives of the same Zeal for Religion, that Francis de
Noailles, after he had reduced 100 Hugonot Families, which he found in Acq's,
at his coming to that Bishopric, to the number of 12, was not wanting to make
use of so fair an opportunity, as he had, to work upon the King of Navarre's
Inclinations, which good advice, in God's due time, had the desired effect. For
having conferred with him at Nerac, by the King's Orders, twice or thrice, with
endeavors to procure from him the re-establishment of the Catholic Religion
in Bearn, when he found that new Difficulties were still started, he laid aside
that particular Point, and coming to the Springhead, whereon all the rest
depended, he told him in the presence of Segur, with all the sincerity of a
faithful Minister, That his Majesty could not reasonably hope to support
himself by that Party, which how powerful soever it appeared, would always be
too weak to bear him up (in spite of the Catholics, who were infinitely more
strong) to that pitch of height, to which his Birth and Fortune might one day
carry him: that whatsoever Wonders his Valor might perform, yet they would
never be of any advantage to him, till he reconciled himself sincerely to the
Catholic Church: and that it was impossible (they were his very words) that he
could ever raise any thing that was durable for the establishment of his
Fortune, either within the Realm, or without it, unless he built on this
Foundation. This was what he said, when he took his leave of the King of
Navarre: And some few days after this, writing from Again to the Sieur de Segur,
he protested to him, That his Master could never arrive to the possession of
that Crown, to which he might lawfully pretend, if he made not his entrance by
the Gate of the Catholic Religion* and prayed him therefore that he would
think seriously of that Matter, for if he followed not his Counsel, he should
one day speak to him in Petrarch 's Verse, When Error goes before, Repentance
comes behind.

This Discourse startled Segur, who had much power over his Masters
Inclinations; and it was principally on this account, that he gave him the
Counsel abovementioned, which consequently caused the King of Navarre, to
consider of the means of reuniting himself to the Catholics.

But it happening that in the midst of these Agitations, the Leaguers began
openly to rebel, and afterward, capitulating with Arms in their hands,
obtained an Edict, by which the King obliged himself to make War with all his
Power against the Hugonots, Segur, whom the King of Navarre had lately sent
into Germany to desire assistance, writ to him, after he had obtained it, that
this was not a time to think of turning Catholic, though he himself had
formerly advised it: and that since his Enemies would make him change his
Religion by force, almost in the same manner as they had used him at the
Massacre of St. Barthol'mew, he ought to stand bent against them, and defend
his Liberty by Arms, that it might not be said, he was basely plyant to their
will; and that he might change freely, with safeguard to his Honor at some
other time, which now he could not without shame, as being by constraint.

He followed this Advice, which was also seconded by his Counsel. He made the
War, and always appeared at the Head of the Hugonots, with the success which
has already been related. But being a man of a sprightly and piercing Wit, he
was not wanting in the mean time to instruct himself, and that by a very
artificial way. Sometimes by proposing difficult Points to his Ministers, or to
speak more properly, his own Doubts and Scruples in matters of Religion, to
understand on what Foundations their Opinions were built: sometimes by
conferring with knowing Catholics, and maintaining against them with the
strongest Reasons he could urge, the Principles which had been infused into him
by his Ministers, on purpose to discover by their Answers, (which he compared
with what had been told him on the other side) what was real and solid truth
betwixt them. And he always continued in this manner of Instruction, clearing
and fathoming the principal Points of the Controversy and causing them to give
in writing, what they had to argue pro or con; which produced this effect, that
the Hugonots never believed him to be sound at bottom, and settled in their
Religion, but reposed much greater confidence in the late Prince of Conde, who
was in reality a better Protestant than he.

And truly it appears exceeding credible, that, when at his coming to the
Crown, he made a promise to the Catholic Princes and Lords, that he would
cause himself to be instructed within six months, he was already resolved on
his Conversion; there remaining but very few things which he then scrupled, and
for which he demanded some longer time, in order to his fuller satisfaction.
But, as he afterward acknowledged, he thought himself obliged to defer that
good action to some more convenient opportunity, because the Hug^nots would
certainly have cantoniz'd themselves, and set up under the protection of some
powerful Foreigner, whom they would have chosen for their Head; which must have
occasioned new Troubles in the Kingdom. Besides which, the Head of the League
was at that time too strong, to think of submitting to him, even though he had
declared himself a Catholic: and the People not being yet made sensible of the
Extremities of War, and their sufferings by reason of it, were obstinately
resolved to maintain it against him; and consequently, he could not then
compass what he so ardently desired, which was to restore the Quiet of his
Kingdom, and to settle it in peace, by embracing the Religion of his
Predecessors. But somewhat before the beginning of the Conference at Surenne,
after making a sober Reflection on the present estate of his Affairs, he
plainly saw, that all things at that time concurred, to oblige him not to defer
his Conversion any longer. For on the one side, he was assured of the Leading
men amongst the H^gonots, who had the power of raising new Disturbances, many
of whom, and such as were men of the greatest Interest, made no scruple to
acknowledge, that in good policy he ought to go to Mass, and that the peaceable
possession of a Great Kingdom, was worth the pains it would cost him in going.
Add to this, that the Heads of the Union were so much weakened, and so little
united amongst themselves, that they were in no condition of making any long
resistance to his Arms, though they should refuse to acknowledge him: And for
the common people of the League, they were so overburden'd by the War which
wasted them, that they desired nothing so much as Peace.

On the other side, he observed the Spaniards used all imaginable means, and
did their utmost to persuade the States to create a Catholic King. That there
was great danger, lest the Third Party, which not long before had laid a Plot
to have surprised him in Mante, and carried him away, now joining with the
Catholic Leaguers who were against the Spaniards, should elect a King on
their side, which would be to embroyl France in worse confusions: And to
conclude, that even they who were not of that Party, and who had always served
him with inviolable faith, now besought him to defer no longer his conversion;
and besought him in such a manner, that they gave him easily to understand they
would forsake him, in case he forsook not his false Religion.

All these Considerations put together, by the Grace of God, who makes use of
second causes, put an end to his delays, and brought him to resolve on
accomplishing what he had so long designed, by making a public profession of
the Catholic Faith. Insomuch, that when the Sieur Francis D, O, who of all
the Court-Lords, spoke to him with the greatest freedom, went to press him
somewhat bluntly on behalf of the Catholics of his Party, that he would make
good his promise to them: He with great calmness gave him those three Reasons
which I have already set down, why he had till that time deferred his
Conversion, and afterward gave him his positive word, that within three months
at the farthest, when he had seen what the Conference of Surenne would produce,
he would make an abjuration of Heresy, after he had received the instruction
of the Bishops and Doctors, which, according to the forms of the Church, ought
to precede so great an action; farther ordering him to assure the Archbishop of
Bourges of those his intentions, before he went to that Conference, being then
on his departure.

And on that account it was, that the Archbishop, after having received the
Answer which he well knew would be sent from Mante, where the Court then was,
spoke as he did at Surenne, and believing that he had now brought the business
to a conclusion, on the seventeenth of May, and at the seventh Session, gave
the Deputies of the League a full assurance of the Kings Conversion.

His Majesty also on his part, having firmly resolved on that holy action,
failed not to write a Letter on the sixteenth of the same Month, to many
Prelates and Doctors, both of his own side and of the League; in which he
invited them to be with him on the fifteenth of July, to the end he might
receive those good instructions which he expected from them: Assuring them in
these very words, That they should find him most inclinable to be informed of
all that belongs to a Most Christian King to know; having nothing so lively
engraven in his heart, as the Zeal for Gods Service, and the maintenance of his
true Church.

In the mean time, the Ministers, and the old rigid Huguenots, those false
Zealots of their Sect, fearing this blow would be fatal to their pretended
Religion, made frequent Assemblies in private, to invent some means of
diverting him from this pious resolution. And there were some of them who had
the impudence to tell him publicly of it in their Sermons, and to threaten him
with a judgment from Heaven, if he forsook the Gospel, (for it has pleased them
to honor their Errors with that venerable Name.) This occasioned him to
assemble all the principal Lords of that new Religion, together with their
Preachers, who were at that time in great numbers at the Court, and who to the
great grief of the Catholics, perpetually besieged him: and to tell them
plainly (that he might free himself once for all, from that troublesome
persecution) That after he had in the presence of Almighty God, made all
necessary reflections on an affair of that importance, he had, in conclusion,
resolved to return into the Catholic Church, from which he ought never to
have been separated. And when La Faye the Minister had adjur'd him in the name
of all his Brethren, Not to suffer (they are his very words) that so great a
scandal should come to them; If, said he, I should follow your advice, in a
little time there would be neither King nor Kingdom left in France: I desire to
give peace to all my Subjects, and quiet to my own Soul, and you shall have
also from me, all the provisions which you can reasonably desire.

Thus, being without comparison the strongest, and in much better condition
than he had ever been formerly; immediately after he had taken the Town of
Dreux, which the League, though it was of great consequence to them, yet durst
never attempt to relieve; he assigned the place where he would receive the
Instruction, which ought to precede the act of Abjuration, to be at St. Denis,
on the twenty second of July.

The Cardinal of Piacenza caused a Declaration to be published, in which,
taking upon him, as Legate from the Holy See, to pronounce, that whatsoever
should be done in relation to that Conversion, was to be accounted void and
null, he exhorted all Catholics both of the one and the other Party, not to
suffer themselves to be deluded in an Affair of that consequence: Prohibiting
all men, and especially the Ecclesiastics, on pain of Excommunication and
privation of their Benefices, from going to St. Denis, and assisting at that
Action.

But notwithstanding all these prohibitions, (which were thought to be made by
the solicitation of the Spaniards) the Princes, the Officers of the Crown, the
principal Members of the Parliaments, the Lords of the Court, the Bishops, and
many Doctors, not only of the Royal Party, but also of the League, went
thither, and amongst others, three famous Curats of Paris, Rene Benoist of St.
Eustache, Charignac of St. Sulpice, and Morennes of St. Merry, who far from
being tainted with the seditious principles of their fellows (the Curats of St.
Severin, St. Cosme, St. Jacques, St. Gervais, St. Nicholas in the Fields, and
St. Andre, who had ran riot in their scandalous Satyrs, as I may call them,
more properly than Sermons, against the Person of the King) had the honor of
bearing their parts in the Conversion of so Great a Prince.

Being therefore arrived at St. Denis from Mante on the twenty second of July,
the next morning he entered into Conference, and held close at it from six in
the Morning to one in the Afternoon, with the Archbishop of Bourges, and seven
or eight Bishops, amongst whom was Monsieur du Perron, nominated to the
Bishopric of Evreux. Many Doctors of great reputation were present in that
Assembly, with the three Curats of Paris, and Father Oliver Beranger, a Learned
Iacobin, Chaplain in Ordinary to the late King. The Instruction was made
particularly touching three points, concerning which, the King proposed some
scruples.

The first was on the Invocation of Saints, to know if it were absolutely
necessary for us to pray to them: On which point they easily satisfied him, by
giving him to understand the Doctrine of the Church concerning it, viz. That as
it is profitable for us to recommend our selves to the prayers of our living
Brethren, without derogating thereby from the Office of Jesus Christ our
Mediator; in like manner it is very advantageous for us, to have recourse to
Saints, and pray them to intercede for us, to the end we may obtain benefits
and favor from God by Jesus Christ; God imparting to them the knowledge of our
necessities and of our prayers, by some way best pleasing to himself, as he
makes known to the Angels according to the Scripture, what is done here below,
and foretells to the Prophets future things, though they are more particularly
reserved to his own knowledge.

The second was concerning Auricular Confession: And it was clearly proved to
him, That Jesus Christ having given commission to his Ministers in general
terms of binding and of loosing sins, that power could not be restrained only
to public sins, and by consequence it was necessary, that Penitents should
give the Priests full knowledge of all the sins they had committed, to the end
they may make a just distinction betwixt those offenses which they ought to
remit, and those they ought not.

The third Particular, in which he desired to be thoroughly instructed, was
concerning the Authority of the Pope: To which he submitted without difficulty,
after it was made out to him, that according to the Gospels, the Councils, and
the Holy Fathers, it extended no farther than to things that were purely
spiritual, and nothing relating to temporals: not at all interfering with the
Rights and Prerogatives of Kings, or the Liberties of Kingdoms. When they would
have proceeded from this, to the Point of the real Presence of Christ's Body in
the Holy Sacrament, which of all other Articles is the most contested betwixt
Catholics and Huguenots, and in which, they never come to an agreement, he
stopped the Bishops by telling them, that he was entirely persuaded of that
Truth, that he had no manner of scruple concerning it, and that he always had
believed it.

It Is also said, that having appointed a Conference betwixt the Doctors and the
Ministers, when one of the Huguenot Preachers had yielded, that Salvation might
be had in the Church of Rome (for at that time they granted it) he said with
great reason, There is then no longer deliberation to be used: I must of
necessity be a Catholic, and take the surest side, as every prudent man would
do in a business of so great importance as that of Salvation: Since, according
to the joint opinion of both Parties, I may be saved being a Catholic, and if
I still continue a Huguenot, I shall be damned according to the opinion of the
Catholics. But whether this be true indeed, or only a report, it is certain,
that being perfectly instructed and well assured of all points of belief, which
are held by the Roman Church, they drew up a form of the Profession of Faith,
which was signed by him: After which there remained no more, but only to make
his profession solemnly, according to the custom of the Church, and to receive
Absolution from his Heresy, and from the sentence of Excommunication, which
had been given against him.

But it was first to be examined anew, in a regular Conference (which would
make the Decision more authentic) whether the Bishops had power to absolve him
in France, of the Excommunication which he had incurred, in a Case reserved by
the Popes to the Holy See. For not only the Legate, and those Doctors who were
devoted to the League, and above all others the Archbishop of Lions, as he had
made appear at the Conference of Surenne, but also the Cardinal of Bourbon, who
had much ado to part with his imaginary Headship of a third Party, maintained
openly and boldly, that the Pope alone had power to absolve him, and that all
other Absolution would be null, because the Pope had solely and positively made
a reservation of that Power to the Holy See. Notwithstanding which, in a great
Assembly of Bishops and learned Doctors, which was held for the resolving of
this Case, the contrary opinion passed, nemine contradicente, in spite of the
Remonstrances of that Cardinal, who was indeed no very able man. The Curat of
St. Eustache himself, Rene Benoist, who was afterward Bishop of Troyes,
Monsieur de Morennes, Curat of St. Merry, who died Bishop of Se^z, those I say,
who had been of the League till that very time, and some other knowing Doctors,
gave an account to the Public in their printed Writings, of the Reasons on
which they grounded their opinion; and they are reducible to this ensuing
Argumentation, which the Reader will not be unwilling to understand, as I have
extracted it from their Books, without interposing my own Judgment in the
Matter, because I write not as a Divine, who declares and maintains a Doctrine,
but as an Historian, who makes a faithful Relation of Actions done, as he finds
them in the best Accounts.

It Is indubitable, say these Doctors, according to the most knowing Canonists,
that he who is excommunicated for a Case reserved to the Holy See, if he have
any Canonical hindrance, that is to say, expressed and approved by the Canons,
which permits him not to go and present himself before the Pope, may be
absolved by some other, without being bound to send to Rome for his Absolution;
provided nevertheless, that when the hindrance (if it endures not always) shall
be removed, he shall go and present himself before His Holiness, submitting in
all humility to what he shall reasonably ordain: Now it is most manifest, (they
say) that there are three sorts of Canonical Hindrances, which dispense the
King from going, and consequently from sending to Rome, to desire Absolution
from the Pope.

The first is the manifest danger, wherein he is continually, of losing his
Life, in so many Battles and Sieges, where he is forced to expose it daily, for
the preservation of the Crown which is devolved to him, by the invioable Right
of Succssion, according to the fundamental Law of the Kingdom; and which one
half of his Subjects, who are in Rebellion against him, do their utmost to take
away. A Danger of this nature, and many of the same, which are included under
it, as that of Conspiracies, Enmities, Robbers, a long Voyage by Sea, are
esteemed according to right Reason, and by the Doctors, to be of that number
which is comprehended in what we call the Article of Death; which is not to be
understood alone of that fatal moment, when we give up our Breath, but also of
any another time, when we are visibly exposed to Death. And it is on these
occasions, as in the Article of Death, that not only the Bishops, but also all
Priests, can give Absolution from all Sins, and Ecclesiastic Censures, with
this Proviso, that he shall afterward present himself before the Pope, if
there be not some other Hindrance; as for example, that which follows.

And that is the greatness and dignity of the Persons excommunicated, and
particularly of Sovereign Princes, who cannot leave the People whom they
govern, to go to Rome, without manifest prejudice to their Crown. For if a
Father of a Family, or suppose an ordinary Servant, may be dispensed with from
going thither, in case his absence would inconvenience his Family, much more
strongly may it be concluded in the Person of a great King, whose presence is
always necessary, or at least wise very advantageous to his Kingdom: Therefore
it ought to be presumed, that Persons of that eminent Dignity, are perpetually
hindered from leaving their Country, and taking such a Journey.

In conclusion, the third Hindrance, which the Doctors call, Periculum in mora,
(the danger of delay) is the great hazard which the Nation might run: For by
deferring that Absolution so long, till it were given at Rome, a thousand ill
Accidents might intervene, and the happy opportunity be lost, of preserving in
France, our Religion, the State, and the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by
the conversion of the King. For all these Reasons it was concluded in that
Assembly, that they not only might, but ought also to absolve him; and
afterward send a solemn Embassy to Rome, to desire the fatherly Benediction of
the Pope, and the Approbation of what had been so justly done in France, in
relation to his Conversion.

It being resolved in this manner, the public and solemn Act of this
Conversion, which was so much the wish of all good men, was performed on the
Sunday following, being the 25th of July, with Magnificence worthy of so great
an Action, and of the Majesty of him who made it. The King clothed all in
white, excepting only his Cloak and Hat, which were black, came forth from his
Lodgings, betwixt the hours of 8 and 9 in the morning, preceded by the Swiss,
the French, and the Scottish Guards, and the Officers of his House, with beat
of Drum accompanied by the Princes, the Crown Officers, and those of the
Sovereign Courts, the Bishops and Prelates, and all those who had assisted at
his Instruction, twelve Trumpets going before him, and five ^r six hundred
Gentlemen following him, all magnificently clothed; the Streets were hung with
Tapissery, and the Pavements strow'd with Flowers and Greens; there were
present an infinite multitude of People, and principally of Parisians, who
notwithstanding all the Prohibitions of the Legate and the Duke of Mayenne, were
come in Crowds to St. Denis, and joined heartily with the rest in the loud
Cries of Vive le Roy, while his Majesty walked through the midst of them to the
Church Porch of St. Denis. There he found the Archbishop of Bourges, who was to
perform the Ceremony, sitting on a great Chair, in his pontifical Habit.
Immediately he asked the King, according to the form, Who he was, and what he
would have? To which Questions the King having answered, I am the King, who
desire to be received into the bosom of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
Church. He fell upon his Knees, and presented the Confession of his Faith,
signed with his Hand, to the Archbishop, saying these words, I swear and
protest, before the Face of Almighty God, that I will live and die in the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, that I will protect and defend it with
the hazard of my Blood and Life, renouncing all Heresies which are contrary to
it. After which he received from that Prelat an Absolution from the Censures
which he had incurred; immediately the whole Church resounded with the often
repeated Cries of Vive le Roy; and he was conducted by the Bishops before the
great Altar, where he renewed his Oath upon the holy Evangelists; and after
having confessed himself to the Archbishop behind the Altar, while they were
singing the Te Deum, he heard High Mass; which was celebrated by the Bishop of
Nantes, and then the Music sang Vive le Roy, with several repetitions of it.
At which the Parisians, (who were present in great numbers at that triumphal
Ceremony) breaking out into tears, drowned the voices of the Musicians, with
their Cries of Vive le Roy: which makes it evident, that the People of Paris,
excepting only the Rabble of the Faction, were only Leaguers, by reason of that
invincible Aversion, which they have always had for Hugonotism. For so soon as
they saw the King converted, they no longer called him the Bearnois, or the
King of Navarre, but plainly the King; whom already they desired to see in
Paris; as appeared not long afterward, by the peaceable reduction of that
capital City of the Kingdom.

Truly after this day, which by the Effects it produced, may properly be called
the last day of the League, when the Piety of the King was observed at Mass, at
Vespers, at the Archbishop's Sermon, and after it, in the Visit which he made
to the Tombs of the Martyrs at Montmartre, all which Actions were well known to
proceed from the Sincerity of a Soul, which was too great to be capable of
Hypocrisy; the People did but laugh at what the Spaniards, the remainders of
the Sixteen, their Preachers, and above all others, the fiery Doctor Boucher,
published in their Libels, and in their Sermons which were but Libels, against
this Conversion, which they labored in vain to decry by many impudent and
forged Defamations. 'Twas almost every man's business, as secretly as he could
to make Peace with the King; and deliver up the Towns without noise, especially
after they had begun to taste the Sweets of Peace, by means of the Truce, which
being earnestly desired by the great Cities, was concluded for three months,
beginning four days after the Conversion.

It Is true, the Duke of Mayenne, fearing that it would soon deprive him of the
Authority, which he enjoyed as Lieutenant of the Crown, procured in his
pretended Estates, that the Oath should be renewed, of perseverance in the
Union, and obedience to the Pope's Decrees. He went yet farther; for in order
to oblige his Holiness, always to support his Party, he caused the Estates to
confirm the Declaration which he had made for the publishing of the Council of
Trent: though they had formerly enrolled the Exceptions which they had made in
bar of it, containing 23 Articles, which were held to be inconsistent with the
Royal Prerogative of our Kings, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church. But
in conclusion, neither that Publication, which they had no great mind to make
valid, had any effect; neither did the Oath which they had taken, hinder them
from treating privately, and considering of the best methods, to receive the
King into Paris, in spite of the Duke of Mayenne.

But that which wholly turned the Balance, and made the justice of his Cause
apparent in the eyes of all men, reducing almost all his Subjects to their
Duty, was, that according to his promise, he sent the Duke of Nevers to Rome,
to render that filial Obedience which is owing to his Holiness from the most
Christian Kings, and to desire that Absolution, which they believed at Rome the
Pope had only power to give him. This met with great Obstructions; and Pope
Clement, being earnestly solicited by the Spaniards, who used their utmost
Endeavors to hinder him from granting it, refused it for a long time together,
after a manner, which was somewhat disrespectful, to so great a King. But when
his Holiness perceived, that he began to be less courted for his Gift, and that
it was believed in France, considering what Applications had been made, that
the King had done all which could reasonably be expected on his part, and
consequently no farther Absolution was necessary; he advanced of his own
accord, as fast as they went back, and encouraged them to renew that
Negotiation, which had been wholly given over by the Duke of Nevers, whom he
wou^d not receive as the Ambassador of the King of France, and who for that
Reason he was departed from Rome in Discontent.

The King therefore being desirous to omit nothing on that occasion, which
could be expected from a most religious Prince, named two new Deputies, and
both great Men, Iacques David du Perron, and Arnaud d' Ossat, whose
extraordinary Deserts were not long after rewarded with Cardinalships; and they
acted both of them with so much prudence, that after many Disputes and
Difficulties raised by the Spaniards, both concerning the Essentials, and the
Formalities of that Affair, the Pope at length resolved on giving a second
Absolution, and to keep himself precisely within the bounds of spiritual
authority, without mentioning the Rehabilitation to which he pretended: For
they would not admit that term, by which it might have seemed that the Crown of
France, which depends on God alone, should either directly or indirectly be
subjected to the Pope. In this manner, that Absolution which had been desired
almost two years before that time, was given at Rome on the sixteenth of
September, in the year 1595. by which it is easy to be observed, that the
League had not the mortal blow from thence; but on the contrary, that which
made the Pope so pliable, was, that he saw the League was going to destruction.

In effect, as when the two great Pillars which sustained the Palace of the
Philistims, were overthrown by the strength of Sampson, all the Building went
to the ground; so when those two specious pretenses of the Public Good and of
Religion, which the Heads of the League had taken for the Columns of their
Fabric, were thrown down by the Conversion of the King, and that Conversion
known to be real, notwithstanding all the jugglings of the Spaniards, who would
have rendered it suspected; that impious Building, already more than half
ruined, and now having not the least support, fell down of it self and came to
nothing. Insomuch that in the year ensuing, Ann. 1594.
almost all the Heads, and all the Cities of the League, made each of them
their separate Treaty with the King, who was better pleased to win upon their
hearts by gentle means, with his admirable clemency and Fatherly goodness,
granting them advantageous conditions, which did him the more honor the less
they had deserved them, than to force them, as he was able, by his victorious
Arms to return to their duty in their own despite.

As the Marquess d^ Vitry, was the first who forsook the Kings Party, after the
death of Henry the Third, entering into that of the League, which at that time
he believed to be the juster Cause; he was also the first, who being disabus'd
of that false opinion, returned to his obedience with the Town of Meaux, of
which he was Governor. The Sieur da la Chastre immediately followed his
example, and brought back with him Orleans and Bourges. The Lionnois, after
they had shaken off the yoke of the Duke of Nemours, whom they kept Prisoner in
Pierre Encise, and that of the Duke of Mayenne, his Brother by the Mothers
side, (who had underhand wrought them to secure him, that he might join his
Government of Bourgogne to that of Lionnois, and set up a kind of independent
principality in both) turned the Leaguers out of the Town, and declared
unanimously for the King.

Provence was the first of all the Provinces, which openly disowned the Party
of the League, taking up Arms at the same time against the Savoyards and the
Duke of Espernon, who had possessed himself of that Government against the
Kings Will.

This voluntary reduction was made by the courage and good management of four
brave Gentlemen, of the House of Fourbin, one of the most Noble and most
remarkable Families of Provence. Their Names were Palamede de Fourbin, Lord of
Soliers, and his two Sons, Iaspar de Soliers, and Saint Canat; and Nicholas de
Fourbin, Knight of Malta, with whom joined Melchior de Fourbin, Sieur de
Ianson, Baron of Ville-Laure, and Mane.

These being related by kindred and alliance to John de Pontevez, Count de
Carces, Governor and Grand Seneschal of Provence, whose two Sisters were
married to Ianson and Saint Canat, wrought so well with him, that they brought
him over from the League; of which he had declared himself Head, after the
death of Monsieur de Vins, his Nephew, who was killed with a Musket Shot as he
was besieging Grass. After which, having persuaded the greatest part of the
Nobility and Gentry to enter into their confederacy, the Count, without much
trouble, reduced the City of Aix, and the Parliament of that place, which
reunited it self at the same time with that party of its Officers, which held
their Sessions at Manosque, under the authority of the King. In sequel of this,
the greatest part of the Provencals being reunited, and strengthened by the
Succors which they received from Monsieur de Lesdiguieres, managed their
undertakings with so much prudence, courage, and good fortune, that at length
they constrained both the Savoyards and the Duke of Espernon, to depart out of
that Country, and to leave the Government of it free to the Duke of Guise. And
that Prince, by the deliverance of Marseilles, finished that great work which
the four Lords of Fourbin had so generously begun, and so well carried on,
immediately after the Kings Conversion, and when he had made his entry into
Paris, which in a very short time was followed by the reduction of all the
remaining parts of the Kingdom.

Many Months were already past, since the Parliament and Magistrates of that
Town, by the care of the President Le Maistre, the Counselors du Vair,
D'Amours, and Mole, (who exercised the Office of Procureur General) the Sieur
Huillier, Provost of the Merchants, the Sieurs Beaurepaire, L'Anglois, and
Neret the Sheriffs, the Colonels and Captains of the several Wards, had
disposed the minds of all the Persons of Quality, the Officers, and good
Citizens of Paris, openly to renounce the League, without regarding either the
Spanish Garrison, or the Faction of Sixteen, which consisted of not above 3 or
4000 seditious People, who were the very Scum of all the Rabble, whom the
Colonels and Captains of the Wards, could easily cut in pieces, in case they
should presume to take up Arms. The Treaty was also already concluded for the
safety of the Parisians, and all necessary Measures taken with the Count of
Belin, Governor of Paris, for the bringing in of the King, particularly, after
he had been Crowned at Chastres, on the 17th. of February, and nothing hindered
the execution of so noble Design, but only the presence of the Duke of Mayenne,
who beginning to have the Count of Belin in distrust, had put the Count of
Brissac in his place, whom he believed to be the most confiding man of all his
Followers. But that Count, the King being now converted, and his Affairs in a
flourishing condition, considered that he had a stronger tie of Fidelity to
him, than to any other Person without exception; and therefore made his Treaty
betimes, on the most advantageous terms he could procure. So that the Duke, who
had sworn never to treat with the King, whatsoever Conditions might be offered,
before he had received Absolution from the Pope, foreseeing that he could be no
longer Master of Paris: and fearing to be apprehended in the Town, departed out
of it, with the Duchess, his Wife, and his Children, whom he brought to
Soissons, and leaving them there, went into Picardy, to order his Affairs in
that Province, and to retain the Cities in his obedience.

In the mean time, the King, who had drawn his Army together at St. Denis,
hastened so well the execution of the Treaty, that the day was appointed to be
the 22d. of March: at which time, advancing as far as Montmartre, and
afterward within 200 paces of the Town, toward the lower part of the River
near the Tuilleries, with the choice of his Cavalry, the ^^fantry was let in by
the new Gate, and the Gate of St. Denis, very early in the morning: so that the
Ramparts were seized, without the least tumult, or any manner of Resistance;
after which, they possessed themselves of all the principal Places, the two
Chastelets, the Palace, and the Avenues of the Bridges. At the same time, the
King's Garrisons of Melun and Corbeil, marching down by the River side, till
they came right against the Celestines, were received by Captain Grossier into
the Arsenal; and on the other side, the loyal Citizens, secured their own Wards
by strong Corpse de guard, and scattering among the multitude, many printed
Tickets, containing a general Indemnity, raised loud Acclamations, and Cries of
Vive le Roy through the whole City.

This caused so great an amazement in those who were the hottest Leaguers, and
in the Spaniards, that after the King's Party had either cut in pi^ces, or
thrown into the River a Corpse de guard of 25 or 30 Lansquenets, who made an
offer of resistance on the Kay, not a man of them durst afterward appear; so
that all things being now in great Tranquillity, and the whole City secured for
the King, he entered, at the New Gate, as it were in Triumph, attended by all
his Nobility and Gentry, after he had received from the Count of Brissac, the
Keys of the Town, and a magnificent imbroider'd Scarf, instead of which he put
his own upon the Count, and made him Mareshal of France upon the place. Then
with 5 or 600 men armed Cap a pe, before him, their Pikes being trail'd, in
show that the Town was voluntarily surrendered he marched directly to the
Church of Nostre-dame, the Trumpets on every side sounding, the Bells ringing,
and innumerable multitudes of People continually ecchoing each other from all
parts of the Town, with incessant Acclamations, and Shouts of Vive le Roy. From
thence, when the Te Deum was sung during the Mass, which he heard with such
demonstrations of Piety, as overjoyed the Parisians, he went to the Louvre,
where, after Dinner, having received the Submissions of all the Companies, at
Three of the Clock he went to see the dismission of the Spanish Garrison, at
the Gate of St. Denis: they were not in number above 3 or 4000 men at most; in
the midst of them was the Duke of Feria, Don Diego d' Ybarra, and the Lord Iuan
Baptista Taxis, who all three of them, with the whole Body of their Soldiers,
bowing lowly to him with infinite Respect, were safely convoyed, till they came
to Guise.

About 30 of the most violent Leaguers, amongst whom, were Dr. Boucher, and the
Petit Feuillant, believing, like Cain, that their horrible Impieties were
incapable of Pardon, departed with that foreign Garrison, and retired into
Flanders, where they passed the rest of their days, some of them in extreme
misery, some others well rewarded by the Spaniards, to the end that Example
might be serviceable to them on some other occasion; and that their Liberality
might encourage others to be like them, wholly at their Devotion. It seems they
were little acquainted with the King's Temper, who was Goodness and Clemency it
self; for he lost the memory of all that was past, as soon as ever he set Foot
in Paris. He even sent to offer his Protection, and all manner of Security, to
the Cardinal of Piacenza, the Pope's Legate, and to Cardinal Pelleve, his
greatest Enemies; the first of whom, to whom he had given his safe Conduct,
died by the way, on his return to Rome; the second, who was then desperately
sick, expired, not at the very moment of the King's entrance into Paris, as the
greatest part of our Historians have written, but six days after it, as his
Epitaph bears witness, which is to be seen, in the Metropolitan Church of
Rheims.

In conclusion, all things were restored in Paris, to their first Estate: The
Parliament solemnly reestablished, in its natural Seat; all its Ordinances,
which had been made, during the Troubles, against the King's Authority, rac'd
out of their Rolls, and the general Lieutenancy of the Crown and Estate,
judicially repealed. And the Faculty of Divines in Body assembled, (their
Freedom being no longer oppressed, as it had been during the League, by the
Tyranny of the Sixteen) declared null all the scandalous Decrees which it had
made, in prejudice of the inviolable Rights of our Kings, swore Fidelity to
King Henry the Fourth, and declared that all Frenchmen were obliged in
Conscience, to acknowledge him for their lawful Sovereign, ordained by God;
notwithstanding that through the Intrigues of the Spaniards, the Pope had not
yet given him Absolution.

Now, as they say, the Primum mobile, draws along with it all the other Heavens
by the rapidity of its motion, so the happy reduction of this capital City of
the Monarchy, was followed by that of the Princes, the Lords, and the Cities of
the League, who vyed with each other, who should first come in, and returned in
Crowds to the King's Obedience. For in the year ensuing, Ann. 1595.
the Admiral Villars, the Duke of Guise with his Brothers, his Cousins, and the
Sieurs of Bois Dauphin and La Chastre, made their Treaties for the Towns which
they yet held in their Governments. Those of Picardy and Bourgogne, were almost
all reduced, either by voluntary Submission, or by the taking of Laon, Noyon,
and the Castle of Beaume; and the Duke of Lorrain, prudently withdrawing
himself from a Party, which must have overwhelmed him under its Ruins, had at
last obtained the Peace, which he sought from the King. Insomuch that there
remained only Soissons, Chaalons upon the Saone, Seurre, and the Castles of
Dijon and Talant, to the Duke of Mayenne, who saw himself forsaken by the Head
of his Family, and the Princes of it, and indeed by all those in whom he had
reposd his confidence. Which notwithstanding, he still hoped, he might set
himself up again, by the assistance of a great Army of 18000 men, which
Ferdinand de Velasco, Constable of Spain, had brought from the Duchy of Milan,
into the French County: which, in conclusion, only afforded new Matter, to
increase the King's Glory, by one of the most hazardous, but also of the most
glorious Actions, which he ever did perform.

The new Mareshal Biron, having fought successfully in Dijon, against the
Vicount de Tavannes, whom he forced to leave the Town, besieged the Castle, and
at the same time, the Castle of Talant, into which the Enemies were retired. It
being feared, that the Constable of Castile with his great Army, which was upon
the point to pass the Saone, should come upon him, there was notice of it given
to the King, who was already advanced with 1500 Horse as far as Troyes. Upon
this Advertisement, he came up speedily to Dijon, about the end of June. From
whence, after he had given all necessary Orders, for carrying on the Siege of
the two Castles, he marched toward the Saone with Mareshal Biron, and 7 or 800
Horse, with design to stop the Constable at least for two or three days, at the
passage of the River, to the end that his men might have leisure, to finish the
Retrenchments, which he had appointed, to hinder any Relief from coming into
the Castles. But being arrived near the Borough of Fontain Francoise, half way
betwixt Dijon and Gray, he had Intelligence from his Scouts, that the whole
Spanish Army, to which the Duke of Mayenne had joined all his remaining Forces,
having already passed the River at Gray, was coming up, and just ready to fall
on him.

Doubtless here was sufficient occasion of Fear, even for a great Captain, to
find himself in this terrible Dilemma: To stay and expect the Enemy, who was
twenty times stronger than himself, was extreme rashness; to retire before him
in full day, was almost impossible to be done, without manifest danger of being
routed, and cut off in his Retreat. Nevertheless he formed his Resolution upon
the Place, with wonderful presence of mind, and showing a bold countenance to
the Enemy, as if he had been sustained by his whole Army, commanded the Marshal
to advance with 300 men, who possessing themselves of a rising Ground, from
whence they chased about 60 Horse of the Enemy, discovered the whole Army of
the Spaniards marching in Battalia, who made a Halt on this side the Village of
St. Seyne upon the Vigennes.

Four hundred Horse of the French Troops belonging to the Duke of Mayenne, and
commanded by the Baron^ de Thianges, de Thenisse, and de Villars Houdan,
appeared at the Head of their Army, sustained by 800 more detached from a great
Body of the Vanguard, where the Duke was in Person, purposely, that he might
bring it to the issue of a Battle, which the Constable should not be able to
avoid. As these were marching right on to Biron, he having the Marquess of
Mirebeau on one side, and the Baron of Lux, on the other, each of them
commanding an 100 Horse, spread them as wide as he could possible, to hinder
himself from being encompassed, and received the Enemies with his usual Valor:
but they being French, old Soldiers, and much out-numbring him, immediately
charged with so much fury, upon the Squardrons of Mirebeau and Lux, that they
broke into them, and put them in Disorder. The Marshal was not wanting on his
side, to give admirable proofs of his Courage and his Conduct, in rallying and
sustaining his men, who in spite of their vigorous Resistance began to bend.
He made one particular Charge with extreme bravery, to dis-engage the Baron de
Lux, who was the worst handled; himself, and the boldest of his Soldiers,
being unhors'd; but seeing fresh Squadrons coming on, whereof some were
marching up directly to him, others turning on the right hand and on the left,
to enclose him, he was at last constrained to give ground with the rest, and
endeavor to make his Retreat, in which he was so extremely pressed, that it
wanted but little of plain flight. And the detachment which was sent by the
King, to receive those who fled, and to sustain Biron, (who wounded as he was
in the Head, and blood all over, yet disdaining to turn his back, fought
retreating, accompanied by very few) were as ill handled as the first, and
driven back to the place where the King was himself in Person.

It was on this occasion that Great Prince performed a most heroic and most
memorable action: For though he saw himself in the greatest danger imaginable,
having in front of him near 1200 Horse in six Squadrons, sustained by the gross
of the Army, which was coming to attaque him; he who had not at that time above
an hundred Horse about him in good order, far from retiring, which one would
have thought he should have endeavored, as being able to have done it without
danger, while the Enemies were employed, either in fighting those who yet made
resistance, or in pursuing those who fled; he marched straight forward, bearing
his Sword aloft, and calling by their names the most considerable Persons who
attended him, as the Duke of Elbeuf, the Marquess of Pisany, de Treinel, de
Roquelaure, de Chasteau Vieux, De Liencour, de Montigny, d' Inteville and de
Mirepoix, and inviting them to act like himself, he made so furious a charge on
those who believed themselves to be already in possession of the Victory, that
he stopped them short, and broke into them, followed by all his brave
Attendants, whoafter his example fought like Lions, and pushed the Enemy with
so much vigor, that those six Squadrons fell back in confusion upon each other.
In the heat of this Combat, he killed with his own hand the valiant Colonel
Sanson, who was using his uttermost endeavors though in vain, to restore the
Fight: and being seconded by Biron, who had rallyed about an hundred and twenty
Horse, and by the Duke of Trimouille, who was come up to the Charge in the
midst of the action with his Company of Gendarmes, he pursued them at full spur
as far as the great Body of Cavalry, which the Duke of Mayenne commanded in the
Vanguard. And doubtless he had not failed to attaque him, as he was very
desirous to have done, seeing his valor seconded with such good fortune, if
that gross had not been flanked with two little Copses, lined with Musketeers,
and sustained by the whole Spanish Army, which had certainly overwhelmed him,
in case they had taken that critical opportunity.

In effect, the Duke of Mayenne having observed, during the Combat, the extreme
danger in which the King had involved himself, which according to his heavy
maxim, might pass for inconsideration and rashness, sent three or four times
with all imaginable earnestness to the Constable, to desire him not to let slip
that favorable minute, but to march as to a certain victory; giving him to
understand, that the King having neither Foot nor Cannon, could not possibly
escape either from being killed, or at least from being taken. But whether the
Castillian feared the fortune of the King, and much more apprehended that his
whole Army was not far behind; or were it the Hatred which the Spaniards bore
the Duke, who for his part hated them not less; or perhaps the Vanity and Pride
of the Constable, who could not endure to be taught his Duty: it is certain that
he absolutely refused to move, but only on his Retreat the same day, to his
Quarters at St. Seyne, and the next morning to Gray. The King, who in the mean
time had rallied all his Troops, having still pursued him, till he had repassed
the Saone.

Thus it may be said, that in this famous Skirmish at Fontain Francoise, the
happy success of which is wholly to be attributed to the incomparable Valor of
the King, he performed an Action not unlike that of the great Macchabee, who
with 800 men, durst bear up against a numerous Army; with this difference
notwithstanding, that the Jewish* Hero was lost in the too eager prosecution of
his Victory, but ours, on the contrary, returned from the pursuit of his flying
Enemies, covered with Glory, after he had driven a powerful Army out of his
Kingdom, with an handful of men, not exceeding the number of 6 or 700.

This was the last Enterprise of the League, which was then gasping in the
pangs of death, and expired immediately after it. For the Duke of Mayenne, in
despair to see himself abandoned by the Constable, with no hope of recovery in
his Affairs, was upon the point of taking a Journey into Spain, and throwing
himself into the Arms of King Philip, with intention to inform him of the
Malice and Cowardice of those, whom he entrusted with the Command of his
Armies, when the King, willing by an admirable effect of his Goodness, to
withdraw his vanquished Enemy from the steep of that Precipice, where he was
seeking his destruction, let him understand that he was ready to receive him
into Grace, and grant him, in that his low estate, very advantageous
Conditions; that while the Treaty betwixt them was depending, he might stay at
Ch^lon on the Saone, the only good Town remaining to him in Bourgogne, and take
his word for his security. And the Duke to answer this Generosity, as much as
lay in him, accepting this Offer, gave immediate Order, that the Castles of
Dijon and Talant should be surrendered. But what was most admirable in this
procedure of the King, was, that to save the Honor of that Prince, who had
engaged himself by Oath, not to acknowledge him, till he had received
Absolution from the Pope, he deferred the conclusion of his Treaty, till he had
obtained it from his Holiness; after which, in the beginning of the year
ensuing, he made an Edict in his Favor.

It was not, indeed, Ann. 1596.
so advantageous as it might have been, if he could have resolved to have
accepted those Propositions sooner, which were offered him more than once; at a
time, when he might have treated not only for himself, but for all that
powerful Party which he h^aded. Yet it was infinitely beyond what he could
reasonably have expected at that time: for, in consideration, that he had
always opposed the pernicious Designs of the Sixteen, and of the Spaniards, and
that making War like a man of Honor, he had constantly spoken of the King with
great Respect, as one who infinitely esteemed his Person, his Merit, and his
Quality; the King who valued him exceedingly, granted, in his favor, (even
against the opinion of the greatest part of his Counsel) that Edict, in which,
making very honorable mention of him, and commending the Zeal, which he always
had for the preservation of the Catholic Religion, and the Monarchy in its
entire estate, he granted him amongst other things, (besides an Amnesty of the
past, the re-establishment of himself and his Friends, in all their
Possessions, the Towns of Soissons, S^urre, and Chalon on the Saone, for his
security) a Declaration, importing that he had no Accusation either against
himself, or the Princes and Princesses of his Family, touching the Parricide
committed on the Person of the late King; and that he bound himself and his
Successors, to the payment of all Debts which he had contracted, as well
without the Kingdom as within it, to make War against him.

After this, the Duke going to pay his Respects to him at M^nceaux, was
received with great Honor, and testimony of Affection: and it happening, that
the King in walking with him, at his ordinary rate* which was very swift, that
poor Prince, who was fat and unwieldy, grew out of breath, freely told him,
That he was quite spent, and could go no farther: The King embracing him, said
only this: For my o^n part, Cousin, I (...) to you, this is all the (...) I
will ever take on you, for all the (...) you have done me, when you were (...)
of the League. Thus, the Duke being charmed with so much Generosity and
Goodness, which won upon his Nature, devoted himself wholly to his service, and
served him afterward to his great advantage, especially against the Spaniards,
in the retaking of La Fere and Amiens.

Now, after this Agreement, there remained no more toward the total
extinguishment of that great Fire, which had spread it self through all the
Kingdom, than the reduction of the Dukes of Mercaeur and of Ioyeuse, who yet
held for the League, the one in Bretagne, and the other in Languedoc. For, as
to the Town of Marseilles, (which the Duke of Guise, to whom the King had given
that Government of Provence, had retaken from the Rebels, it being then under
the dominion of two petty Tyrants, who acknowledged neither the King, nor the
Duke of Mayenne, and who would have given it up to the Spaniards) the History
of its Deliverance, belongs not to that of the League: for the Duke of Ioyeuse,
three years were already past, when after the death of his Brother, who was
drowned in the Tarn, when he had been forced in his Retrenchments at the Siege
of Villemur, he was returned from Father A^ge the Capuchin, to be Duke of
Ioyeuse, and General of the League in Languedoc. This change of his was made,
at the earnest Solicitations, of the Faculty of Divines in Toulouse; the
Doctors, (who were consulted on this Case of Conscience, and especially his
Brother the Cardinal, who after the death of the late King, was entered into
the Party of the League) having declared to him, that he was obliged, under
pain of mortal Sin, to accept of that Employment, for the good of Religion. Yet
he would not take it, without a Dispensation from the Pope, who transferred him
from the Order of St. Francis, to that of St. John of Jerusalem. He had
maintained, till that time, the Party of the Union in that Province, as well as
he was able; but when he saw, that the greatest part of the Towns, made their
voluntary submission, after the Conversion of the King; and that those few
Officers of Parliament, who were remaining at Toulouse, were resolved, in case
he would not accommodate himself to them, that they would join with the Members
of their Company, who, during the Troubles, were retired to Castle Sarazin, and
Besiers. He made his Treaty, and in January obtained from the ^in^, in the same
manner as the Duke of (...) had done, an Edict in favor of him, by which he
was made Marshal of France, and Lieutenant of the King in Languedoc, and
Tholo^se, and the other Towns of that Province, which yet held for the League.

He lived for three years afterward, in the midst of the Pomps. Pleasures, and
Vanities of the World. But it caused a wonderful Surprise, when after he had
solemnized with great Magnificence, the Marriage of his only Daughter,
H^nrie^^e Char^otte, only Heir of that rich and illustrious House of Ioyeus^,
with Henry Duke of Montp^nsi^r, it was told, on the second Tuesday of Lent, by
the Capuchin who preached at St. Germain de l' Auxerrois, that having for the
second time, renounced the World, he was returned the last night into the
Cloister, from whence he had departed eight or nine years before, for the
service of Religion, as he believed: but at the last, his Mind having been
enlightened by God's holy Spirit, and being strongly wrought upon by the
Impu^ses of his Grace, he had resolved to do Justice on himself; considering,
in the presence of God, that the Motive on which the Pope had given him the
Dispensation, no longer subsisting, it was his duty, dealing sincerely with
God, who is not to be deceived, no longer to make use of it, when the Causes
which supported it, were no more in being. For which Reasons, he piously
resolved, to resume his ancient Habit of Penitence, in which, after he had
edified all Paris, by his rare Virtues, and his fervent Sermons, he died in our
days, a most religious Death.

All that now remained, was to reduce the Duke of M^rcaeur; which was indeed,
to give the fatal Blow to the League, and to cut off the last Head of that
monstrous Hydra. That Prince, who was Son to the Count of Va^demont, and
Brother of Queen Louise, Wife to the late King, being carried away with the
furious Torrent of the League, after the death of the Guises, following the
example of the other Princes of his Family, had caused almost a general Revolt
in his Government of Bretagne, where he made War for almost ten years, with
Fortune not unlike that of the Duke of Mayenne, but with much greater
Obstinacy. For not withstanding that in the declination of the League, he had
lost the greatest part of his Towns, which were either taken from him, or of
their own accord forsook his Party, yet he still fed his Imagination with
flattering Hopes, that this fair Duchy, to which he had some Pretensions in
right of his Wife, might at last remain in his possession, by some favorable
revolution of Fortune, in case the War continued. Ann. 15^7.
But when he saw the King approaching Bretagne, with such Forces, as there was
no appearance of resisting, he made his Applications to the Duchess of
Beaufort, to whom he offered the Princess his only Daughter, for the young Duke
of Vandome her Son. And it was in consideration of that Marriage, that she
obtained from the King, an Edict yet more honorable, and at least as
advantageous as that which she had obtained for the Duke of Mayenne, whom she
desired to have in her Interests, Ann. 1598.
designing to make her self powerful Friends, by whose assistance she might
compass her high Pretensions, which all vanished by her sudden Death, in the
year ensuing.

Thus ended the League, by the reduction of the Duke of Mercaeur, who had this
advantage above all the Princes of that Party, that his Accommodation was
followed by an Employment, wherein he obtained all the Glory, that a Christian
Hero could desire, and which has recommended his Name to late Posterity. For
the Emperor Rodolphus, dissatisfied with his German Generals, who had served
him ill against the Turks, and being informed of the rare Merit of this Prince,
having entertained him with leave from the King, and given him the Command of
his Forces in Hungary, he extended his Reputation through all Christendom, by
his wonderful Exploits in War: particularly in the famous Retreat of Canisia,
with 1500 men, before an Army of 60000 Turks; at the taking of Alba Regalis,
and at the Battle wherein he defeated the Infidels, who came to the relief of
their men besieg^d in that City. And being upon his return to France, after so
many heroic Actions, it pleased God to reward him, with another Crown of
Glory* infinitely surpassing that on Earth, and to receive him into Heaven, by
means of a contagious Disease, which took him from the World at Nuremberg.

The King was not yet satisfied, to have wholly extinguished that Firebrand of
Civil War, which the League had lighted up in all the Provinces of France, he
farther desired, in order to the security and quiet of his People, after so
great Troubles, to make an end of foreign War, which he accomplished not long
after the Treaty of the Duke of Mercaeur, by the Peace of Vervins. Since that
War which was openly made against the Spaniard, during the space of four years,
had nothing of relation to the League, nor the Peace which concluded it, I
shall forbear any mention of it in this History, that I may not exceed the
Limits of my Subject. I shall only say, that after the Spaniard had been
obliged by virtue of the Articles of Peace, to restore all the Places, which he
had taken from us, or that had been basely given up to him, during our
Troubles, we have seen, since that time, under the glorious Reigns of the
Bourbons, that imperial House still increasing with the French Monarchy, by
Peace and War, in Greatness, in Power, and in Wealth, even till this present
time, when Louis the Great, by his victorious Arms, and by his Laws, has raised
it to the highest pitch of Glory, on the Ruins of those who had attempted its
destruction by the League. A wonderful effect of the divine Providence and
Justice; and a plain demonstration to all Subjects, that they are indispensably
obliged, to give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar; and that with good Reason,
founded on the express Commands of Jesus Christ, the fourth Council of Toledo,
inspired by God's holy Spirit, has made a Decree, against such kind of
Leaguers, containing, That whoever shall have violated by any League, the Oath
of Allegiance, by which he is bound to maintain the state of his Country and
of his King, or shall have made any Attempt against his sacred Person, or
endeavored to depose him, and tyrannically usurped the Sovereign Power, let
him be Anathema before God the Father and his holy Angels; -- before Jesus
Christ and his Apostles; -- before the holy Ghost and the Martyrs; -- let him
be cut off from the Catholic Church, which be has profaned by his execrable
Perjury; and let him be excluded from the Company of the Faithful, together
with all those who have been partakers of his Impiety; for it is most just, that
they who are Accomplices, and guilty of the same Crime, should also be involved
in the same Punishment.

THE POSTSCRIPT Of the TRANSLATOR.
THat Government generally considered, is of divine Authority, will admit of no
dispute: For whoever will seriously consider, that no man has naturally a right
over his own Life, so as to murder himself; will find by consequence, that he
has no right to take away another Life; and that no pact betwixt man and man,
or of Corporations and Individuals, or of Sovereigns and Subjects, can entitle
them to this right. So that no Offender can lawfully, and without sin, be
punished, unless that power be derived from God. It Is He who has commissioned
Magistrates, and authorized them to prevent future Crimes by punishing
Offenders, and to redress the injured by distributive Justice: Subjects
therefore are accountable to Superiors, and the Superior to Him alone. For the
Sovereign being once invested with lawful Authority, the Subject has
irrevocably given up his power, and the dependence of a Monarch is alone on
God. A King, at his Coronation, swears to govern his Subjects by the Laws of
the Land, and to maintain the several Orders of Men under him, in their lawful
privileges; and those Orders swear Allegiance and Fidelity to him, but with
this distinction, that the failure of the People is punishable by the King,
that of the King is only punishable by the King of Kings. The People then are
not Judges of good or ill administration in their King; for it is inconsistent
with the Nature of Sovereignty, that they should be so: And if at some times
they suffer, through the irregularities of a bad Prince, they enjoy more often
the benefits and advantages of a good one, as God in his Providence shall
dispose, either for their blessing or their punishment. The advantages, and
disadvantages of such subjection are supposed to have been first considered,
and upon this balance they have given up their power without a capacity of
resumption: So that it is in vain for a Commonwealth Party to plead, that men,
for example, now in being, cannot bind their Posterity or give up their power:
For if Subjects can swear only for themselves, when the Father dies the
subjection ends, and the Son who has not sworn can be no Traitor or Offender,
either to the King or to the Laws. And at this rate a long-lived Prince may
outlive his Sovereignty, and be no longer lawfully a King: But in the mean
time, it is evident that the Son enjoys the benefit of the Laws and Government,
which is an implicit acknowledgment of subjection. It Is endless to run through
all the extravagancies of these men, and it is enough for us that we are settled
under a Lawful Government of a Most Gracious Prince; that our Monarchy is
Hereditary; that it is naturally poised by our municipal Laws, with equal
benefit of Prince and People; that he Governs as he has promised by explicit
Laws; and what the Laws are silent in, I think I may conclude to be part of his
Prerogative; for what the King has not granted away, is inhe^ent in him. The
point of Succession has sufficiently been discussed, both as to the Right of
it, and to the interest of the People: One main Argument of the other side is,
how often it has been removed from the Right Line? As in the case of King
Stephen, and of Henry the Fourth, and his Descendants of the House of
Lancaster. But it is easy to answer them, that matter of Fact, and matter of
Right, are different Considerations: Both those Kings were but Usurpers in
effect, and the Providence of God restored the Posterities of those who were
dispossessed. By the same Argument they might as well justify the Rebellion
and Murder of the Late King: For there was not only a Prince inhumanly put to
death, but a Government overturned; and first an Arbitrary Commonwealth, then
two Usurpers set up against the Lawful Sovereign; but to our happiness the same
Providence has miraculously restored the Right Heir, and to their confusion, as
miraculously preserved him. In this present History, to go no further, we see
Henry the Third, by a Decree of the Sorbonne, divested, what in them lay, of
his Imperial Rights, a Parliament of Paris, such another as our first long
Parliament, confirming their Decree, a Pope authorizing all this by his
Excommunication, and an Holy League and Covenant, prosecuting this Deposition
by Arms: Yet an untimely death only hindered him from reseating himself in Glory
on the Throne, after he was in manifest possession of the Victory. We see also
the same Sorbonists, the same Pope, Parliament, and League, with greater force
opposing the undoubted Right of King Henry the Fourth; and we see him, in the
end* surmounting all these difficulties, and triumphing over all these dangers.
God Almighty taking care of his own Anointed, and the True Succession: Neither
the Papist nor Presbyterian Association prevailing at the last in their
attempts, but both baffled and ruined, and the whole Rebellion ending either in
the submission, or destruction of the Conspirators.

It Is true, as my Author has observed in the beginning of his History, that
before the Catholic League, or Holy Union, which is the Subject of this Book,
there was a League or Combination of Huguenots, against the Government of
France, which produced the Conspiracy of Amboise; and the Calvinist Preachers
(as M^zeray, a most impartial Historian, informs us) gave their opinion, that
they might take up Arms in their own defense, and make way for a free access to
the King, to present their Remonstrances: But it was ordered at the same time,
that they should seize on the Duke of Gu^se, and the Cardinal of Lorrain his
Brother, who were then Chief Ministers, that they might be brought to Trial by
process before the States; but he adds immediately, who could answer for them,
that the Prisoners should not have been killed out of hand, and that they would
not have made themselves Masters of the Queen Mother's Person, and of the young
King's, which was laid afterward to their charge? The concealed Heads of this
Conspiracy, were Lewis Prince of Conde, and the famous Admiral de Coligny; who
being discontented at Court, because their Enemies the Guises had the
management of affairs, under the Queen Regent, to their exclusion, and being
before turned Calvinists; made use of that Rebellious Sect, and the pretense of
Religion, to cover their Ambition and Revenge. The same Mezeray tells us in one
of the next Pages, That the name of Huguenots or Fidnos (from whence it was
corrupted) signifies League or Association, in the Swisse Language; and was
brought, together with the Sect, from Geneva into France. But from whencesoever
they had their name, it is most certain that pestilent race of people cannot by
their principles, be good Subjects: For whatever enforced Obedience they pay to
Authority, they believe their Class above the King; and how they would order
him if they had him in their power, our Most Gracious Sovereign has
sufficiently experienced when he was in Scotland. As for their boast that they
brought him in, it is much as true, as that of the Calvinists, who pretend, as
my Author tells you in his Preface, That they seated his Grandfather Henry the
Fourth upon the Throne. For both French and English Presbyterians were
fundamentally and practically Rebels; and the French have this advantage over
ours, that they came in to the aid of H^nry the Third, at his greatest need, or
rather were brought over by the King of Navarr^ their declared Head, on a
prospect of great advantage to their Religion; whereas ours, never inclined to
the Kings Restoration, till themselves had been trodden underfoot by the
Independent Party, and till the voice of three Nations called aloud for him,
that is to say, when they had no possibility of keeping him any longer out of
England. But the beginning of Leagues, Unions, and Associations, by those who
called themselves Gods People, for Reformation of Religious Worship, and for
the redress of pretended Grievances in the State, is of a higher rise, and is
justly to be dated from Luther's time; and the private Spirit, or the gift of
interpreting Scriptures by private Persons, without Learning, was certainly the
Original Cause of such Cabals in the Reformed Churches: So dangerous an
instrument of Rebellion is the Holy Scripture, in the hands of ignorant and
bigoted men.

The Anabaptists of Germany led up the Dance, who had always in their mouths,
Faith, Charity, the Fear of God, and mortifications of the Flesh; Prayers,
Fastings, Meditations, contempt of Riches and Honors were their first specious
practices: From thence they grew up by little and little to a separation from
other men, who according to their Pharisaical account, were less holy than
themselves; and Decency, Civility, neatness of Attire, good Furniture and Order
in their Houses, were the brands of carnal-minded men. Then they proceeded to
nickname the days of the Weeks, and Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, etc. as Heathen
names, must be rejected for the First, Second, and Third Days, distinguishing
only by their numbers. Thus they began to play, as it were, at cross purposes
with mankind; and to do every thing by contraries, that they might be esteemed
more godly and more illuminated. It had been a wonder, considering their
fanciful perfections, if they had stopped here. They were now knowing and pure
enough to extend their private Reformation to the Church and State; for Gods
people love always to be dealing as well in Temporals as Spirituals; or rather,
they love to be fingring Spirituals, in order to their grasping Temporals.
Therefore they had the impudence to pretend to Inspiration in the Exposition of
Scriptures; a trick which since that time has been familiarly used by every
Sect, in its turn, to advance their interests. Not content with this, they
assumed to themselves a more particular intimacy with Gods Holy Spirit; as if
it guided them, even beyond the power of the Scriptures, to know more of him
than was therein taught: For now the Bible began to be a dead Letter, of it
self; and no virtue was attributed to the reading of it, but all to the inward
man, the call of the Holy Ghost, and the ingrafting of the Word, opening their
Understanding to hidden Mysteries by Faith: And here the Mountebank way of
canting words came first in use: as if there were something more in Religion
than could be expressed in intelligible terms, or Nonsense were the way to
Heaven. This of necessity must breed divisions amongst them; for every man's
Inspiration being particular to himself, must clash with another, who set up
for the same qualification; the Holy Ghost being infallible in all alike,
though he spoke contradictions in several mouths: But they had a way of licking
one another whole; mistakes were to be forgiven to weak Brethren; the failing
was excused for the right intention; he who was more illuminated, would allow
some light to be in the less, and degrees were made in contradictory
Propositions. But Godfathers and Godmothers, by common consent, were already
set aside, together with the observation of Festivals, which they said were of
Antichristian Institution. They began at last to Preach openly, that they had
no other King but Christ, and by consequence, Earthly Magistrates were out of
doors: All the gracious Promises in Scripture they applied to themselves, as
Gods chosen, and all the Judgments were the portion of their Enemies. These
impieties were at first unregarded, and afterward tolerated by their
Sovereigns: And Luther himself made request to the Duke of Saxony, to deal
favorably with them, as honest-meaning men who were misled. But in the end,
when by these specious pretenses they had gathered strength, they who had
before concluded, that Christ was the only King on Earth, and at the same time
assumed to themselves, that Christ was theirs; inferred by good consequence,
that they were to maintain their King; and not only so, but to propagate that
belief in others; for what God wills, man must obey: And for that reason they
entered into a League of Association amongst themselves, to deliver their Israel
out of Egypt; to seize Canaan, and to turn the Idolaters out of possession.
Thus you see by what degrees of Saintship they grew up into Rebellion, under
their Successive Heads, Muncer, Phifer, John of Leyden, and Knipperdolling,
where, what Violences, Impieties, and Sacriledges they committed, those who are
not satisfied, may read in Sleydan. The general Tradition is, that after they
had been besieged in Munster, and were forced by assault, their Ringleaders
being punished, and they dispersed; two Ships-lading of these precious Saints
was disembogu'd in Scotland, where they set up again, and broached anew their
pernicious Principles. If this be true, we may easily perceive on what a Noble
stock Presbytery was grafted. From Scotland they had a blessed passage into
England; or at least arriving here from other parts, they soon came to a
considerable increase. Calvin, to do him right, writ to King Edward the Sixth,
a sharp Letter against these People; but our Presbyterians after him, have been
content to make use of them in the late Civil Wars, where they and all the rest
of the Sectaries were joined in the Good Old Cause of Rebellion against His
Late Majesty; though they could not agree about dividing the Spoils, when they
had obtained the Victory: And it is impossible they ever should; for all
claiming to the Spirit, no Party will suffer another to be uppermost, nor
indeed will they tolerate each other; because the Scriptures interpreted by
each to their own purpose, is always the best weapon in the strongest hand:
Observe them all along, and Providence is still the prevailing Argument: They
who happen to be in power, will ever urge it against those who are undermost;
as they who are depressed, will never fail to call it Persecution. They are
never united but in Adversity, for cold gathers together Bodies of contrary
Natures, and warmth divides them.

How Presbytery was transplanted into England, I have formerly related out of
good Authors. The Persecution arising in Queen Mary's Reign, forced many
Protestants out of their Native Country into Foreign parts, where Calvinism
having already taken root (as at Francfort, Strasburg, and Geneva) those Exiles
grew tainted with that new Discipline; and returning in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, spread the contagion of it both amongst the Clergy and Laity
of this Nation.

Any man who will look into the Tenets of the first Sectaries, will find these
to be more or less embued with them: Here they were supported underhand by
Great Men for private interests: What trouble they gave that Queen, and how she
curbed them, is notoriously known to all who are conversant in the Histori^s of
those times. How King James was plagued with them is known as well, to any man
who has read the Reverend and Sincere Spotswood: And how they were baffled by
the Church of England, in a Disputation which he allowed them at Hampton Court,
even to the Conversion of Dr. Sparks, who was one of the two Disputants of
their Party, and afterward writ against them, any one who pleases may be
satisfied.

The Agreement of their Principles with the fiercest Jesuits, is as easy to be
demonstrated, and has already been done by several hands: I will only mention
some few of them, to show how well prepared they came to that solemn Covenant
of theirs, which they borrowed first from the Holy League of France; and have
lately copied out again in their intended Association against his present
Majesty.

Bellarmine, as the Author of this History has told you, was himself a Preacher
for the League in Paris, during the Rebellion there, in the Reign of King Henry
the Fourth. Some of his Principles are these following.

In the Kingdoms of Men, the Power of the King is from the People, because the
People make the King: Observing that he says, In the Kingdoms of Men, there is
no doubt but he restrains this Principle to the subordination of the Pope: For
his Holiness, in that Rebellion, as you have read, was declared Protector of
the League: So that the Pope first Excommunicates (which is the Outlawry of the
Church) and by virtue of this Excommunication, the People are left to their own
natural liberty, and may without farther Process from Rome depose him.

Accordingly you see it practiced, in the same Instance: Pope Sixtus first
thunderstruck King Henry the Third, and the King of Navarre; then the Sorbonne
make Decrees, that they have successively forfeited the Crown; the Parliament
verifies these Decrees, and the Pope is petitioned to confirm the sense of the
Nation; that is, of the Rebels.

But I have related this too favorably for Bellarmine; for we hear him in
another place, positively affirming it as matter of Faith, If any Christian
Prince shall depart from the Catholic Religion, and shall withdraw others from
it, he immediately forfeits all Power and Dignity, even before the Pope has
pronounced Sentence on him; and his Subjects, in case they have power to do it,
may and ought to cast out such an Heretic, from his Sovereignty over
Christians.

Now consonant to this is Buchanan 's Principle, That the People may confer the
Government on whom they please. And the Maxim of Knox, That if Princes be
Tyrants against God and his Truth, their Subjects are released from their Oath
of Obedience. And Goodman 's, That when Magistrates cease to do their Duties,
God gives the Sword into the Peoples hands: evil Princes ought to be deposed by
inferior Magistrates; and a private man, having an inward Call, may kill a
Tyrant.

It Is the work of a Scavenger, to rake together and carry off all these
Dunghills; they are easy to be found at the Doors of all our Sects, and all
our Atheistical Commonwealths men. And, besides, it is a needless labor; they
are so far from disowning such Positions, that they glory in them; and wear
them like Marks of Honor, as an Indian does a Ring in his Nose, or a
Souldanian a Belt of Garbidge. In the mean time I appeal to any impartial man,
whether men of such Principles can reasonably expect any Favor from the
Government in which they live, and which Viper-like they would devour.

What I have remarked of them is no more than necessary, to show how aptly
their Principles are suited to their Practices: The History it self has
sufficiently discovered to the unbiased Reader, that both the last Rebellion,
and this present Conspiracy, (which is the mystery of Iniquity still working in
the three Nations) were originally founded on the French League: that was their
Model, according to which they built their Babel. You have seen how warily the
first Association in Picardy was worded: nothing was to be attempted but for
the King's Service, and an Acknowledgement was formally made, that both the
Right and Power of the Government was in him: but it was pretended, that by
occasion of the true Protestant Rebels, the Crown was not any longer in
condition, either of maintaining it self, or protecting them. And that
therefore in the Name of God, and by the Power of the holy Ghost, they joined
together in their own Defense, and that of their Religion. But all this while,
though they would seem to act by the King's Authority, and under him, the
Combination was kept as secret as possibly they could, and even without the
participation of the Sovereign; a sure Sign, that they intended him no good at
the bottom. Nay, they had an Evasion ready too, against his Authority; for it is
plain, they joined Humieres, the Governor of the Province, in Commission with
him; and only named the King for show; but engaged themselves at the same time
to his Lieutenant, to be obedient to all his Commands; levying Men and Money,
without the King's Knowledge, or any Law, but what they made amongst
themselves. So, that in effect, the Rebellion and Combination of the Hugonots,
was only a leading Card, and an example to the Papists, to rebel, on their
side. And there was only this difference in the Cause, that the Calvinists set
up for their Reformation, by the superior Power of Religion, and inherent Right
of the People, against the King and Pope. The Papists pretended the same
popular Right for their Rebellion against the King, and for the same end of
Reformation, only they faced it, with Church and Pope.

Our Sectaries, and Long Parliament of 41, had certainly these French
Precedents in their eye. They copied their Methods of Rebellion; at first with
great professions of Duty and Affection to the King; all they did was in order
to make him glorious; all that was done against him was pretended to be under
his Authority and in his Name; and even the War they raised, was pretended for
the King and Parliament. But those Proceedings are so notoriously known, and
have employed so many Pens, that it would be a nauseous Work for me to dwell on
them. To draw the likeness of the French Transactions and ours, were in effect
to transcribe the History I have translated. Every Page is full of it. Every
man has seen the Parallel of the Holy League, and our Covenant; and cannot but
observe, that besides the Names of the Countries, France and England, and the
Names of Religions, Protestant and Papist, there is scarcely to be found the
least difference, in the project of the whole, and in the substance of the
Articles. In the mean time I cannot but take notice, that our Rebels have left
this eternal Brand upon their Memories, that while all their pretense was for
the setting up the Protestant Religion, and pulling down of Popery, they have
borrowed from Papists both the Model of their Design, and their Arguments to
defend it. And not from loyal, well principled Papists; but from the worst the
most bigoted, and most violent of that Religion. From some of the Jesuits, an
Order founded on purpose to combat Lutheranism and Calvinism. The matter of
Fact is so palpably true, and so notorious, that they cannot have the Impudence
to deny it. But some of the Ies^ites are the shame of the Roman Church, as the
Sectaries are of ours. Their Tenets in Politics are the same; both of them
hate Monarchy, and love Democracy: both of them are superlatively violent; they
are inveterate haters of each other in Religion, and yet agree in the
Principles of Government. And if after so many Advices to a Painter, I might
advise a Dutch-maker of Emblems; he should draw a Presbyterian in Arms on one
side, a Jesuit on the other, and a crowned Head betwixt them: for it is perfectly
a Battel-royal. Each of them is endeavoring the destruction of his Adversary;
but the Monarch is sure to get Blows on both sides. But for those Sectaries and
Commonwealths-men of 41, before I leave them, I must crave leave to observe of
them, that generally they were a sour sort of thinking men, grim and surly
Hypocrites; such as coud cover their Vices, with an appearance of great
Devotion and austerity of Manners: neither Profaneness, nor Luxury, were
encouragd by them, nor practisd publicly, which gave them a great opinion of
Sanctity amongst the Multitude; and by that opinion principally they did their
business: Though their Politics were taken from the Catholic League, yet
their Christianity much resembled those Anabaptists, who were their Original in
Doctrine; and these indeed were formidable Instruments of a religious
Rebellion. But our new Conspirators of these seven last years, are men of quite
another Make: I speak not of their Nonconformist Preachers, who pretend to
Enthusiasm, and are as morose in their Worship, as were those first Sectaries,
but of their Leading men, the Heads of their Faction, and the principal Members
of it: what greater looseness of Life, more atheistical Discourse, more open
Lewdness was ever seen, than generally was and is to be observed in those men?
I am neither making a Satyr nor a Sermon here; but I would remark a little the
ridiculousness of their Management. The strictness of Religion is their
pretense; and the men who are to set it up, have theirs to choose. The Long
Parliament^ Rebels frequented Sermons, and observed Prayers and Fastings with
all solemnity: but these new Reformers, who ought in prudence to have trodden
in their steps, because their End was the same, to gull the People by an
outside of Devotion, never used the means of insinuating themselves into the
opinion of the Multitude. Swearing, Drunkenness, Blasphemies, and worse sins
than Adultery, are the Badges of the Party: nothing but Liberty in their
mouths, nothing but License in their practice.

For which reason they were never esteemed by the Zealots of their Faction, but
as their Tools; and had they got uppermost, after the Royallists had been
crushed, they would have been blown off, as too light for their Society. For my
own part, when I had once observed this fundamental error in their Politiques,
I was no longer afraid of their success: No Government was ever ruined by the
open scandal of its opposers. This was just a Catiline's Conspiracy, of
profligate, debauched, and bankrupt men: The wealthy amongst them were the
fools of the Party, drawn in by the rest whose Fortunes were desperate; and the
Wits of the Cabal sought only their private advantages. They had either lost
their Preferments, and consequently were piqu'd, or were in hope to raise
themselves by the general disturbance. Upon which account, they never could be
true to one another: There was neither Honor nor Conscience in the Foundation
of their League, but every man having an eye to his own particular advancement,
was no longer a Friend, than while his Interest was carrying on: So that
Treachery was at the bottom of their design, first against the Monarchy, and if
that failed, against each other; in which, be it spoken to the honor of our
Nation, the English are not behind any other Country. In few words, just as
much fidelity might be expected from them in a common cause, as there is
amongst a Troop of honest murdering and ravishing Bandits; while the Booty is
in prospect, they combine heartily and faithfully, but when a Proclamation of
Pardon comes out, and a good reward into the bargain, for any one who brings in
another Head; the Scene is changed, and they are in more danger of being
betrayed every man by his Companion, than they were formerly by the joint
forces of their Enemies. It Is true, they are still to be accounted dangerous,
because, though they are dispersed at present, and without an Head, yet time
and lenity may furnish them again with a Commander: And all men are satisfied
that the debauched Party of them, have no principle of Godliness to restrain
them from Violence and Murders; nor the pretended Saints any principle of
Charity, for it is an action of Piety in them to destroy their Enemies, having
first pronounced them Enemies of God. What my Author says in general of the
Huguenots, may justly be applied to all our Sectaries: They are a malicious and
bloody Generation, they bespatter honest Men with their Pens when they are not
in power; and when they are uppermost, they hang them up like Dogs. To such
kind of people all means of reclaiming, but only severity, are useless, while
they continue obstinate in their designs against Church and Government: For
tho^ now their claws are par^d, they may gro^ again to be more sharp; they are
still Lions in their Nature, and may profit so much by their own errors in
their ^are m^n^gements, that they may become more sanctified Traitors another
time.

In the former part of our History, we see what Henry the Third gained from
them by his remisness and concessions: Though our last King was not only
incomparably more pious than that Prince, but also was far from being taxed
with any of his Vices; yet in this they may be compared, without the least
manner of reflection, that extreme Indulgence and too great Concessions, were
the ruin of them both: And by how much the more, a King is subject by his
Nature, to this frailty of too much mildness, which is so near resembling the
God^ like Attribute of Mercy; by so much is he the more liable to be taxed with
Tyranny. A strange Paradox, but which was sadly verified in the Persons of
those two Princes: For a Faction appearing zealous for the Public Liberty,
counts him a Tyrant who yields not up whatever they demand, even his most
undoubted and just Prerogatives; all that distinguishes a Sovereign from a
Subject, and the yielding up, or taking away of which, is the very Subversion
of the Government.

Every point which a Monarch loses or relinquishes, but renders him the weaker
to maintain the rest; and besides, they so construe it, as if what he gave up
were the natural right of the people, which he or his Ancestors had usurped
from them; which makes it the more dangerous for him to quit his hold, and is
truly the reason why so many mild Princes have been branded with the names of
Tyrants, by their incroaching Subjects. I have not room to enlarge upon this
matter as I would, neither dare I presume to press the Argument more closely:
But passing by, as I promised, all the remarkable passages in the late Kings
Reign, which resemble the Transactions of the League; I will briefly take
notice of some few particulars, wherein our late Associators and Conspirators
have made a Third Copy of the League. For the Original of their first
Politiques was certainly no other than the French: This was first copied by the
Rebels in Forty One, and since recopyed within these late years by some of
those who are lately dead, and by too many others yet alive, and still drawing
after the same design. In which, for want of time, many a fair blot shall be
left unhit, neither do I promise to observe any method of times, or to take
things in order as they happened.

As for the Persons who managed the two Associations, theirs and ours, it is
most certain that in them is found the least resemblance: And it is well for us*
they were not like: For they had men of Subtilty and Valor to design, and then
to carry on their Conspiracy; ours were but bunglers in comparison of them, who
having a Faction not made by them, but ready formed and fashioned to their
hands, (thanks to their Fathers) yet failed in every one of their Projections,
and managed their business with much less dexterity, though far more wickedness
than the French. They had indeed at their Head an old Conspirator, witty and
turbulent, like the Cardinal of Lorrain, and for courage in Execution much such
another. But the good sense and conduct was clearly wanting on the English
side; so that if we will allow him the contrivance of the Plot, or at least of
the Conspiracy, which is an honor that no man will be willing to take from
him; in all other circumstances he more resembled the old decrepit Cardinal of
Bourbon, who fed himself with imaginary hopes of power, dreamed of outliving a
King and his Successor, much more young and vigorous than himself, and of
governing the World after their decease: To dye in Prison, or in Banishment, I
think will make no mighty difference, but this is a main one; that the one was
the Dupe of all his Party, the other led after him, and made fools of all his
Faction. As for a Duke of Guise, or even so much as a Duke of May^nne, I can
find none in their whole Cabal. I cannot believe that any man now living could
have the vanity to pretend to it: It Is not every Age that can produce a Duke of
Guise; a man who without the least shadow of a Title (unless we will believe
the Memoires of the crack-brain'd Advocate David, who gave him one from
Charlemaign) durst make himself Head of a Party, and was not only so in his own
conceit, but really; presumed to beard a King, and was upon the point of being
declared his Lieutenant General, and his Successor. None of these instances
will hold in the Comparison, and therefore I leave it to be boasted, it may be,
by one Party, but I am sure to be laughed at by another. Many hotheaded
Chevaliers d' Aumale, and ambitious Bravo's like Captain St. Paul, may be found
amongst them, Intriguing Ladies, and Gallants of the Times, such as are
described in the Army of the League, at the Battle of Yvry; and besides them,
many underling Knaves, Pimps, and Fools; but these are not worthy to be drawn
into resemblance.

Therefore to pass by their Persons, and consider their Design: it is evident
that on both sides they began with a League, and ended with a Conspiracy. In
this they have copied, even to the word Association, which you may observe was
used by Humieres, in the first wary League, which was formed in Picardy: and we
see to what it tended in the Event; For when Henry the Third, by the assistance
of the King of Navarre, had in a manner vanquished his Rebels, and was just
upon the point of mastring Paris, a Iacobin, set on by the Preachers of the
League, most barbarously murdered him; and by the way take notice, that he
pretended Enthusiasm, or Inspiration of God's holy Spirit, for the commission
of his Parricide. I leave my Superiors to conclude from thence, the danger of
tolerating Non-conformists, who (be it said with Reverence) under pretense of a
Whisper from the holy Ghost, think themselves obliged to perpetrate the most
enormous Crimes against the Person of their Sovereign, when they have first
voted him a Tyrant, and an Enemy to God's People. This indeed was not so
impudent a Method as what was used in the formal process of a pretended
high-Court of Justice, in the Murder of King Charles the First; and therefore
I do not compare those Actions: but it is much resembling, the intended Murder
of our gracious King, at the Rye, and other Places: and that the Head of a
College might not be wanting to urge the perfor^mance of this horrible
Attempt, instead of Father Edm. Bourgoing, let Father Ferguson appear, who was
not wanting in his spiritual Exhortations to our Conspirators, and to make them
believe, that to assassinate the King, was only to take away another
Holophernes. It Is true, the Iacobin was but one, and there were many joined in
our Conspiracy, and more perhaps than Rumsey or West have ever named; but this,
though it takes from the justness of the Comparison, adds incomparably more to
the Guilt of it, and makes it fouler on our side of the Water.

My Author makes mention of another Conspiracy against Henry the Fourth, for
the seizing of his Person at Mante, by the young Cardinal of Bourbon, who was
Head of the third Party, called at that time the Politics, that is to say in
modern English, Trimmers: This too was a Limb of our Conspiracy; and the more
moderate Party of our Traitors were engaged in it. But had it taken effect, the
least it could have produced, was to have overthrown the Succession; and no
reasonable man would believe, but they who could forget their Duty so much as
to have seized the King, might afterward have been induced to have him made
away, especially when so fair a provision was made, by the House of Commons,
that the Papists were to suffer for it.

But they have not only rummag'd the French Histories of the League, for
Conspiracies and Parricides of Kings; I shall make it apparent that they have
studied those execrable Times, for Precedents of undermining the lawful
Authority of their Sovereigns. Our English are not generally commended for
Invention; but these were Merchants of small Wares; very Pedlers in Policy:
they must like our Tailors have all their Fashions from the French: and study
the French League for every Alteration, as our Snippers go over once a year
into France, to bring back the newest Mode, and to learn to cut and shape it.

For example: The first Estates convened at Blois by Henry the Third, (the
League being then on foot, and most of the three Orders dipped in it,) demanded
of that King, that the Articles which should be approved by the three Orders
should pass for inviolable Laws, without leaving to the King the power of
changing any thing in them. That the same was designed here by the Leading men
of their Faction, is obvious to every one: for they had it commonly in their
mouths, in ordinary Discourse: and it was offered in Print by Plato Redivivus,
as a good Expedient for the Nation, in case his Majesty would have consented to
it.

Both in the first and last Estates at Blois, the Bill of Exclusion, against
the King of Navarre was pressed; and in the last carried by all the three
Orders, though the King would never pass it: The end of that Bill was very
evident; it was to have introduced the Duke of Guise into the Throne, after the
King's decease: to which he had no manner of Title, or at least a very cracked
one, of which his own Party were ashamed. Our Bill of Exclusion. was copied
from hence; but thrown out by the House of Peers, before it came to the King's
turn to have wholly quashed it.

After the Duke of Guise had forced the King to fly from Paris by the
Barricades, the Queen Mother being then in the Traitors Interests, when he had
outwitted her so far, as to persuade her, to join in the Banishment of the Duke
of Espernon his Enemy; and to make her believe, that if the King of Navarre,
whom she hated, were excluded, he would assist her, in bringing her beloved
Grandchild of Lorrain, to the possession of the Crown; it was proposed by him,
for the Parisians, that the Lieutenancy of the City might be wholly put into
their hands: that the new Provost of Merchants, and present Sheriffs of the
Faction, might be confirmed by the King; and for the future, they should not
only elect their Sheriffs, but the Colonels and Captains of the several Wards.

How nearly this was copied in the tumultuous meetings of the City for their
Sheriffs, both we and they have cause to remember; and Mr. Hunt's Book,
concerning their Rights in the City Charter, mingled with infamous aspersions
of the Government, confirms the Notions to have been the same. And I could
produce some very probable instances out of another Libel, (considering the
time at which it was written, which was just before the detection of the
Conspiracy) that the Author of it, as well as the Supervisor, was engaged in
it, or at least privy to it; but let Villainy and Ingratitude be safe and
flourish.

By the way, an Observation of Philip de Comines comes into my mind: That when
the Dukes of Burgundy, who were Lords of Ghent, had the choice of the Sheriffs
of that City, in that year all was quiet and well governed; but when they were
elected by the people, nothing but tumults and seditions followed.

I might carry this resemblance a little farther: For in the heat of the Plot,
when the Spanish Pilgrims were coming over, nay more, were reported to be
landed; when the Representatives of the Commons were either mortally afraid, or
pretended to be so of this airy Invasion; a Request was actually made to the
King, that he would put the Militia into their hands: which how prudently he
refused, the example of his Father has informed the Nation.

To show how the Heads of their Party had conn'd over their Lesson of the
Barricades of Paris, in the midst of Oats his Popish Plot, when they had
fermented the City with the leaven of their Sedition, and they were all
prepared for a rising against the Government; let it be remembered, that as the
Duke of Guise and the Council of Sixteen, forged a List of Names, which they
pretended to be of such as the King had set down for destruction; so a certain
Earl of blesed Memory, caused a false report to be spread of his own danger,
and some of his Accomplices, who were to be murdered by the Papists and the
Royal Party; which was a design to endear themselves to the multitude, as the
Martyrs of their cause; and at the same time, to cast an odious reflection on
the King and Ministers, as if they sought their blood with unchristian cruelty,
without the ordinary forms of Justice. To which may be added, as an Appendix,
their pretended fear, when they went to the Parl^ament at Oxford; before which
some of them made their Wills, and showed them publicly; others sent to search
about the places where the two Houses were to sit, as if another Gunpowder Plot
was contriving against them, and almost every man of them, according to his
quality, went attended with his Guard of Janissaries, like Titus: So that what
with their followers, and the seditious Townsmen of that City, they made the
formidable appearance of an Army; at least sufficient to have swallowed up the
Guards, and to have seized the Person of the King, in case he had not prevented
it by a speedy removal, as soon as he had Dissolved that Parliament.

I begin already to be tired with drawing after their deformities, as a Painter
would be, who had nothing before him in his Table but Lazars, Cripples, and
hideous Faces, which he was obliged to represent: Yet I must not omit some few
of their most notorious Copyings. Take for example their Council of Six, which
was an imitation of the League, who set up their famous Council, commonly
called Of the Sixteen: And take notice, that on both sides they picked out the
most heady and violent men of the whole Party; nay they considered not so much
as their natural parts, but heavy Blockheads were thrown in for lumber, to make
up the weight: Their Zeal for the Party, and their Ambition, atton'd for their
want of Judgment, especially if they were thought to have any interest in the
people. Loud roarers of Ay and No in the Parliament, without common sense in
ordinary discourses, if they were favorites of the Multitude, were made Privy
Counselors of their Cabal; and Fools, who only wanted a parti-colour'd Coat, a
Cap, and a Bawble, to pass for such amongst reasonable men, were to redress the
imaginary Grievances of a Nation, by murdering, or at least seizing of the
King. Men of scandalous Lives, Cheats and Murderers, were to Reform the Nation,
and propagate the Protestant Religion: And the rich Idiots to hazard their
Estates and Expectations, to forsake their Ease, Honor, and Preferments, for
an empty name of Heading a Party: The wittiest man amongst them to encumber and
vex his decrepit Age, for a silly picque of revenge, and to maintain his
Character to the last, of never being satisfied with any Government, in which
he was not more a King than the present Master. To give the last stroke to this
resemblance, Fortune did her part; and the same fate of division amongst
themselves, ruined both those Councils which were contriving their King's
destruction. The Duke of Mayenne and his Adherents, who were much the most
honest of the Leaguers, were not only for a King, but for a King of the Royal
Line, in case that Duke could not cause the Election to fall on himself, which
was impossible, because he was already mar^ied: The rest were some for this
man, some for another, and all in a lump for the Daughter of Spain; this
disunited them, and in the end ruined their conspiracy. In our Council of Six,
some were for murdering, and some for securing of the King; some for a rising
in the West, and some for an Insurrection of the brisk Boys of Wapping: In
short, some were for a mungrel kind of Kingship, to the exclusion of the Royal
Line, but the greater part for a barefaced Commonwealth. This raised a
division in their Counsel, that division was ^omented into a mutual hatred of
each other; and the conclusion was, that instead of one Conspiracy, the
Machines played double, and produced two, which were carried on at the same
time: A kind of Spread Eagle Plot was hatched, with two Heads growing out of
the same Body; such twin Treasons are apt to struggle like Esau and Jacob, in
the Womb, and both endeavoring to be first born, the Younger pulls back the
Elder by the Heel.

I promised to observe no order, and am per^orming my word before I was aware:
After the Barricades, and at many other times, the Duke of Guise, and Council
of Sixteen, amongst the rest of the Articles, demanded of the King to cashier
his Guards of the forty five Gentlemen, as unknown in the times of his
Predecessors, and unlawful; as also to remove his surest Friends from about his
Person, and from their Places both Military and Civil. I leave any man to
judge, whether our Conspirators did not play the Second Part to the same Tune:
Whether his Majesty's Guards were not alleged to be unlawful, and a grievance
to the Subjects; and whether frequent Votes did not pass in the House of
Commons at several times, for removing and turning out of Office, those who on
all occasions behaved themselves most Loyally to the King, without so much as
giving any other reason of their misdemeanors, than public same: That is to
say, reports forged and spread by their own Faction, or without allowing them
the common justice of vindicating themselves from those calumnies and
aspersions.

I omit the many illegal Imprisonments of freeborn men, by their own
Representatives, who from a Jury erected themselves into Judges; because I find
nothing resembling it in the worst and most seditious Times of France. But let
the History be searched, and I believe Bussy Le Clerc never committed more
outrages in pillaging of Houses, than Waller, in pretending to search for
Popish Relics: Neither do I remember that the French Leaguers ever took the
evidence of a Jew, as ours did of Faria: But this I wonder at the less,
considering what Christian Witnesses have been used, if at least the chief of
them was ever Christened. Bussy le Clerc, it is true, turned out a whole
Parliament together, and brought them Prisoners to the Bastille; and Bussy
Oats was for garbling too, when he informed against a worthy and Loyal Member,
whom he caused to be expelled the House, and sent Prisoner to the Tower: But
that which was then accounted a disgrace to him, will make him be remembered
with honor to Posterity.

I will trouble the Reader but with one Observation more, and that shall be to
show how dully and pedantically they have copied, even the false steps of the
League, in Politics, and those very Maxims which ruined the Heads of it. The
Duke of Guise was always oftentatious of his power in the States, where he
carried all things in opposition to the King: But by relying too much on the
power he had there, and not using Arms when he had them in his hand, I mean by
not prosecuting his Victory to the uttermost, when he had the King enclosed in
the Louvre, he missed his opportunity, and Fortune never gave it him again.

The late Earl of Shaftsbury, who was the undoubted Head and Soul of that
Party, went upon the same maxims, being (as we may reasonably conclude)
fearful of hazarding his Fortunes, and observing that the late Rebellion under
the former King, though successful in War, yet ended in the Restoration of His
Present Majesty, his aim was to have excluded His Royal Highness by an Act of
Parliament; and to have forced such concessions from the King, by pressing the
chymerical dangers of a Popish Plot, as wou^d not only have destroyed the
Succession, but have subverted the Monarchy. For he presumed he ventured
nothing, if he could have executed his design by form of Law, and in a
Parliamentary way. In the mean time, he made notorious mistakes: First, in
imagining that his pretensions would have passed in the House of Peers, and
afterward by the King. When the death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey had fermented
the people, when the City had taken the alarm of a Popish Plot, and the
Government of it was in Fanatique hands; when a Body of white Boys was already
appearing in the West, and many other Counties waited but the word to rise,
then was the time to have pushed his business: But Almighty God, who had
otherwise disposed of the Event, infatuated his Counsels, and made him slip his
opportunity, which he himself observed too late, and would have redressed by an
Insurrection which was to have begun at Wapping, after the King had been
murdered at the Rye.

And now it will be but Justice before I conclude, to say a word or two of my
Author. He was formerly a Jesuit: He has amongst others of his works, written
the History of Arianism, of Lutheranism, of Calvinism, the Holy War, and the
Fall of the Western Empire. In all his Writings, he has supported the Temporal
Power of Sovereigns, and especially of his Master the French King, against the
usurpations and encroachments of the Papacy: For which reason being in disgrace
at Rome, he was in a manner forced to quit his Order, and from Father
Maimbourg, is now become Monsieur Maimbourg: The Great King his Patron, has
provided plentifully for him by a large Salary, and indeed he has deserved it
from him. As for his style, it is rather Ciceronian, copious, florid, and
figurative; than succinct: He is esteemed in the French Court ^qual to their
best Writers, which has procured him the Envy of some who set up for Critics.
Being a professed Enemy of the Calvinists, he is particularly hated by them; so
that their testimonies against him stand suspected of prejudice. This History
of the League is generally allowed to be one of his best pieces: He has quoted
every where his Authors in the Margin to show his Impartiality; in which, if I
have not followed him, it is because the chiefest of them are unknown to us, as
not being hitherto translated into English. His particular Commendations of Men
and Families, is all which I think superfluous in his Book; but that too is
pardonable in a man, who having created himself many Enemies, has need of the
support of Friends. This particular work was written by express order of the
French King, and is now translated by our Kings Command: I hope the effect of
it in this Nation will be, to make the well-meaning men of the other Party
sensible of their past errors, the worst of them ashamed, and prevent Posterity
from the like unlawful and impious designs.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ABsolution given by the Archbishop of Bourges, to Henry the Fourth, held good,
and why? Page 924 Acarie, Master of Accounts, a grand Leaguer, 96 Francis, Duke
of Alanson, puts himself at the Head of the Protestant Army against the King
his Brother, 10. Is Crowned Duke of Brabant, 79. His Death, 85 George de
Clermont d' Amboises, 147. joins the Prince of Conde in Anjou with 1500 Men
that he had levied, 150. Is Grand Master of the Ordnance for the King of
Navarre at the Battle of Courtras, 209 Arques, its situation, and the great
Battle that was fought there, 742, etc. John d' Aumont Marshal of France, 114.
His Elogy, 195. The good Counsel be gave the King, but unprofitably, 114. He
Commands the Army Royal under the King, against the Reyters, 260. A grand
Confident of Henry the Third's, 383. Commands a Party of Henry the Fourth's
Army in Campaign, and at the attacquing of the Suburbs of Paris, 752. At the
Battle at Ivry, 774 The Duke d' Aumale at the Battle of Vimory, 270. Is made
Governor of Paris by the Leagers, 428. Besieges Sen^is, 483. Loses the Battle
there, 486 Auneau, a little City of La Beauce, its situation, 279. How the
Reyters were there defeated by the Duke of Guise, 280, etc. Don John of Austria
treats secretly with the Duke of Guise at Joinville, 20 Aubry, Curate of St.
Andrews, a grand Leager; his extravagance in his Sermon, 825
B.
THe Sieur Balagny sends Troops to the Duke of Guise, 235. Besieges Senlis with
the the Duke d' Aumale, 484. His defeat at that Battle, 486, etc. The Iournal
of the Barricades, 357, etc. Colonel Christopher de Bassom-Pierre, 103, 250,
777 Baston a furious Leaguer, that Signs the Covenant with his Blood. 449 The
Battle of Courtras, 200, etc. The Battle at Senlis, 485 The Battle or Combats
at Arques, 742 The Battle at Ivry, 770 Claude de Baufremont, Baron of Sen^cey,
enters into the League. 106. is President of the Nobles at the Estates at
Paris. Page 875 John de Beaumanoir, Marquis de Laverdin, Marshal de Camp, to
the Duke de Joyeuse, 196. is beaten by the King of Navarre, 197. Draws up the
Duke's Army into Battalia, at the Battle of Courtras, 209. breaks the Light
Horse, 215. his honorable Retreat, and his Elogy; his Services recompensed
with a Marshal of France's Staff. 226 Renaud de Beaune, Archbishop of Bourges,
chief of the Deputation of the Royallists at the Conference at Suresne, 879.
The sum of his Harangue, and of his Proofs, 880, etc. gives the King
Absolution. 928 Bellarmine, a Jesuit, and a Divine of Legate Cajetan's, preaches
at Paris during the Siege. 806 President de Bellievre sent to the Duke of
Guise, 335. is not of advice, that the King should cause the Duke to be killed
in the Louvre, 341. his Contest with the Duke of Guise, about the Orders he
brought him on behalf of the King, 343. his banishment from Court. 384 Rene
Benoist Curate of St. Eustach, acts and writes for the King. 836, 923 The
Marshall de Biron commands an Army in Poictou, 144. he artfully breaks the
designs of the Duke of Mayenne, ib. his Valor at the Combat of Arques, 748,
etc. at the attacquing the Suburbs of Paris, 752. at the Battle of Ivry, 775.
at the Siege of Roan, 845. he is killed before Espernay, 862. counsels the King
to put Friar Ange and his Penitents in Prison. Page 369, 367 The Baron of Biron
at the Battle of Ivry, 775. at the Battle of Fontan Francoise, 946, 947 The
Sieur de Bois-Dauphin enters into the League. 105 John Boucher Curate of St.
Benets, a grand Leaguer, and his Character, 95. his Chamber is called the
Cradle of the League, 99. causes the Alarm-Bell to be rung in his Parish
Church, at the Sergeants and Archers that would seize the Seditious, 304.
preaches against the King, 431, 432. retires into Flanders with the Spaniards,
after the reducing of Paris. 943 The Duke of Bouillon la Mark, General of the
German Army. 231, 233 Charles Cardinal de Bou^bon, put, by the Duke of Guise,
as a Ghost at the Head of the League, 92. his weakness, and ridiculous
pretension, 93, 102, 114. his Manifesto, or that of the League under his name,
114. the King declares him to be the nearest of Blood, and gives him the
Prerogatives of the Presumptive Heir of the Crown, 382. He presides over the
Clergy at the Estates of Blois, 388. is seized Prisoner, 403. is declared King
by the Council of the Union, 739. and proclaimed by the Name of Charles X. 764,
765. his death in Prison. Page 821 Charles de Bourbon, Count de Soissons, joins
with the King of Navarre at Monforeau, 198. his Valor at the Battle of
Coutras, 221, 222. at the attacquing the Suburbs of Paris. 753 Henry de
Bourbon, Prince de Conde, brings an Army of Germans into France, 10. is
excommunicated by Pope Sixtus Quintus, 132. drives the Duke of Mercoeur from
Poitou, 146. the History of his unhappy Expedition upon Angers, 145, 146.
espouses Charlotte Catharine de la Trimoille, 147. quits the Siege of Brouage,
where he leaves his Infantry, and marches with his Cavalry, to relieve Angers,
where his Army is scattered, and how, 150. his firmness at the Conference of
St. Brix, 162, 163. his Valor at the Battle of Coutras, 207, etc. his Death
and Elogy, 329, 330, etc. Henry XI. de Bourbon, Prince de Conde, a grand Enemy
to the Heresy of the Calvinists, notwithstanding that he was born of a
Calvinistical Father and Mother, 148. his Elogy. ib. etc. Lovis de Bourbon,
Duke of Monpensier, manages the Conference at St. Brix, 162. joins with the
Troops of the King's Army at Gien, 260. his Valor at the Combat of Arques,
748. at the Battle of Ivry, 774. Andrew Brancas de Villars maintains the Siege
of Roan with great honor, 845. puts all the Camp in disorder, 850, 851. is
made Admiral of the League. Page 872 Anthony de Brichanteau Beauvais Nangis,
enters into the League, and why, 106, 107, etc. reenters into the King's
favor, who gives him the Signet of Admiral of France. 393, 394 The President
Brisson, head of the Parliament of the League, 450. secretly protests before
Notari, of the violence that he suffers, ib. the Sixteen cause him to be
hanged. 837 Peter Brulart sent to the King of Navarre to convert him, 140, 141,
etc. his Elogy, and that of his House, ib. his Banishment from Court. 384
William Duke of Brunswick, at the Battle of Ivry, where he is slain. 789 Bussy
le Clerc a furious Leaguer, 98. takes Arms to hinder de Prevost, Curate of St.
Severnes, from being apprehended, who had preached seditiously against the
King, 303, 304. is made Governor of the Bastille, after the Barricades, 365.
leads the Parliament to the Bastille, how, and under what pretext, 444, 445. is
constrained to surrender the Bastille to the Duke of Mayenne, 838. saves
himself in Flanders, where he dies miserable. 839, 840
C.
CArdinal Cajetan sent Legate into France by Sixtus Quintus, 758. hinders an
Accommodation being made with the King, though he should be converted, 766.
runs the risque of being killed at the Show of the Ecclesiastics and Monks
during the Siege of Paris. Page 808 Queen Catharine de Medicis engages the King
in the War against the Hugonots, 7. concludes a Peace at the Court of the
Religion, 11, 12, 13. she hinders the King from opposing the League at first,
60. she maintains it underhand, 80. she would exclude the King of Navarre from
the Succession, that the Prince of Lorrain her Grandson might reign, 85. she
holds a Correspondence with the Duke of Guise, and hinders the King from arming
himself against him, 117. her Conference with the King of Navarre at St.
Brix's, 161. she carries the Duke of Guise to the Louvre, and mollifies the
King's anger, 344. counsels the King to go out of Paris, 362. she suffers her
self to be amused by the Duke of Guise, who enters very dexterously into her
Interests, 371, 372. her surprise, at the death of the Guises, 403. her Death,
437. 438. her Elogy, and Portrait. 438, 439, etc. Claude de la Chastre, Bailiff
of Beny, 105. Marshall of the Camp in the Duke ^f Guise's Army against the
R^yters, 246, 250, 266. marches the first to Montargis, to surprise the Reyters
at Vimory, 266, 267, 268. his advance to Dourdan, to surround them in Aun^au,
279. what part he had in the defeat of the Reyters at Auneau, 268. he preserves
Berry and Orleans for the League, 493. is made Marshall of the League, 872. he
makes his Peace, and reenters into Obedience, Page Page 936 The Count de
Chastillon, Son of the Admiral, brings assistance to the Army of the Reyters,
233, 258. his brave re^reat in the middle of an infinite number of Enemies,
298. repulses the Troops of the Duke of Mayenne, before Tours, 482. defeats the
Troops of Sieur de Saveuse, 491. his Valor at the Combat of Arques, 742, 748.
he misses taking Paris by storm, 812. he is the principal cause of the happy
success at the Siege at Chartres, 817, 818. his Death and Elogy. ib. and 819
Clement VIII. Pope, would not receive the Catholic Deputies of the Royal
Party, 861. nor the Duke of Nevers that went to render him Ob^di^nce, 933.
after having a long time refused to give the King Absolution, he gives it at
last. 934 The Combat and Retr^at at Pont St. Vincent. 246, etc. The Combat at
Vimoroy. 267, etc. The Combat at Auneau, where the Reyters were defeated. Page
277, etc. Combat at Fontain Francoise. 947 The Conference of the Duke of
Espernon, with the King of Navarre, about his Conversion. 87, etc. Conference
at d'Espernay and de Meaux, 121 The Conference of Sieur Lennoncour, and
President Brulart, with the King of Navarre, for his Conversion. 140, 141, etc.
The Conference at St. Brix between the Queen Mother, and the King of Navarre,
the Prince of Conde, and the Vicount de Turenne. 161, 162, etc. The Conference
at Nancy between the Princes of the House of Lorrain. 184, etc. The Conference
of Henry III. with Cardinal Morosini, Legate, touching the Murder of the
Guis^s. 413, 414, etc. The Conference of Cardinal Morosini with the Duke of
Mayenne. 474, etc. The Conference of the two Kings at Tours, 478 The Conference
of the Lorrain Princes at Rhemes. 829 The Conference of du Plessis Mornay, and
of Sieur de Ville-Roy for the Peace. 858, 859, etc. The Conference at Suresne.
879, 880, etc. Charles de Cosse, Count de Brissac, 105. ^uted the Government of
the Castle of Angers, 153, 189. he joins with the Troops of the Duke of Guise,
259. he is refused the Admiral^y that the Duke of Guise asked for him, and was
given to the Duke of Espernon, 312. his Elogy, ibid. causes the Barricades to
be made, 352. his scoffing raill^ry upon this Subject, 355. he leads the King's
Soldiers disarmed to the New market, ib. is President of the Nobles at the
Estates of Blois, 388. is there arrested Prisoner, and presently delivered,
403. is made Governor of Paris by M. de Mayenne, 939. he receives the King
into Paris, who makes him Marshal of France. Page 942 Coutras, its situation,
and the Battle fought there. 202, 203, etc.
D.
FRancis de Daillon Count du Lude, wounded at the Battle of Ivry. 790 Guy de
Daillon, Count du Lude, and Governor of Poitou, his Elogy. 791 The Advocate
David and his M^moirs. 63 The Baron of Dona, General of the Reyters, 230. his
birth and qualities, 231, etc. his neglig^nce repaired, in part, by his courage
and val^ur at the combat of Vimory, 272. suffers himself to be surpised in
Auneau, where the Reyters are defeated, 280, 281. saves himself in the defeat,
293. his return into Germany in a very pitiful condition. 300
E.
THE Fifth Edict of the Pacification extremely advantageous to the Huguenots,
called the Edict of May, 14. it is revoked. Page 61 The Edict of Blois against
the Huguenots. ib. The Edict of Poictiers favorable to the Huguenots 74 The
Edict of July against the Huguenots. 121 The Edict of Reunion against the
Huguenots, in favor of the League. 378 Philip, Count d'Egmont, at the Battle
of Ivry, where he is slain. 789 John d'Escovedo, Secretary to Don John
d'Austria, assassinated by Order of Philip the Second, and why. 21 The Duke
d'Espernon, the King's Favorite, confers with the King of Navarre about his
Conversion, and what happens thereupon, 87, 88 the hatred which was bore him,
was the cause that many brave persons entered into the League, 105. he treats
with the Reyters, 160, 161, 275. is made Admiral of France, and Governor of
Normandy, 313. his Character and Portrait, 314. a great Enemy to the Duke of
Guise, 315. his Banishment from Court, 377. he abandons Henry IV. 735 Francis
d'Espinay de Saint Luc. 105, 211. defeats the Rear-guard of St. Mesme, 151. his
brave Action at the Battle of Coutras. Page 224 Peter d'Espinal, Archbishop of
Lions, counsels the Duke of Guise not to quit the Estates, 396, etc. is
arrested Prisoner at Blois with the Cardinal de Guise, 403. is ransomed for
money, and made Chancellor of the League, 794. is chief of the Deputation for
the League, at the Conference at Suresne, 879. the sum of his Answer to the
Harangues of the Archbishop of Bourges. 884, etc. The Estates of France have
but deliberative voices. 36, 61 The first Estates of Blois. where the King
declares himself Head of the League. 61, etc. The second Estates of Blois. 385,
etc. They act openly against the King's Authority. 388, etc. They declare the
King of Navarre incapable to succeed to the Crown. 289, etc. The Estates of the
League at Paris. 865
F.
AN horrible Famine in Paris during the Siege. 800, 801 James Faye d'Espesses,
Advocate General, maintains strongly the Rights of the King, and the Liberties
of the Gallicane Church, against the Leaguers, at the Estates of Blois. 390 The
President Ferrier, Chancellor to the King of Navarre, is made Huguenot, toward
the end of his days. Page 87, 88 The Form of the League. 32 Form of the League
of Sixteen. 100, 101 Form which was made to be signed by the Huguenots that
re-enter'd into the Church. 154 Four Gentlemen of the House of Fourbin, are
cause of the reducing of Provence. 936
G.
GEnebrard makes a Sermon against the Salique Law, at the Procession of the
Estates of the League. 867, 868, etc. The Cardinal of Gondy Bishop of Paris,
incloses himself during the Siege with his Flock for their relief, 803. he
endeavors to make the People return to their Duty. 836 Ludovic de Gonzague,
Duke de Nevers, renounces the League, and why, 111, 112. he goes Ambassador to
Rome to yield Obedience, and to desire Absolution of the King, 932, etc.
Gregory XIII. would never approve of the League, 112, 113. his death. 130
Gregory XIV. declares for the League against the King, whom he excommunicates
with all his Adherents, 825, 826, 827. sends an Army into France, ib. his Bull
is condemned, and has no effect. ib. Philibert de la Guiche, Grand Master of
the Ordnance at the Battle of Ivry. Page 782 Guincestre Curate of St. Gervais,
a grand Leaguer, 98. lifts up his hand at his Auditors, in the midst of his
Sermon, and even at the first President, and assures them the death of the
Guises would be revenged, 429, etc. he accuses King Henry III. of Sorcery, in
the midst of his Sermon. 452
H.
AChilles de Harlay, first President of the Parliament of Paris, runs the
^isque of his life, in opposing the Leaguers, 248. They constrained him in the
midst of a Sermon to lift up his hand with others, 429. is carried Prisoner to
the Bastille, 446. his Elogy. 447 James de Harlay, Sieur de Chanvallon,
Governor of S^ns for the League, repulses the King's Army at two Assaults, and
keeps the place, 795. his spiritual Raillery upon the four Marshals of the
League. 873 Nicholas de Harlay, Bar^n of Sancy, levies an Army of Swisses and
Germans for the King at his own proper charges, 502, etc. and joins them to the
King's Army. 504 The Sieur Denis de Here, Counselor of Parliament, carried to
the Bastille by the Leaguers, 448. his Elogy. ib. Henry III. King of France and
Poland, 5, 10. his Pourtrait. Page ib. The Change made in his Conduct and
Manners when he was King of France. ib. He engages presently in the War against
the Huguenots, contrary to the counsel of the Emperor, the Venetians, and his
best Servants. 6, 7, 8 He declares himself Head of the League. 73 He is not the
Institutor, but the Restorer of the Order of the Holy Ghost. 75, 78 Solicits in
vain the King of Navarre to reenter into the Catholic Church, 87, 88 is
calumniated by the Leaguers. 89, 90 His weak Resolutions. 86, 116, 123, 139.
His Declaration against the Leaguers too weak. 119 Makes a Peace very
advantageous to the Leaguers. 123, 124 Makes War against the King of Navarre
with great repugnancy. 143, 144 Raises the Duke of Joyeuse prodigiously, 192,
193 His smart and majestical Answer to the Ambassadors of the Protestant
Princes of Germany, that pressed him to revoke his Edicts against the
Huguenots. 158, 159. His Confrery and Processions of Penitents. 173 His close
design in the War, which he is constrained to make against his will. 333 He
puts himself at the Head of his Army at Gien upon Loir, and opposes the passage
of the Army of the Reyters. 260 He testifies his too much weakness, and his too
much fear of the Seditious, whom he durst not punish. Page 305 He is contented
to reprehend the seditious Doctors and Preachers, in lieu of punishing them.
308 He incenses the Duke of Guise, in refusing him the Admiralty, which he had
asked for Brissac. 312, 313 Makes a resolution at last to punish the Leaguers.
332, 333 His irresolution, when he sees the Duke of Guise at the Louvre. 200,
201, etc. Makes the Guards and the Swisses enter Paris, 208, 209 The excessive
Demands they made him at the Barricades. 359, 360, 361 Goes from Paris in poor
equipage, and retires to Chartres. 363, 364 He favorably hearkens to them, who
with Friar Ange de Joyeuse, went in Procession at Chartres to ask his pardon.
367, 368, 369 His profound dissimulation. 325, 375, etc. Causes the Edict of
Reunion to be published in favor of the League. 378, 379 Lets loose the marks
of his choler and indignation, which he would conceal. 382, 383 Opens the
second Estates, where be communicates with the Duke of Guise. 385, 386 His
Oration, which checks the Leaguers, ib. and 387 His extreme indignation, by
reason of the unworthy Resolutions which they took against his Authority in the
Estates. Page 392, 393 Is resolved to have the Duke of Guise killed, 394, etc.
Causes him to be killed in his Chamber. 400, 401, etc. Causes the Cardinal de
Guise to be killed. 410, 411 Writes to the Legate Morosini, and gives him
Audience three days after, to declare to him his Reasons 413 Maintains that he
has incurred no Censure, and has no need of Absolution. 415 In lieu of arming,
he amuses himself, in making Declarations, which are slighted and contemned.
425 Makes great offers to the Duke of Mayenne in vain. 454 Takes rigorous
courses, but too late. 464, 465 How, and why he treats with the King of
Navarre. 466, 467 Offers very advantageous Conditions to the Princes of
Lorrain. 472, 473 Publishes, and causes to be executed, his Treaty with the
King of Navarre. 477 His Conference with this King at Tours. 478 Marches in the
Body of the Army, with the King of Navarre, toward Paris. 492 Receives and
dissembles the News of the Monitory against him. 494 Takes up his quarters at
St. Clou, and is unhappily killed. 509, 510, etc. His most christian, and most
holy Death, and Elogy. 514, 515, etc. Henry de Bourbon, King of Navarre,
protests against the first Estates at Blois. Page 61 His Conference with the
Duke d'Espernon, about the Subject of his Conversion. 86, 87, etc. His Fidelity
toward Henry III. 109 His forcible Declaration against the Leaguers. 117, 118
Gives the Duke of Guise the Lie in writing, and offers to fight him, to save
the French Blood. ib. Draws the Marshal de Damville to his side against the
League. 124 He desired not the ruin of Religion, but of the League, to
preserve the Monarchy. 126 Causes his Protestation against Sixtus Quintus's
Bull, to be fixed upon the Gates of the Vatican in Rome. 137, 138 His Conference
with the Queen Mother at St. Brix. 161, 162 His Exploits against the Army at
Joyeuse. 197, etc. His Valor and good Conduct at the Battle of Courtras. 202,
204, etc. His Clemency after his Victory. 227 He knew not how to, or would not,
make use of his Victory. 228 Assembles the Estates on his side, at Rochel; at
the same time, that the Estates were held at Blois. 390 His proceedings after
the death of the Guises, 467 His Declaration to all Frenchmen. Page 468 He
treats with, and is united to the King. 470, 471 His Conference with the King
at Tours. 478 His march toward Paris. 492, 493 He succeeds Henry III. and is
acknowledged for King of France, by the Catholics of the Army, upon certain
conditions. 734 Divides his Troops into three parts, and carries one into
Normandy. 736 His Conduct and Valor at the Battle of Arques. 741, etc.
Attaques and takes the Suburbs of Paris. 752, etc. Besieges Dreux. 769 Gives
and gains the Battle of Ivry. 770, etc. His Exploits after his Victory. 795,
etc. Is repulsed before Sens. ib. Besieges Paris. 796 Why he would not attaque
it by Force. 800 Rejects the Proposition which they made him to surrender
Paris, provided he would become Catholic. 809, etc. Pursues the Duke of Parma
just to Artois. 816, 817 The two Attempts he made unsuccessfully to surprise
Paris. 811, 816, etc. He takes Noyen. 844 Besieges Roan. 845 His Combat and
Retreat from Aumale. 847 Raises the Siege of Roan, and a little while after
besieges the Duke of Parma's Army. 852, etc. His proceedings after the Retreat
of that Duke. Page 861 The History of his Conversion. 900, etc. The Points upon
which he causes himself to be instructed. 918, 919, etc. He makes his solemn
Abjuration, and receives Absolution at St. Denis. 927, 928 Sends the Duke of
Nevers to Rome, in Obedience, and to ask the Pope's Absolution; who after
having long time de^err'd it, at last gives it him. 932, 933, etc. His happy
entrance into Paris. 938, 939 His heroic Valor at the Combat of Fontain
Francois. 948, etc. Grants a Treaty, and very favorable Edict to the Duke of
Mayenne. 954 His rare bounty in receiving him at Monceaux. 955 Anthony Hotman,
Advocate General for the League at the Parliament of Paris, is Author of the
Treaty of the Right of Uncle against the Nephew. 738, etc. Francis Hotman a
Civilian, Brother to the Advocate, refutes his Book, without knowing that it
was his Brothers. ib. The Huguenots have the advantage in the first War, that
Henry III. made against them. 7, 8 They become powerful, by joining with the
politic Party. ib. They were the first that leagued themselves against the
Kings. 14 James de Humieres, Governor of Peronne, his Elogy; and what made him
begin the League in Picardy. Page 22, 23 Charles de Humieres, Marquis d'Encre,
Governor of Campeigne for the King. 486 Is the cause of gaining the Battle of
Senlis, ib. etc. His Elogy. ib. etc. Carries a great supply of the Nobles of
Picardy to the King at the Battle of Ivry. 781
I.
JAmes Clement, the History of his abominable Parricide. 508, 509, etc. The
President Jeannin, sent by the Duke of Mayenne into Spain. 830 His Elogy. ib.
His prudent Negotiation with the King of Spain. 833 Ten Jesuits save Paris,
which had been taken by scaling the walls, if they had been asleep, as all the
rest were. 813 Innocent IX. Pope, declares himself for the League. 861 Duke
Anne de Joyeuse the King's Favorite. 192, 193 His prodigious rise. ib. His
Elogy. ib. He commands the Army against the King of Navarre. 194 His Exploits
in Poitou. 195, etc. His faults and presumption at the Battle of Coutras. Page
202, 203 His death ib. Henry de Joyeuse, Count de Bouchage, becomes Capucin,
under the name of Friar Auge, and why. 368, 369 His most extraordinary
Procession, from Paris to Chartres, to ask mercy of the King. ib. His going
out, and re-entring the Capucins. 960, etc. Francis de Joyeuse Cardinal,
Protector of France, generously maintains the King's Rights. 418 His effectual
Remonstrance, to Pope Sixtus, upon his proceedings after the death of the
Guises. ib. Ivry, its situation, and the Battle was fought there. 770, 771,
etc.
L.
FRrancis de la Noue, at the relief of Senlis. 484 Ranges the Army, and gains
the Battle. 485, etc. His Valor at the Combat of Arques. 748 Wounded and
beaten back at the attaquing the Suburbs of St. Martin. 353, etc. M. de Launoy,
a grand Leaguer. 75 Philip de Lenoncour, Cardinal. 140 The Sieur de
I'Esdiguieres takes Montelimar and Ambrun, where the Huguenots plunder the
great Church. 145 The League and Leaguers, its true Original. Page 2, 3 Wherein
it is like to that of Calvinism. 3 The success it had quite contrary to the end
it was proposed for. ib. The first that conceived the design, was the Cardinal
de Lorrain at the Council of Trent, 15, 16 The occasion that gave it birth in
France. 22, 23, etc. Its Project in Form, to which all the Leaguers are made
subscribe. 32, 33 The Refutation of the Articles of the said Form. 33, etc. It
would usurp the Authority Royal, in the first Estates at Blois. 60, 61, etc.
Its horrible Calumnies against Henry III. 89, 166, 234, 262, 234, 303, 304 The
League of Sixteen at Paris, its original, and progress. 93, etc. Its twelve
Founders. 94, etc. The Treaty of the League with the Spaniard. 102 It hinders
the Low Countries from being united to the Crown. 108 In taking Arms at so
mischievous a time, hinders the ruin of Huguenotism, which was going to be
destroyed during the Peace. ib. It sends new Memoirs, and a new Form of Oath to
the Provinces, at the coming of the Reyters. 234 The Insolence of the Leaguers
after the defeat of the Reyters. 302 They take Arms, and fall upon the Archers
who would seize de Prevost, Curate of St. Severin, that had preached
seditiously against the King. Page 203, 204 They take the Alarm, seeing the
King disposed to punish them, and implore the help of the Duke of Guise. 332,
etc. Their Transports and Acclamations at the Duke's coming. 337 They oppose
the going forth of Strangers, whom the King would have put out of Paris. 348
They make Barricades. 352 They act openly against the King's Authority at the
Estates. 389 Their furious deportmen^s at Paris, after the death of the Guises.
427, 428, etc. They degrade King Henry III. and act ^all sorts of Outrages
against him. 436 They accuse him of Enchantments, and Magic Charms. 452 The
Cities that entered into the League. 461 At Tolous they massacre the first
President, and Advocate General. 462 Their Deputies press the Pope to publish
the Excommunication against the King. 495, 496 They become stronger than ever
after the death of Henry III. 737, 738 Their Power during the Siege of Paris.
800 They offer the Crown of France to the King of Spain. 833, 834 They cause
President Brisson to be hanged. 837 Four of the most Seditious are hanged at
the Louvre. 839 They make it appear at the Estates at Paris, that they desire
nothing less than the King's Conversion. Page 890, 891 Henry d'Orleans, Duke de
Longueville, at the Relief of Senlis. 486 Gives Battle to the Leaguers, and
gains it. 487, etc. Commands one part of the King's Army. 736 And at the
Attaque of the Suburbs of Paris. 752, 753 Charles, Duke of Lorrain, would not
have the passage of the Reyters through his Country opposed, and why. 239, 240,
etc. Would not enter France after the Reyters. ib. Obtains Peace of the King.
946 Charles, Cardinal of Lorrain, was the first that formed the design of a
general League of the Catholics. 15, 16 His Portrait. ib. Charles de Lorrain,
Duke of Mayenne, makes Wars with the King of Navarre in Guyenne with little
success. 143, 144 Ioins himself with his Brother the Duke of Guise, against the
Army of the Reyters, 258, 259 His brave Action at the Combat of Vimory, 270,
etc. He retires to Lion in Bourgogn after the death of his two Brothers. 426,
etc. His Encomium and Portrait. 453, etc. He refuses the great Offers the King
made him, and goes to the Wars. ib. His happy beginnings. Page 455 His Entry
into Paris. 457 Weakens the Council of Sixteen by augmenting it. 458, 459
Causes himself to be declared Lieutenant General of the Estate and Crown of
France. 460 Acts as a Sovereign, and makes new Laws. 460, 461 Marches against
the King, defeats the Count de Brienne's Troops, and takes him Prisoner. 480,
481, etc. He attaques, and takes the Suburbs of Tours, and returns without
doing any thing else. ib. His generous Resolution when he saw himself besieged
by the Royal Army. 507, 508 Makes the Cardinal of Bourbon be declared King, by
the Council of the Union. 739 He attaques the King at Arques, and is repulsed
and beaten. 742, 743, etc. He follows the counsel of M. de Ville-Roy, and
opposes the designs of the Spaniards. 759, 760, etc. Causes to be proclaimed
Charles X. 764, 765. Marches to the Relief of Dreux. 769 Loses the Battle of
Ivry. 787 Breaks with the Spaniards, and why. 833, etc. Divides himself from
the Princes of his House. 834, etc. Is jealous of the young Duke of Guise. 835
Causes Four of the principal of the Sixteen to be hanged up at the Louvre, and
abates their Faction. Page 839 Carries the Duke of Parma to the Relief of Roan.
846 He assembles the Estates at Paris. 862, 863 etc. His Declaration, wherein
he invites all the Catholic Lords of the Royal Pa^ty, to meet at the Estates,
for the good of the Religion and the State. 865, 866 His Speech and Design in
the Estates. 875, etc. He creates one Admiral, and four Marshals of France. 873
Causes the Conference of Surene to be accepted by the Estates. 878 Takes Noyen.
879 Dexterously hinders the Election of a King at the Estates. 895, 896 Will not
hold the King's Absolution good. 931 Retires from Paris to Soisons. 940 What he
did at the Battle of Fontain Francoise. 947, 948, etc. Obtains from the King a
Treaty, and a favorable Edict. 954, 955, etc. Is very well received by the
King at Monceaux. 957 Henry de Lorrain, Duke of Guise, destined by his Uncle
the Cardinal of Lorrain to be Head of a League General of the Catholics. 17,
18, 19, etc. Treats with* Don John d'Austria, at Joinville. ib. The occasion
that caused him to begin the League. Page ib. His Pourtrait. 25, etc. Takes
Arms after the death of Monsieur. 85, etc. Makes use of the old Cardinal de
Bou^bon, as a Ghost, whom he puts at the Head of the League. 92 Treats at
Joinville with the Agents of Spain, and the Cardinal de Bourbon, and the
Conditions of the said Treaty. 10^, 102, etc. He begins the War with the
s^^prizing of diverse places by himself and his Friends, 104, etc. Makes the
Treaty at N^mours very advantageous to the League. 121 Goes and finds the King
at Meaux, and complains unjustly of diverse matters. 188 Undertakes with a very
few Troops to defeat the Army of the Reyters. 234, 235, etc. His honorable
Retreat at Pont St. Vincent. 246, 247, etc. He continually harrasses the Army
of the Reyters. 262 He attaques them, and defeats one Party of them at Vimory.
267, etc. He forms a design to attaque them at Auneau, and the execution of
that Enterpri^e. 277, 278, etc. He pursues the rest of the Reyters as far as
Savoy. 301, etc. He let them plunder the County of Montbeliard. Page ib. He
receives from the Pope a consecrated Sword, and from the Duke of Parma his
Arms, which they sent him, as to the greatest Captain of his time. 311 The
refusing him the Admiralty for Brissac, the which was given to Espernon his
Enemy, puts him on to determine it. 312, etc. He assembles the Princes of the
House of Lorrain at Nancy, and there resolves to present to the King a Request,
containing Articles against the Royal Authority. 322, 323 He resolves to
relieve Paris. 334, 335 He goes to Paris, notwithstanding the King's Orders
which were sent him by M. de Bellievre. ib. A description of his Entry into
Paris, where he was received with extraordinary transports of joy. ib. etc. His
Interview with the King at the Louvre. 343 In the Queens Garden. 344 What he
did at the Battle of the Barricades. 356 He disarms the King's Soldiers, and
causes them to be reconducted to the Louvre. 357 His real design at the Battle
of the Barricades. 358, etc. His excessive demands. 360, etc. Makes himself
Master of Paris, and makes a Manifesto to justify the Barricades. 365, 366,
etc. He dexterously draws the Queen Mother into his Interests. Page 371 Causes a
Request to be presented to the King, containing Articles most prejudicial to
his Authority. 371, 372, etc. Has given him all the Authority of a Constable,
under another name. 377, 378 His Prosperity blinds him, and is the cause that
he sees not an hundred things, to which he ought to give defiance. 385, etc. He
is shocked at the Speech the King made to the second Estates at Blois. 386, 387
He disposes of the Estates at his pleasure. ib. etc. Would have himself
declared, by the Estates, Lieutenant General of the whole Realm, independent
from the King. 391, 392 Is advertised of the design formed against him, and
consults thereupon with his Confidents. ib. etc. Is resolved to stay, contrary
to the Advice of the most part. 396, etc. The History of his Tragical Death.
399, 400, etc. His Encomium. 411 Lewis de Lorrain, Cardinal de Guise, presides
for the Clergy at the Estates of Blois. 388 The History of his Tragical Death.
410, 411 N. de Lorrain, Duke de Guise, escaping out of Prison, comes to Paris,
where he is received of the Leaguers, with open Arms, 835. he kills Colonel St.
Paul. 872, 873
M.
THE Marshal of Matignon, Governor of Guyenne, hinders the Leaguers from
surprising Bourdeaux. Page 113 Breaks the Measures of the Duke of Mayenne
dexterously. 243, 244 Gives good Advice to the Duke of Joyeuse, which he follows
not. 203 Reduces Bourdeaux to Obedience. 820 Father Claude Mathiu grand
Leaguer, solicits the Excommunication of the King of Navarre. 182 Father
Bernard de Montgaillard, Surnamed, The Petit Feuillant, a Seditious Preacher.
428 His Extravagance in a Sermon. 442, 443 He retires into Flanders with the
Spaniards, after the reduction of Paris. 943 Francis de Monthelon, a famous
Advocate, is made Lord Keeper by Henry III. 384 Henry de Montmorency, Marshal
de Damville, Head of the Politics or Malcontents, for to maintain himself in
the Government of Languedoc. 9 Draws his Brothers and Friends to him. ib. Ioins
with the King of Navarre, and Prince of Conde, against the League. 124 Protects
the Catholic Religion, and receives acknowledgments from the Pope. 125, 126 His
Fidelity in the Service of the King. 126, 127* Is at last made Constable of
France by Henry IV. Page ib. William de Montmorancy, Sieur de Thore, joins with
the Malecontent Politics. 9 Is defeated in conducting a Party of Duke Casimir's
Reyters. 25, 26 Re-takes Chantilly from the League. 483 The Sieur de Montausier
fights most valiantly, and insults agreeably over the Gascoins which were at
the Battle of Courtras. 217 The Sieur de Montigny enters and breaks the
Squadron of the Gascoins, at the Battle of Courtras. 215, 216 The Sieur de
Morennes Curate of St. Merry, labors to make the People return to the
Obedience of their King. 836 Cardinal Morosini, Legate in France, could not
obtain Audience the day of the Duke of Guise's Massacre. 406, 407 His
Conference with the King, to whom he declares he had incurred the Censures,
because of the Murder of the Cardinal de Guise. 414, 415 He incurs the Pope's
indignation, for not having published the Censures. 417 His Conference with the
Duke of Mayenne. 474, 4755, etc. John de Morvillier, Bishop of Orleans, his
Encomium and Pourtrait. 68, 69, etc. He counsels the King to declare himself
Head of the League. ib.
N.
ANne d'Este, Duchess de Nemours, Mother of the Guises, is arrested Prisoner at
Blois. Page 403 She treats by Letters with the Dukes of Nemours and Mayenne, to
reduce them to their Duty. 441, 442 The King sends her to Paris to appease the
Troubles. ib. The young Duke of Nemours, is arrested Prisoner at Blois. 403
Makes his Escape out of Prison. 441 The Orders he gave for the Defense of
Paris, where he maintains the Siege with all the Conduct and Vigor of an old
General. 798 He offers the King to surrender Paris, provided he will be made
Catholic. 809, 810 He abandons his Brother, and endeavors to make himself
declared Head of the League in his place. 485, 486, etc. Francis de Noailles,
Bishop of Acqs, his Encomium, his Embassage, and the part he had in the
Conversion of Henry IV. 309, 310, etc.
O.
THE Order of the Holy Ghost, and its true Origin. 74, 75, 76, etc. Lewis d'
Orleans, a famous Advocate, a grand Leaguer. 96 Author of the Seditious Libel,
Entitled, The English Catholic. Page 738. Is Advocate General for the League.
ib. The Colonel Alphonso d'Ornano, defeats 4000 Swissers, Protestants in
Dauphiny, 230 A Confident of Henry III's. 384 Counsels the King to dispatch the
Duke of Guise in the Louvre. 380
P.
PAnigerole Bishop of Ast, preaches at Paris during the Siege. 806 The
Parisiens enter into the League, and how. 91, etc. Their Barricades. 351, etc.
Their furious deportment after the death of the Guises. 427 Their admirable
firmness during the Siege. 801 They declare against the Sixteen. 840 They run
in Crowds to St. Denis, at the Conversion of the King. 928 The History of the
Reduction of Paris. 938, 939, etc. The Duke of Parma sends Troops to the Duke
of Guise. 236 He sends him his Arms after the Defeat of the Reyters, as to him,
who of all the Princes, merited best the Title of Captain. 311 Comes to the
Relief of Paris, and raises the Siege, by executing his own design, without
giving Battle. Page 810 His Retreat to Artois. 817 He renders the Duke of
Mayenne suspect to the King of Spain. 821 He marches to the Relief of Roan. 846
He pushes at the King at the Battle of Aumale. 848 Causes the Siege of Roan to
be raised. 854, 855, etc. His admirable Retreat at Caudebec. 853 The Cardinal
de Pelleve Solicitor of the Affairs of the League at Rome. 128 His Birth and
Qualities. ib. He presides for the Clergy at the Estates of Paris. 875 His
Death. 944 The Brotherhood of Penitents, and their Origin. 170, 171, etc. That
which the King established at Paris. 173. Philip II. King of Spain, causes John
d'Escovedo, Secretary to Don John d'Austria, to be assassinated, and why. 21
Solicits the King of Navarre and Damville to make War in favor of the
Huguenots, 80, 110 Presses the Duke of Guise to take Arms. 81, 82, etc.
Endeavors to cause himself to be declared Protector of the Realm of France.
761, 762, etc. Makes a Manifesto, and declares himself against the King. 769 He
supports the Sixteen against the Duke of Mayenne. Page 822 He imprudently
discovers his design he had to make the Infanta his Daughter to be chosen Queen
of France. 831, 832, etc. He endeavors to have a King chosen at the Estates of
Paris. 893, 894, etc. Francis Pigenat, Curate of St. Nicholas in the Fields,
declaims, in a furious manner, against the King. 431 Du Plessis Mornay, makes a
Writing, which alarms the League, 89. his Fidelity in the service of the King
of Navarre, his Master, whom he serves extremely well with his Pen and his
Sword, 118. he makes the treaty of the Union of the King with the King of
Navarre against the League, 471. is made Governor of Saumour by the King of
Navarre, 476. he confers with the Sieur de Ville Roy about the Peace. 858, 859,
etc. The Politics; their Party joins with those of the Huguenots. 8 Dr. Poncent
declaims insolently in open Pulpit against the King, 179. his punishment, 180,
181, etc. Le Pont St. Vincent, the brave Retreat the Duke of Guise made there.
246, 247, etc. The Pourtrait of Henry III. 5, 6, etc. The Pourtrait of the
Cardinal of Lorrain. 16, 17, etc. Pourtrait of the Duke of Guise. 24, 25, 26.
Pourtrait of John de Morvillier, Bishop of Orleans. 69, 70, 71, etc. Pourtrait
of the Duke of Espernon. Page 313, 314, etc. The Pourtrait of Queen Catharine
de Medicis. 437, 438, etc. The Pourtrait of the Duke of Mayenne. 453 The
President Potier de Blanc-Mesnill, is carried Prisoner to the Bastille by the
Leaguers, 446. his intelligence with Henry IV. and his Encomium. 753, 754, 755,
etc. John Prevost, Curate of St. Severines, a grand Leaguer, 95. declaims
furiously against the King. 303 The Preachers of the League, declame
scandalously against the King, but above all, after the death of the Guises,
428, 429, etc. they encourage the People of Paris during the Siege, 807, 808,
etc. their impudence. 824, 825
R.
THE Reyters and their Army, 231, 232, etc. the Plundering they make in
Lorrain, 243, 244, etc. their entrance into France, 257, 258, etc. their
Consternation, finding, at the River Loir, quite contrary to what was promised
them, 262, 263, etc. their Combat at Vimory, 267, 268, 269, etc. their
Negligence and Debauchery, 283, 284, etc. their defeat at Auneau, 285, 286,
287, etc. their whole dissipation. 293, 294, 295, etc. Francis Count de
Roche-Foucault. 147 John Lewis de la Roche-Foucault, Count de Randan, defeated
and killed before I^ioir. Page 791, etc. The Captain Roche-Mort, surprises the
Castle of Angers, and is there killed. 149, 150 Rene, Vicount de Rohan. 147
Colonel Rone beats up the Quarters of the Reyters Army, 241. receives
Commission from the Duke de Mayenne to command in Champaign and Brye, 456. he
seizes of Vandosme, 499, 480, etc. he defends Paris, after the taking of the
Suburbs, 756, 757. he commands the Light Horse at the Battle of Ivry, 777. is
made the Marshal of the League. 872
S.
LEwis de Saint Gelais, 147. Marshal de Camp of the King of Navarr's Army at
the Battle of Coutras. 207 Captain St. Paul, Officer of the Duke of Guise, 270,
271, etc. his Val^^r at the Combat of Auneau, 288, 289, etc. enters by force
into the Queens Garden, to defend the Duke his Master, 345. is made Marshal of
the League, 872. his death. 783 Charles de Saveuse defeated by the Count de
Chastillon. 491 Philip Sega, Cardinal of Placentia, Legate in France for the
League, 861. endeavors to hinder the Conference at Surene, 877. forbids, but to
no purpo^e, to go to St. Denis, to assist at the King's Abjuration, 921, 922,
etc. he retires after the entry of the King, and dies upon the way returning to
Rome. 944 Segur Pardaillon, Steward of the King of Navarr's Household, counsels
him to be converted, and afterward dissuades him for a time. Page 901, 902,
etc. The ridiculous Show the Ecclesiastics and Monks made during the Siege of
Paris. 807, 808, etc. The Siege of Brouage. 149 The Siege of Senlis. 483, 484,
etc. The Siege of Paris, 797, 798, etc. the things that contributed to make the
Parisians resolve to suffer all things, rather than surrender. 802, 803, etc.
The Siege of Chartres. 817 The Siege of Roan. 845 Sixtus Quintus Pope, his
Birth, Fortune, and Genius, 130, 131, 132, etc. rebukes the Leaguers, ib. his
Bull of Excommunication against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde,
133, 134, etc. what the Catholics said against this Bull, 135, etc. the
Writings against it, ib. and 136. the King of Navarr's Protestation, which he
made to be fixed in Rome, against this Bull, 137, 138, etc. he praises the
Generosity of this King, 138, 139. and sends the Cordeliers to the Galleys that
preached against him, 309. he sends a consecrated Sword to the Du^e of Guise,
after the defeat of the Reyters, 311. his resentment and ^holer he put himself
in, for the murder of the Cardinal de Guise, 417, 418, etc. he suspends all
Expeditions for Benefices, till the King should send to demand his Absolution,
ibid. he causes a Monitory to be affixt against him at Rome, Page 423. he
declares his Opinion against the League, and the Guises, to the Cardinal de
Joyeuse, 419. he refuses the King Absolution, unless he would put the Prelates
that were Prisoners into his bands, 495. his thundering Monitory against the
King, 498, 499, etc. he sends Cardinal Cajetan his Legate into France, to cause
a Catholic King to be chosen, 758. he disabuses himself in favor of the King,
822. he threatens the Spanish Ambassador to cause his Head to be cut off, 824.
his death, ib. The Sorbonne, and its Encomium, 306. the Faction of the Leaguers
prevails there upon the good Doctors, 307. it makes a naughty Decree against
Kings, 308. makes one wherein it is declared, That all People are freed from the
Oath of Allegiance, which they made to Henry III. 432, 433, etc. the incredible
mischiefs of this cursed Decree, 433, 434, etc. makes another, where it
declares, That the King ought not to be prayed for at the Mass, 496, 497. its
Decree against Henry de Bourbon, 766, 767, etc. another Decree against him
during the Siege of Paris, 805. the pernicious Sequels of this Decree, 806,
807, etc. declares all the Decrees it had made during the League to be null.
944, 945
T.
TRaity of the League at Peronne, 42, Page 43, etc. Treaty of the Duke of Guise
with Don John d'Austria. 19, 20 Treaty of the Heads of the League with the King
of Spain. 101, 102, etc. The Traity of Nemours favorable to the Leaguers. 121,
122, etc. The Treaty of the Duke of Espernon with the Army of the Reyters. 296,
297, etc. The Treaty between the King and the Lords of the League. 378, 379 The
Treaty between the King, and the King of Navarre, against the Leagne. 465, 466
The Treaty of the Duke of Mayenne. 954, 595, etc. Treaty of the Duke of
Mercoeur. 958, 959 Lewis de Tremouille Head of the League in Tourain, and
Poitou. 59, 60, 147, 148 Claude de Tremouille becomes Huguenot, and why, 147,
148, etc. seizes of the Post of Coutras, 202, etc. his Courage and his Valor in
this Battle. 215, etc. Charlotte Catharine de la Tremouille, becomes Huguenot,
and espouses the Prince de Conde. 147, 148, etc. Henry de la Tour, Vicount de
Turenne, joins himself to the Marescal de Damville, with the Party of the
Malcontents, 9. his audacious Answer at the Conference of St. Brix, 165, 166,
etc. he brings a grand Reinforcement to the King of Navarre, 197, 198. he
combats most valiantly at the Battle of Coutras, 216. he is made Marescal of
France, Duke of Bouillon, and Sovereign Prince of Sedan. 844, 845, etc. he
takes Stenay the evening before his marriage. Page ib.
V.
LE Sieur de Ville-Roy, Secretary of State under Henry III. 384. he enters into
the League to serve the State, 759. his Encomium, ib. the good counsel he gave
to M. de Mayenne, 761, 762, etc. Henry IV. obliges him to stay with the Duke of
Mayenne in Paris, ib. his Conference with Du Plessis-Mornay about the Peace.
858, 859, 860 Vimory, a* description of the Combat that was there fought. 267,
268, 269, etc. The Sieur de Vins, commanding the Light Horse of the Duke of
Guise, goes to make discovery of the Reyters in their Quarters about d'Auneau,
279. commands the Light Horse at the Combat of Auneau, 282, 286, 287, etc. he
gives advice to the Duke of Guise not to trust the King, 398, 399, etc. why he
enters into the Duke of Guise's Party, and how he is made Head of the League in
Provence. 462, 463, etc. The Marquis de Vi^ry, after the death of Henry III.
throws himself into the Party of the League, 734, 735. he was the first of all
that returned to his obedience, after the coversion of the King. 935, 936, etc.
FINIS.

