A Peaceable METHOD FOR THE RE-UNITING Protestants AND Catholics

In matters of Faith: Principally in the Subject of the Holy EUCHARIST.

Proceeding upon Principles Agreed on, and waving Points in Dispute;

Upon occasion of the late Contest concerning the Perpetuity of Faith touching
that great Mystery.

Written in French by LEWIS MAIMBOURG. S.J.

Printed at Paris, 1671.

To the Honorable WILLIAM PETRE OF STANFORD (...) ESSEX, Esquire
Honored Sir,
HAving no better means to express it, I do ambitiously lay hold of this, to
declare, in the face of the World, the great respect I bear you, both in regard
of your own worth and my particular obligations. Your worth (...) asure by
those talents* (...) The Gives of all (...) has been pleased to bestow upon
you, in more than an ordinary proportion. The improving of them is, perchance,
no lets to be admired in a person of your rank and quality. You have given the
world a great proof of it by the constant labor and great charge you have put
your self to, for instructing men, the best way (by laying examples before
them) how to become Saints. And, as you have in this showed, first, the great
esteem your self have of sanctity, so have you also by communicating your
labors to others; given them who participa^e o^ them an excellent lesson to
learn by, how to be good to themselves and others also. If moved by this
example of yours, I have endeavour^d something for the public good, I hope you
will allow me the freedom, to present these my first labors to you, by whose
conversation, in my first beginnings, I must own, as part of my obligation to
you, that I learned a good share both of mine own language, and of that of my
Author, of which, as well as of the Spanish, you have showed your self to have
more than an ordinary comp^ehension. As for the Work it self; I hope of will
not be unwelcome to you, as being sorfull (the little part I have in it
emboldens me to say so) both of reason and civility, as will render it much
suiting with your humor, who are particularly remarkable for them both. The
latter, at least, I hope, will incline you to give it a favorable
entertainment, and to accept of this small expression of the respects of

Honored Sir, Your much obliged and very humble Servant T.W.

The Translatours Preface to the Reader.
I Suppose it will be no hard matter for you to discover from what Soil this
plant originally comes. It was indeed, wholly French within these few weeks,
and there were not many months, since it appeared in France. I will not say
that it may possbly find a more favorable reception, as coming from that
place, from whence we so frequently receive those new Modes we so highly value
and admire. But yet I may perchance with some reason, hope, that it may not be
unwelcome to some, who may take notice of the newness of the Method wholly
suited to that civility and Peaceable way of proceeding, which I have heard the
best bred and most moderate persons require in things of this nature. The chief
intended Design of this small Treatise, is, in order to a clearing the Point of
the Real Presence in the most Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, the principal
subject of Contests now at present in those parts. Though (as the Author in
his last Chapter makes evidently appear) mutatis mutandis it is equally
appliable to any other matter whatsoever. I pray be not offended if I say that
it has often been reflected upon by very sober men, that those of the adverse
Party deal not fairly with us, scarce ever allowing us to enter into Dispute
with them upon equal terms.

For we being tied up and enclosed as it were, within certain limits, which
keep our understandings (as well as material enclosures are not to restrain our
bodies) within a certain compass of reasoning and opining, it is very easy at
any time, and upon any subject belonging to Faith, to know where to find us. I
mean to be at a certainty of what we are obliged to maintain, and where we may
be set upon.

It would have saved us some labor, if we could always have been sure to have
had the same advantage, and that there were not those alterations and that
variety of Opinions in the Times, Places, and Persons of the Reformed Churches,
which very frequently put us upon a hazard of coming unprepared of suitable
Arms offensive or defensive, as not being able to have sufficient intelligence
beforehand of the nature of our enemy or of his manner of fight.

In the Subject matter of Dispute (concerning the Blessed Sacrament) I know
there are some who will not stick to say roundly, that it is nothing but Bread
and Wine which is contained and Received in the Lords Supper. And these, I
think, speak the best English; that is, express most plainly and sincerely in
their words, what they do believe in their judgments Others think this too
rough and harsh, as clashing too openly with Holy Scripture (the Rule of
Belief) and the general Sentiment and Language of Antiquity. And these will
tell you, though something faintly; that Christ is truly present, that he is
really present, that he is there the Food of the Soul, and the Bread of Angels.
In a word, they will express themselves in such terms, with so much respect
and reverence of that Holy Sacrament, that you shall have much ado to
distinguish them from true and hearty Catholics. But yet if you press them to
speak intelligibly and to declare heartily what they mean by Truly and Really,
you shall find that (though they are loath to speak out) they mean nothing
less then what those words in their natural use seem to import. For Truly and
Really must come to signify only figuratively and Commemoratively, or some
such like.

And whereas, by the expressions they are pleased to make use of, you might, in
reason, expect something of Real Substance distinct from the (...) Elements of
Bread and Wine, you are to understand, that, besides some forced Texts of
Scripture, you shall have diverse pregnant Proofs and Re^sons fetched as far as
Sense and Natural Philosophy can reach, to oblige you to believe that in this
great supernatural Work of the Hand of the Omnipotent, in which he undertook to
act the Wonder of Wonders; the whole Change is made by, and consists in Faith
only. Nay, their Real Faith is, that there is ^^^her: Substantial Mutation in
the matter or subject of this great Sacrament, but what is made in the fancy by
them called Faith. I know there are near as many several Opinions concerning
the content of this Holy Sacrament, as there are explications of those words
which make the Dispute, This is my Body; which have been calculated by some,
curious in this kind, to a very incredible Product.

And now it being left to every one to take up what and which he pleases in
this great variety of Opinions, I think we have reason to say we have a hard
task to oppose we know not what, till we come to the Trial; or defend our
selves against I cannot tell whom ( Lutheran, Calvinist, Anabaptist,
Independent, etc.) till they are pleased to declare themselves and appoint us
our Theme.

But that for which I am to commend and recommend this ensuing Discourse, is,
that I think it equally and strongly convincing against all. For if it be once
made out (as this Treatise endeavors to evince even by the consent of the
whole Reformed Church it self) that there must intervene some Supreme Authority
which may exact an acquiescencie, and withal are obliged to submit unto
without further dispute, there will quickly be discovered a ready way to put
things into a better posture: and particulars will find whereon to settle, as
in one Center, that unlimitted variety of opining.

I beseech those who have a real kindness for their own Souls, and any respect
for those who were accounted great Persons, even in their own way, to reflect
particularly upon what is mentioned in the second Chapter of this little Work,
concerning the Opinions of the Divines of all the Reformed Churches of Europe
in this Point; and especially upon what was delivered at the famous Synod of
Dort, by the Ambassador, and by the Commission of the Great and Wise King,
King James: That there was but one only means, which the Church had ever made
use of: to wit, a National Synod, which was to be Judge in the case, and to
decide which of the two Opinions, was more conformable to the Word of God, etc.
And conformably to this, you will find how that wise King when, soon after his
coming into England, the Puritans (Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Knewstabs, etc.) began to
show themselves at a Conference in the Kings own Presence, and Mr. Knewstabs in
particular, moving: Bakers Chronicle of the affairs of the Church in the Reign
of K. James p. 445.
How far an Ordinance of the Church was to bind men, without impeachment of
their Christian Liberty? Being much moved, made this short reply; and told him,
he would not argue that Point with him, but answer therein as Kings are wont to
speak in Parliament, Le Roy S' avistra. And therefore I charge you (said he)
never speak more to that Point, how far you are bound to Obey, when the Church
has once ordained it. By which earnest and wise Answer of his, certainly he
could intend nothing less, but that the Ordinances and Decrees of the Church
are so far obligatory as never to be questioned, but to be religiously
respected and admitted with an Ipso dixit.

This certainly must also be the meaning and import of those words in the
twentyeth of the 39. Articles: The Church has power to Decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith, etc. For, Power, and
Authority; and Submission and Obedience are certainly correlatives. If there be
Power and Authority to enact; Submission and Obedience are essential to
performance. Now by the Church here, and in the foregoing Reply of King James:
(if any thing was intended reducible to action and practice) I imagine nothing
can be meant but the Representative of the Church. Archbishops Bishops, and the
Chief of the Clergy lawfully convened, etc. Which Representative (as is very
remarkable both in Queen Elizabeth's days Anno 1562. and in King James's Anno
1604, with the consent and allowance of the said King and Queen under the great
Seal) thought themselves so unquestionably empowered and authorized for that
great Work of framing certain Articles in order to an Uniformity of Doctrine
in Religion, as no man (by their special and strict Command) could be admitted
to any part of the Ministry without consenting and subscribing thereunto:
Which was yet more strongly enforced upon all in general, by those
Excommunications ipso facto denounced against all dissenters, in the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, made Anno 1604.

Not to mention those others, who have nothing but Antichrist, the Tyrannical
Antichrist in their mouths, when a Pope or Council is but mentioned; and yet
think it not unreasonable, upon the Authority of a Convocation of some few
Elders etc. to oblige to their Tenets and Practices under pain of a stool of
Repentance, etc.

I know there are some who hold all these proceedings and practices very harsh
and unreasonable, whose spirits will not easily yield but will make bold to
argue the case with Kings or Councils, Parliaments or Prelates, or any thing
which agrees not with their private and particular Principles. And they will
tell you (very colourably as they imagine) that as their Soul is their own, and
as they must stand or fall to themselves, so are they to make choice of their
own faith and Religion, and not to pin it upon another man's sleeve. I should
something wonder to bear an Objection of this nature from any one who pretends
to Learning. But because I know there are some who make plausible flourishes
upon it, and think by this means to cast off all Authority, and become their
own free choosers and Masters without control: and consequently, will slight
the chief grounds of this Discourse, fitted principally for persons of better
Principles; I must needs in a word, show them, that if they design any thing of
reason, and not all wilfulness and presumption in their proceedings, they must
needs find another Point to steer their course by. And yet, Gentlemen, thus far
I will keep you company: that your Soul is your own (under the great Giver of
it) and that you must stand or fall to your selves.

But I fear you have never been at any of the Universities, or not minded the
business your Parents intended by the charge they were at, if you think this
good Logic: Ergo, you are to choose your own Faith; in that sense which is and
must be intended by you, if you think to evade what will here come in against
you. For your meaning (if at all to your purpose) can be no other, but that
because your Soul is your own, and you your self, and no body else, are to give
an account of your stewardship and your improving of it, therefore you are to
make up a Faith (which indeed is the Ground of all subsequent action) according
to your own fancy and understanding. And yet I cannot believe but you will
acknowledge that you are to take some Guide along with you, that you are to
follow some Rule in this business of so important a concern. You will never
own, I am sure of it, that it shall be mere fancy that you are resolve^ to rely
upon A Guide then you must have: A Rule you must follow. An you sure (in a
business of so great importance as is the salvation of your Soul) that you have
a faithful Guide, a direct Rule? Do you follow the one close, d^ you apply the
other right? Here the^ you see (unexpectedly perehance) tha^ your Guide, your
Rule, your use or application of them may be questioned. B^ you will happily,
suppose you have stopped my, mouth by telling me that you Guide is inerrable,
your Rule is as certain as the Word of God it self, which and contains all
Truth. Who dares deny this? Not I, I do assure you.

But I must needs tell you, what I have heard some very Learned and expert
Physicians complain of, which is: That many times it happens that some good
woman having by friendship or stealth, gotten some Prescription of theirs,
which had been found very beneficial to some Patient or other, applies it so
ill, and so irregularly, for want of knowledge of the nature of Distempers, or
of the Constitution of Bodies, or of the Crisis of the Disease etc. that in
stead of a Cure by that excellent Remedy, which with due application wrought
strange effects in some, it comes to be the ruin of many a poor Creature who
under a skilful hand had been in little or no danger at all. To be a little
bold with you then: I pray tell me; have you confidence and presumption enough
to think you have (in a matter of greater moment) the skill you pretend to?
Were you sick of some dangerous disease, notwithstanding that your Life were
your own, and that no body were to live by you or dye with you, yet I dare
boldly say you would be loath (it would be against the practice, custom, and
even obligation of the ablest Physicians in the world) to rely upon your own
judgment, but would be glad, even with some charge, to have the advice of one
or more, who had made it their business to study nature, and were approved of
as men well versed in the Art of Physic. Were you to make a Purchase never so
inconsiderable, yet I presume, (though the Estate were to come and belong to
none but your self and your heirs) you would think it very necessary to employ
some Learned man in the Law to draw the Conveyance and make your Title sure.
And herein I think consists the chief and sum of your skill, to make a prudent
choice of such persons in both Arts as you may safely rely upon, and to follow
their order and directions, if you intend either to recover your Health or
secure your Inheritance. And can you think it a business of less importance,
in an affair of so great concern as is the election of your Faith and Religion,
to make a good and prudent choice of those who are both by Industry and Divine
Authority enabled to guide and direct you in the ways of Truth?

I leave you to a more serious reflection and more mature deliberation upon this
great business, as you shall find your self obliged by the force of such
Reasons and Grounds, as with an impartial perusal of this following Treatise,
will occur unto you: and wish you heartily, as I do mine own Soul, true Faith,
perfect Health, and Life in Christ Jesus everlasting.

IN the Translatours Preface page 1 line 8 read since it first appeared.

A Method for RE-UNITING OF PROTESTANTS AND CATHOLICS.
CHAP. I. That in matters of Religion there is little gotten by Disputation,
and that for the avoiding this inconvenience there ought to be an Agreement
concerning some Principles on both sides.
1. IN Contests which do arise in matters of Religion between the Defenders of
Truth and Falsity, and are maintained either by word of mouth, or writing, it
falls out much otherwise than it does in those more bloody Wars which are
managed by the Swords of State and State, Prince and Prince. For in these, for
the most part, after a Battle or two, the Victory is clear on one side or
other, and Peace is again established by the defeat of him who finds himself in
a necessity of yielding to the fate of War, and receiving the Law from the
Conquering Party. But in that other, the obstinate Champion of Error even
after many foils and defeat, does still scorn to yield the victory. Nay, I dare
be bold to say, he will not fail to become more violent and insolent than ever;
because he is resolved never to want the boldness to speak as high and as loud
as Truth it self, and to make himself believe he has right to challenge the
victory on his side, which perchance may appear, at least, doubtful to the
greatest part of the hearers in the heat and noise of Disputation.

I speak not this as disowning that proceeding by way of disputation to have
been of great advantage to the Church of God against Heretics by a mature
discussing those passages of Holy Writ which have made against them: The
ancient Fathers made happy use of it, with such vigor and success, as gained
them those noble Victories, of which they have left us glorious Trophies in
those great Works of theirs. Yet this I think we may be bold to affirm, that
this Method, be it never so excellent in it self, is not apt to produce those
happy effects in all persons universally; it being more proper for the Learned
only. And as it happens that the learning of the Adversaries of Truth is
always accompanied with blindness and obstinacy (the proper effects of that
Pride which gives it its pretended magnitude) so comes it to pass, that that
light which arises from Dispute, proves very uneffectual in order to a reducing
of them; and serves, for the most part, only to make the breach wider, and to
maintain the unhappy war, so as to render it more lasting, and in a manner
endless.

2. Hence it was that Tertullian who, in some of his greatest Works, undertook
some certain Heretics with as much strength of Wit and Reason as is possible;
yet at another time, and in another Work of his, he charges the whole body of
them together in another way which he esteemed more universally satisfactory,
and by which he thought he might with greater ease, and with more quiet and
less trouble, reduce the most rebellious spirits that were. According to this
Method of his, ^e will not that you enter into Dispute with them, nor that you
set upon them with Scripture. l. de praesc. c. 1^.
For either they pervert it (says he) into some sense which may appear more
favorable to them; In ipso congressu firmos quidem fatigant, insi mos capiunt,
medios cum scrupulo ^immittunt c. 15.
or they add, or take away at their pleasure. Some passages they allege in a
quite contrary sense, and you are obliged to a defense; and yet they will not
stick to affirm, with as much confidence as you, that they have the true
meaning on their side. From hence it is, that you gain little upon them in
these kinds of encounters: wherein after you have tired-out the more learned,
they take too frequently, with the weaker sort, and always leave in the minds
of the vulgar something of doubt and uncertainty, which causes in them much
perplexity.

Nay, it has fallen our more than once, that that very Person for whose
satisfaction a Conference has been held, or a Treatise written, perceiving no
great advantage gotten by the contest, has found himself in a wavering
condition, and has thought it not unreasonable to begin to call that now in
question, of which before he made no doubt at all.

This is the very reason why this Learned man concludes, Ergo non ad Scripturas
provoc andum, nec in his constituendum est certamen in quibus aut nulla, a ut
incerta victoria est, aut par incertae. c. 18.
that the most compendious, and the most ready way for the reducing such kind
of spirits into peace and unity, is not that way which, for the most part,
obliges them to a continuance of the war, lest they might seem to be overcome.
I mean the way of dispute, and even that which is managed with holy Scripture:
and that we ought not lightly to engage in those ways or matters, where there
is little to be gotten, and where the victory appears uncertain and doubtful,
at least to those of meaner capacities, even then, when to the wiser sort it
appears most evident on the sounder parties side.

3. This is that which makes him lay aside all particular Controversies
concerning all those Points which may be made out by Scripture; and in that his
excellent Book of Prescriptions, to fall upon certain general Maxims, which
are Rules and Principles agreed upon on all sides, and from whence certain
necessary Consequences, which do most naturally flow from them, being well
applied, do convince all men of reasonable understandings without either
dispute or reply; and by a shorter and more certain way, lead them sweetly to a
desired unity.

He calls them Prescriptions, Adversus haereticos, etiam fine retractatu
verborum revincendos. l. 1. contra marc.
making use, according to his Custom, of a term of Law, in the knowledge
whereof he had arrived to great perfection. And he makes use particularly of
this Term, upon this occasion, because it imports in its signification, a total
defeat and solid conviction of Falsitie, according to such certain and
undeniable Principles of which there has been a constant Possession in all
Ages, by a due application whereof it is easy to discover and overthrow Error,
without being obliged to attacque it with any other weapon, or refuting it by
particular Arguments.

4. This seems to me the only means to end this endless war: to bring the
business home to some one of those Principles which are received and allowed of
on both sides, and are agreed upon as the chief Rule for deciding all our
differences. Without this, we shall hardly ever come to any agreement: if we be
still resolved to dispute the business as it is easy to do, when a resolution
is already taken never to yield. And after tedious contests, and large Volumes,
which almost equally tire the patience of both Authors and Readers, the
business will be found always in the same posture it was at first in.

As the Better side has reason to take satisfaction in the advantage obtained:
Haec utique and ipsi habent in nos retorquere, necesse est enim and illos
dicere a nobis potius adulteria Scripturarum and expositionum mendacia inierri,
qui proinde sibi defendant veritatem. c. 18.
so the Weaker (says Tertullian) attributes unto it self the self-same glory
and would fain seem Victorious. That which the one does most justly, in
exprobating falsity and error unto his adversary, the other thinks most
unjustly done, and declares against it. Truth, which only has reason to use
such language, finds it self set upon afresh, even after Victory. And Falsity,
which disguises it self under the name of Verity, and usurps her right, begins
again to fight her at her own weapon, uttering the same or like reproaches
against her.

5. This appears particularly in the proceeding of the Protestant Party, who,
upon their separation from us, thought good to accuse us of error and novelty.
It is scarce to be believed how many set Disputations and Conferences there
have been held both in public and in private; concerning Points in question
between us. The number of those Volumes which have been writ concerning those
subjects, would serve to fill whole Liberaries. What passages have not
Bellarmin, Perron, Coeffeteau, Richelieu, and those other famous Defenders of
the Faith, drawn out of the Holy Scriptures; and Ancient Fathers, together with
all the Reasons and Arguments which might serve to place Truth again in its
proper light, and restore unto it the luster which Falsity had endeavored to
rob her of? I speak this, because for my own part, I am highly satisfied, that
the Proofs which these great men have made use of, are of very great force, and
their Discourses very exact and convincing; and that the Church of God owes
much unto them for their Labor and industry in maintaining her just Decrees.

I will add something more yet. I have so good an opinion of the natural
ingenuity and honesty of many of the most sincere and witty persons of the
Protestant party themselves (for there are certainly, in other respects, many
excellent Wits and Learned men amongst them) that they will not make much
difficulty to own heartily and plainly, that the Reasons and Places which our
Doctors have alleged against their Tenets, have put them very much to it, and
that they have need enough of all their Wit, all their shifts, and all their
industry to disengage themselves, in some handsome appearance at least, from
such streights as those troublesome passages have brought them into.

And now as I have taken the freedom to desire them to deal heartily with me,
so is it my intention to be plain and sincere with them; and to yield so far
unto them, as ingeniously to acknowledge, that in those Answers of theirs, with
which, in their turns, they have filled large Volumes, they are not without
some colorable pretense, and that they carry such an appearance of Reason with
them, as may easily seduce the understandings of those who are not well versed
in disputes of this nature. Nay, I will own farther, that some passages out of
Scripture, and the Holy Fathers; alleged by them against us, have obliged us
to make use of the famoufest Wits amongst us, to find a clear and natural sense
in the explication of them, which has not been of efficacy to hinder these men
from making their Replies, that they may still still seem to bear up handsomely,
in case they remain absolutely resolved not to yield to the known Truth, which
may indeed convince their understandings, but not compel nor force their wills.

Thus after so many assaults, and so many repulses; after so many brave Works
of those great men, who have: so gallantly maintained the Churches cause, our
adversaries will not at all own themselves weakened thereby. And as they make
themselves believe they have, by their Answers, sufficiently guarded themselves
from our blows; and that on the other side, they seem to please themselves with
those which in their turn, they imagine they have given us; if they do not
pretend to the honor of a victory; neither do they hold themselves obliged to
yield it unto us. And thus the war continues still: since at the conclusion of
all our Disputes, they find themselves still in a condition to rally their
forces, to begin the battle again, and resolutely to deny what we maintain, and
to maintain what we deny.

6. This is clearly to be seen in that famous Contest which has lately made so
much noise in the world by occasion of a Book written concerning The perpetuity
of the Faith of the Catholic Church, in the matter of the Holy Eucharist. The
Author of the said Book, and of in Defense has, in three several Works,
proposed his reasons why it seem^ impossible that that change of Belee^ in
point of the most Blessed Sacrament should have happened, as they are pleased
to charge us: chiefly because this could not have been done without some
remarkable opposition, which notwithstanding we find not at all to have been
made in any Age of the Church, until the appearing of the Sacramentaries. On
the contrary he makes it appear, that in those very days, in which this
strange Innovation is pretended to have been brought into the world, this
Doctrine of ours was the common belief of the whole Church, which had also
received it from former Ages. And this he shows by an exact inquiry into all
the Authors of the Greek and Latin Church, who lived from the seventh unto the
tenth Age (which is the time they allot for this their pretended alteration)
and by the general consent of all the Eastern Churches from that time unto this
very day.

Mr. Claude, who was the man engaged himself from the beginning in this
quarrel, resolved, in point of honor, to maintain it to the very last. And
instead of yielding unto the Truth, as it would have been honorable enough for
him to have done, and to have given that glory unto God which is his due, chose
rather to keep up that credit which he had gotten amongst his own party, by
publishing there other Treatises, in which, to give him his due, he has done as
much as Wit could do in pursuit of his Resolution to defend a very bad Cause
for his own and his parties reputation: For he pretends to prove, by more
Reasons than one, which he advances with a great deal of freedom and fair show
(such as is apt enough to surprise a man at first sight) that that alteration
or change was not at all impossible. Nay, he endeavors to lay down the very
manner how this came to pass; at such time as the Church was fallen off from
that particular and distinct knowledge of the truth of this great Mystery, into
a more confused and general belief o^ it, which reflected not precisely upon
either Real Presence or Absence it was easy to fall upon the belief o^ such
things as some did add by way of illustrating the matter, and which they were
apt to present, and the World insensibly to receive, under the specious
pretense of rendering the Mystery more full of Majesty.

And being far from giving ground upon the last piece which was set out against
him, and upon which a final Conclusion of the difference was to be hoped, it
is commonly reported, that he is already prepared to enter again into the List
with more earnestness and resolution the^ ever; to the end to maintain a
Dispute, in the which being resolved to come to no agreement with his
Adversary, he opposes him in every petty matter and circumstance. For making
use of all the Art and Subtilty humane Wit affords (which is always
sufficiently furnished with some ground or other for contradiction) and tracing
him in all those by-ways which the nature of disputation leads into, he every
where opposes him, and, by a necessary sequel, obliges him to a Contest
concerning the matters of fact which he alleges, concerning the Authors he
cites, concerning their interests, concerning their inclinations, concerning
their intrigues, concerning the meaning of their expressions, concerning the
force of his and their reasons, concerning the Critical and Historical part. In
a word, he runs quite counter to him in every thing; denying (as Tertullian has
it) whatsoever his Adversary maintains, and maintaining whatever he denies. So
true it is, that it being once resolved never to yield in such kind of
encounters, there will never be wanting matter for Dispute, even in such things
which otherwise appear evident and uncontrollable.

7. I make no doubt but the Author of that Learned Work of the Peertuity, etc.
will be able to stand his ground, and to gain yet more, with the same advantage
which so good a Cause has hitherto afforded him. The honor which is gotten by
the happy mannaging such Disputes is proper for those Great Wits and able
Persons, who take such pains, chiefly for the satisfaction of those who have
the same abilities. For this cause, as I dare not pretend to make one of that
number; having no other aim in this my undertaking but to serve those who hold
not themselves obliged to give themselves the trouble of tedious searches into
Greek and Latin Authors, so do I willingly and entirely give up that Honor
unto him, and make choice rather of another Method, inferior indeed in outward
show, but much more easy, and, at the least, full as profitable, if I obtain
the end of my endeavors, which is, to reduce Protestants by a sweeter way and
without contest.

For this end it will be necessary, as we have already infin^ated, that we make
choice of some Rule which is out of Contest between us, of some fixed settled
Points, of some certain Principles which are equally agreed upon by both
Parties, and from whence by necessary consequence, clear and certain
Conclusions are deduceable, which may unite all understandings in the same
Belief concerning this great Mystery.

To this end I am resolved to allege nothing in this little Treatise, but what
Monsieur Claude himself is pleased to grant us, and what our Adversaries
themselves make use of for the establishing their Pretenses. Although
absolutely speaking (as I touched before) there is not any thing which is not
subject to exceptions, cavils, and contentious wranglings even in things
themselves most evident, supposing a resolution obstinately to defend a Party
engaged for, and that it comes to be accounted a Point of Honor so to do. I
cannot, for all that, understand how that can again be questioned, which has
once been granted, and of which they have, at another time, endeavored to make
their own advantage. So that I cannot well fear lest the Principle which I
shall advance, should fall under that contest, which I so industriously
endeavor to eschew. For in the establishing of it, and in applying of it to
our present subject, my special care shall be to lay aside all those general
Pleas, which may be subject to Contest, and to make use of none but such as
Monsieur Claude himself, and his Friends shall please to furnish me with, and
grant me of their own accords.

8. And to oblige my self to perform it with as much clarity and brevity
withal, as may possibly be, I will conclude the matter in these three Chapters
following.

In the first I will propose the Maxim or Principle which I intend to make use
of, and I will establish it by the Doctrine and proceedings of Prorestants
themselves.

In the second I will apply it, according to their own Rules, unto the Subject
of the Holy Eucharist.

And in the last I will draw those Consequences, which their own agreed-upon
Principles do afford me.

This seems to me the way to force our Adversaries (but sweetly) to return of
themselves, to that True Faith, from which a miserable Schism has
unfortunately separated them, by the revolt of their Forefathers.

I am not able to say what success I am like to have in so noble an enterprise.
My endeavors, nevertheless, shall not be wanting to effect it, upon those
terms which I have prefixed unto my self. At least I intend to secure this
advantage; that having no litigious quarrel with these Gentlemen, if I prove
not so fortunate as to persuade them into, and reduce them to the obedience of
the Holy Church, I will, not, at least, interrupt that civil peace and sociable
tranquillity we all enjoy under the Authority of the Laws of our Gracious
King, by words and expressions which are apt sometimes to sound too loud and
bite too sharply. I will not, I say, have my part in those too bitter and
violent expressions, which the earnestness of Disputation is naturally apt to
lead a man ^^to, unless more than ordinary care be used for the checking them.
Finally, I will avoid the bitterness of those obstinate Contests which are too
frequently accompanied with that sharpness and animosity, which is not at all
beseeming the civil breeding of this Age; nor this happy time of Peace, when
all our wor^^ ought to carry a certain sweetness with them, which may inspire
and maintain Union and Charity.

CHAP. II. The settling of this general Maxim: That that Church in which are
found the two Parties concerned has ever had the Power to determine all
differences, and to declare that as matter of Faith which before there was no
obligation to believe. And that we are bound to acquiesce unto her decisions,
under the penalty of being Schismatics.
1. THere is not any one to be sound among those, who bear the name of
Christians, who does not acknowledge that there is in the World a True Church,
which our Lord Jesus has purchased with the price of his own most precious
Blood. All those who have separated themselves from us into so many several
Sects, declaring that their Congregation is the Company of the Faithful, and
the Church of God, agree at least in this, that they hold for certain, that
there is a True Church of Jesus Christ, wheresoever it is to be found.

It is moreover evident, that those who first entered into Dispute concerning
matters of Faith, were all of the same Church; which Church before it did
declare for either side of the Dissenters, and before one Party made a
separation, was the only then in being, and consequently the True Church.

Now of this Church it is I intend to speak: and I averr, that all generally do
agree, that She is endowed with Sovereign Authority to define and propose that
as matter of Faith, which, antecedently to her definition, no body perchance
was obliged to accept under that notion.

2. For proof of this Verity, which is not well to be denied, when understood,
this reflection is to be made out of St. Paul to the Romans, Chap. 10: That to
be bound to believe a thing as a Point of Faith, it is not sufficient that it
be contained in the Word of God, which is the only motive of divine Faith, but
it is also necessary that we know it, and that we know it as revealed by God.
For to know it, we must hear of it; and for this purpose (regularly speaking)
it is necessary that it be proposed by full Authority, as the formal words of
the blessed Apostle do clearly import.

How shall they believe him whom they have not heard? Quomodo credent in quem
non audierunt? Quomodo autem audient sine praedicante? Quomodo autem
praedicabunt nisi mittantur? Romans 10. v. 14, 15. Ergo fides ex auditu, auditus
autem per verbum Christi. v. 17.
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? but how shall they Preach, unless
they be sent? There is then no obligation to believe without a previous
instruction concerning an A^^icle of Faith; and this cannot be without the
Ministry of those who are appointed by the Church to propose her Doctrine,
which Doctrine is grounded upon the Word of God. In regard of this the Apostle
concludes in this manner; Faith then is by hearing, and hearing is by the Word
of Christ. Thus for there is no difference betwixt us and Protestants. They do
own, that for this end, it is necessary there should be in the Church,
Ministers of the Word of God, for the proposing, by her Authority, that which
is contained in the Divine Word. They profess, that in order to an obligation
of believing any particular point, it is necessary that it be distinctly known,
and that it be proposed by some legal Authority to be believed.

3. This notwithstanding, there are many things which we are now obliged to
believe, which were not distinctly known at some other time, nor proposed unto
the Faithful as Points belonging to Faith, and necessarily to be believed by
them. It is a verity which no Protestant, I think, will make difficulty in.

For I will now grant them, that all that we are to believe is contained in the
Word of God, which we have received in the Holy Scriptures, and which the
blessed Apostles have delivered unto us, having first received it of their
Divine Master Christ Jesus. But I hope also they will not stick to acknowledge,
that all that is comprehended in Holy Writ, whether in the sense of the Letter,
or in the Consequences which are included in those Divine Principles, has not
always been clearly and distinctly known by all persons, and at all times. It
is an admirable sure of Tapistry wrought by the hand of God himself, and framed
with a most rare variety of graceful figures, both for ornament and
instruction of his Church; but it was not, from the beginning, exposed all at
once to view. These rare lineaments did not appear but by degrees, as it
happened that the pieces were unfolded one after another upon occasions.

It is a most fertile soil which bears a mavelous variety of sweet flowers,
of excellent fruit, and all sorts of choice grain in its bowels, as it were
enclosed or shut up in the seeds, which are as so many Treasures with which she
is enriched: but you must expect till the Sun disclose and discover them,
making them spring and bud forth one after a not her according to their sundry
seasons, to the end that they may beautify and adorn the Fields and Gardens.

It is a Heaven decked with an infinite variety of glittering Stars, which
sparkle and make a kind of day in spite of the darkness of night; but their
glory does then only appear, when the Moon has by little and little dissipated
the vapors and clouds which keep them from our sight.

Even so the Word of God comprehends all vetities belonging to Faith. But those
fair flowers did not appear, those bright Stars did not shine to the eyes of
Christians, until the light of the Holy Ghost illuminating his Church, did; by
it self, upon occasion, dissipate those clouds which hid those glorious Stars
from our eyes: or disclosed and brought to light those rare flowers, by
consequences drawn out of certain Principles, in which they before remained, as
it were, shut up or enclosed.

4. Omnia quae audivi a Patre meo, nota feci vobis. Joh. 15.
This is manifest in the Apostles themselves. The Son of God, their blessed
Master, in the 15th of S. John tells them, that he had made known unto them,
whatsoever he had learned of his heavenly Father. It is then clear and certain
that he instructed them in all those Truths which are of Faith in that his
Church, which he intended to raise and establish by their means and Ministry.
For it is not to be denied but that he had learned them of his Eternal Father.
And yet notwithstanding in the last of St. Luke, Aperuit illis sensum ut
intelligerent Scripturas. Luc. ult. Adhuc multa habe^ vobis dicere, quae non
potestis portare modo. Spiritus Sanctus docebit vos omnem veritatem. John 16.
after his Resurrection, we find him opening their understandings, that they
might be capable of the sense of Holy Scriptures, and consequently of the
mysteries of Faith which are comprised therein. Nay he further tells them, that
he had yet many things to say unto them, of which they were not yet capable.
And he adds, for their comfort, that, that Holy Ghost whom he would send
shortly unto them, should instruct them in all matters of Truth. How, I pray,
is th^^ made good? That he had told them all, and yet that there remained much
to be told; and that the Holy Ghost should tell them for him, teaching and
instructing them in all matters of Truth* How shall we make this out? I think
it may be done with a great deal of ease. The meaning is, that he told them all
(...) general, and in certain Principles of h^^ Gospel which comprehend all,
and the Holy Ghost instructed them clearly and distinctly concerning the sense
an^ meaning of those Principles, and in the Consequences which they were to
draw from those Principles, of which they were ignorant before. And for this
cause it is that the Holy Ghost is by Holy Fathers' called the Interpreter or
Voice of the Son; Basil, 5. cont. Eunom. Marc Vict. 3. cont. Ari^
because an Interpreter speaks nothing of himself, but only sets forth what is
contained in the Text, the sense whereof his task is to explain, and by a new
light to discover those hidden verities which may be drawn from it: So the Holy
Ghost taught the Apostles no new things nor spoke of himself, as instructing
them in a new Doctrine, but did only make them understand distinctly and in
particular such things as our 'blessed Savior had told them in general terms,
Non enim loquetur a semetipso, sed quaecunque audierit loquetur. John 16.
and laid open unto them those verities which before lay undiscovered under
those Principles from whence he deduced them by such Consequences as he made
them capable of, and by an accession of new sight which before was not in them.

We may add yet more; that it cannot be with truth said, that the Apos^^es,
even after the coming of the Holy Ghost, had, from the beginning, all that
clear and discerning knowledge of all those Truths which they came to know
afterward in their particular circumstances, and upon emergent occurrences,
unto which he deferred their more ample instruction.

For in the Acts of the Apostles we see S. Peter questioned whether the Gospel
were to be Preached to the Gentiles. Chapter 10. In veritate comperi, quia non est
personarum acceptor Deus. Visam est spiritui sanct^ and nobis. Acts 15.
He was instructed from heaven that that favor was for the whole world, and he
learned that God, who has no regard to persons, nor qualities, no^ Countries,
made no distinction, as (...) that Blessing, between Jews and Pagan^. We know
also how the Apostles met a^ Jerusalem to deliberate concerning the
observation of the Ceremonies of the Law, and that they decreed, by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that the^ was no farther obligation to observe
them, Quis enim integrae mentis credere potest aliquid eos ignorasse, quos
magistros Dominus dedit. etc. de Praescript. c. 22.
excepting only some very few particulars.

5. Notwithstanding I do frankly ^vouch (what Protestants, with Tertullian
against some ancient Heretics, (...) maintain) that at what time soeve^ the
Apostles did receive the full perfect on of that knowledge which they had o^
Christian Verities, it was complete (...) to all things belonging to Faith, and
that we know not, nor ever shall know any thing in those matters which they
knew not better than we, they being the Masters appointed by our blessed
Savior, State ac tenete traditiones quas didicistis five per sermonem five per
epistolam. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Si in alique nutaverit veritas ad originem Evangelicam
and Apostolicam Traditionem revertamur. Cypr. Ep. 74 Edit. Pamel. Item Aug. l.
5. de bapt. cont. Donatist. A Castro verbo Apost. here is. 1.
through whose means the World was to receive his Celestial Doctrine. I do
consequently acknowledge that they did leave it to their Disciples either in
Writing or by word of Mouth, and that when it happens that men are divided in
their opinions, and doubt of the truth of this or that, they ought to have
recourse to The Rule, to the Head or Fountain, which is that Word of God which
we have in holy Scriptures, and which the Apostles have left us by their
Disciples, having first received it of Christ Jesus their blessed Master. Our
Divines will easily agree with them in all these Points, and they will condemn
of Error and temerity, and of folly also if they please, the Abbot Ioachim and
that other Visionary, who were so bold as to say, that the Apostles themselves
did not comprehend the Spiritual sense of the Gospel; the true understanding
whereof was reserved for some others in after times. Such extravagancies as
these can not be rejected by them with more e^gerness than they are by our
Doctor also.

This notwithstanding, it may ve^ well be, that the Apostles did not d^late
themselves in the explication o^ their Doctrine so fully as it was afterward
thought fitting to do; and the they did not judge it necessary to descend to
all those particulars, which were examined and looked into in afte^ Ages. It
was possible also, that the would not deduce all those particular sequels,
which were enclosed or shut up as it were, in those Principles which they
established; as our Blessed Savior himself had formerly dealt with the^

It is also very likely, that men, o^ of neglect, not preserving those Truth in
memory, as they ought to have done they came insensibly to ^e forgotten or,
that whilst men's wits were wholly taken up in defending some part o^ them
against Heretics who opposed them, there was not so much heed taken of those
others which never came into Controversy. However it be, this i^ indubitably
certain, that a time there was, when many things were not clearly and
distinctly known* nor, at such time, obligatory, as to exercise of faith, which
the Church has since placed in the number of such things as are belonging to
Faith.

For although all those things were comprehended in Holy Scripture, and in the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and that there always were the same marks to know
them by, yet they were not always taken notice of, with the same reflection or
application. But now, by occasion of Disputes which have been raised at certain
times, the Church having set her self to examine them legally and according to
form, and making reflections upon Holy Scripture, and looking back upon the
neighboring times of the Apostles, making up by such means unto the
Fountainhead of true Apostolical Tradition; she has declared them to be of
faith; as being exactly conformable to the Rule of Belief.

6. I do not say therefore (what some happily of our Adversaries, who are not so
well acquainted with our Tenets, may reproach me with) that the Church has
Authority to frame new Articles of Faith. No, I do acknowledge, together with
them, that she cannot act but according to Rule, which is the holy Scripture,
and Tradition truly and purely Apostolical, from which also we have received
the holy Scripture it self. She holds forth nothing new, but she proposes unto
us Antiquity which we knew not before. She does not give new birth to Scars
which never were before, but she makes them appear in that Instre, which
formerly they had done by removing those clouds which did obscure them. She has
no new revelations, she only publishes those ancient ones of which we had no
forme^ assurance. Finally, she settles no other Principles, but such as she
receive^ from our Savior himself, out of which by force of her light, and
certain necessary sequels, she makes those Veritie^ appear, which were hidden,
and, as (...) were, Quid est Depositum? Id est quod tibi creditum est, non a te
inventum: quod acceptisti, non quod excogitasti (...) rem non ingenii sed
doctrinae non usurpationi^ privatae publicae traditionis; rem ad te perductam,
non a te prolatam; in quae ^on author debes esse, sed custos, non institu^or
sed sectator, non ducens sed sequens Comment. 1. c. 27.
shut up in those Principles.

This is that which Vincentius Lirine^ sis expresses most admirably, applying
unto the Church those words of S. Pa^ to his Disciple Timothy: Depositum
c^stodi, keep well the Depositum which (...) put into your hands. What is the
meaning of this Depositum (says he) speaking of matters of Faith? It is that
which you are entrusted with; and, by no means, that which your self have
invented: It is that which you have received; and in no wise that which your
self have found out: it is not the result of your own Wit or understanding, but
it is what you learn from that Doctrine which has been taught you. It is not
any thing which you have established in the World by your own private
Authority; it is a Point of Tradition which you have been trusted with for the
public good. It is a Treasure of which there was no Mine in your own Land. You
are not the Author, ^ut the conserver of this Doctrine. You are not here the
Guide, but he that follows the Guide. What Guide? The Word of God, which is
this Guide, and the true Rule of Holy Church. Vald. l. 2. Doct. fid. c. 22.
Can. l. 2. de Com. 7. a castro, de Lu^ go valentia and alii. Videte quid dicat,
qui fuerunt. non qui sunt, ut exceptis Apostolis quodcunque aliud postea
dicetur, abscindatur. Hier. in Ps. 86.


All our Divines agree in this Doctrine, which they have taken from the Holy
Fathers. For St. Hierome has it in ex^ess terms upon the 86. Psalm, where he
Psalmist says, that Our Lord will delare in Scriptures of People and of
Prinoes and of those that have been in her. He makes use (says St. Hierome) of
a word signifying time past, fuerunt, that have been, because we are to hold
nothing for a Point of Faith in the Church, but what we find in the Prophers
and in the Apostles, who are the Princes of the Church. And upon this ground it
is, that St. Irenaeus, and after him S. Augustine, says, That the faith of our
Ancestors and ours, makes but one and the same Faith; because we believe
nothing at this day, which was not contained in the whole Body of their Faith.

The Church therefore never did make, Iren. l. 3. c. 2 and lib. 4. c. 13 Aug.
Ep. 51,
and undoubtedly never will make any new Articles of Faith, since it is not in
her power to define any thing, but according to the Word of God, which she is
always to consult with, as with her Oracle, and the Rule she is bound to
follow. But there is no question also, but upon occasion of Differences, from
time to time, in men's judgments and opinions, she has often declared for, and
defined some Points, which were, antecedently, by some questioned and that
without offense; or at least were not known before, unless in general and by a
confused kind of knowledge. There is nothing more certain nor more common in
the History of the Church and Councils; where you shall frequently see defined,
and proposed, as a Point or Principle of Faith, that which, before Conte^^s did
arise, and before that violent clashing which has been in almost every Age of
the Church about some Point or other in Controversy, which was neither defined,
nor so much as thought of. For example, concerning the authentickness of some
Canonical Books; concerning the validity of Baptism conferred by Heretics:
concerning one or two Wills and operations in our Blessed Savior: concerning
the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and many such like. All which are now no more
to be called in question, although before the definition of the Church, it
might have been done without offense.

For if it be true, that it belongs unto her to propose that as matter of
Faith, which was not before distinctly known or taken under that notion, as we
have now made out; it must needs be our duty and obligation to receive it as
such, and consequently to believe it, if we intend not to make our selves
guilty of infidelity, in receiving what appertains to Faith.

7. In this we and the Protestants are well enough agreed. For the force and
strength of Mr. Claudes laborious piece lies chiefly in that groundwork which
he has laid with a great deal of Art and skill, where he treats of the change
he pretends has been made in our Belief, concerning the most Blessed Sacrament.
And this he endeavors to settle upon that distinct and confused knowledge
which he will have to have been concerning this Mystery in several and distinct
times. He affirms that the whole Body of the Church did insensibly fall from a
distinct knowledge of this Verity, into another confused one; and that there
was a time, when there was no positive belief either of Real Presence or Real
Absence, because no body so much as thought of it: and that there was in the
faithful, only a general confused Idaea of the Body of our Lord in the
Sacrament it self, and in the receiving of it; without troubling themselves to
reflect, much less to examine, by what kind of presence, or in what manner he
was there. There was then no obligation, in his opinion, to adhere to one side
and reject the other; because neither the one nor the other was then distinctly
known, nor clearly proposed. But when afterward, some-penetrating further into
this matter had given occasion to those hot Disputes, and lasting Contests
which divided men's wits into several opposite judgments in the case, it was
necessary that the true Church (on which side soever she was) having brought
the matter to the test of Scripture and Apostolical Doctrine, should declare
for one side. And then was there an obligation to adhere unto, and distinctly
to believe, that which was confusedly or not certainly known, before the
decision of the matter in contest.

This has happened in our days more than once, even in their own Church; but
particularly in the subject of that famous Controversy between the Arminians
and the Gomarists, which made so much noise in Holland, the particular flory
whereof I think fit to set dow^ that you may discover this verity b^ the
confession even of those who were in greatest esteem amongst our adversaries
themselves.

8. Acta Synodi Dordt. typ. Isaaci Ioannidis Canininii Dordt. 1620. Mercur.
Franc. to 4. to. 5.
Arminius, Minister of Amsterdam and afterward Professor of Divinity at
Leyden, held forth a doctrine, which did not at all agree with that of Calvin,
Beza, Zanchius, and Peter Martyr, particularly in the matters of
Predessination, of Grace, and of Free Will, This Arminius having a very good
Wit, and being of great esteem among^ them, did soon gain a great Party i^ the
University; and his Scholars, wh^ were zealous for their Masters Opinion being
now become Ministers, did not fail to set them out in many Towns of Holland.

The more ancient Ministers and serior-Professors opposed him with all their
power. Gomarus that famous Doctor and Professor of Grouning hen appeared in the
head of them. Holland; and West-Friesland, that a Provincial Synod should be
called to judge of the business.

But Arminius having found Powerful Protectors among the States, dealt his
business so, that, instead of a Synod, which was not all for his purpose, he
proposed, and made them yield to admit of Disputations and Conferences, wherein
he had his end, because nothing was concluded therein. 14 May.
He and Gomarus Disputed the business before the Council which was appointed
for that purpose. 13 Oct.
They were heard one after another, in a full Assembly of the States. They had
a solemn Conference, each of them being accompanied by four Ministers whom they
had made choice of for their assistance. But all those debates served for
nothing else but to raise new difficulties, and to bring poor Arminius the
sooner to his end, who so overheated himself in those Conferences, 5 Oct.
that he died soon after.

But his Abettors dyed not with him, but on the contrary, after the death of
their Chief, rallyed all their forces together. All the Ministers and Divines
who were of his persuasion, especially those of Holland, dtrecht, and Overisl^
presented a Petition, and offered un^^ the States a Remonstrance, in which they
did declare and justify their Doctrine, which they had now reduced to five
Articles, all which they were ready to make good by the pure Word o^ God.

And to guard and secure themselves from the sentence of a Synod, which they
much apprehended, they adde^ further in that their Remonstrance, (treading
still in the footsteps of their Master) that it did belong properly to the
particular States of every Province to judge of differences in matters of
Religion; especially in this case, where there was nothing in agitation which
could disturb the peace, nor break that union they now enjoyed: And that; for
their parts, they desired nothing but a Toleration, and liberty to follow their
own Opinion, providing for and preserving always the peace and union of the
Reformed Church. Being earnest in this manner to have the business ended by the
civil Magistrate, it was easy for them to prerend, that whatsoever was thus
ordained, should pass for a mere direction by way of Policy, which could not
any ways reach unto the grounds of their Doctrine.

The Gomarists against this Remonstrance, set out a large Treatise, in which
they remonstrated also on their part, that the five Articles of the Arminians
concerning Predestination and Grace, were contrary to the received Doctrine of
their Church, ever since the Reformation: that their Divines had never held any
thing concerning those matters, but what had been taught by Calvin; Merc.
frauc. To. 5.1617 page 32.
except some few, who, for that very cause, had been excommunicated, and also
banished. And that consequently such novelties as these were not to be
tolerated, until by a National Synod, (to which, according to the example of
the Apostles, the business ought to be referred) it were otherwise ordained.

All this writing on both sides did but increase the fend, and cause the
several parties to be called by the new names of Remonst^ators and
Anti-Remonstrators. In the interim these first having gotten more credit with
the States of Holland and West-Friesland, by the means and Protection of
Barnevelt Advocat General of those States, 1614. 25. July.
obtained of them that Toleration which they so much defired, and by the cuning
insinuation of Utengobardus, wh^ had been one of Arminius's chief Colleagues,
and the most zealous of the Party, got their Doctrine to be received as current
in many Towns of Holland. The others made what opposition they could, and
protested highly against it, and particularly the Senat^ of Amsterdam,
notwithstanding the Eloquent Oration which the famou^ Grotius made in favor of
the Rem^^ strators, Arminius. Scand alo^^ Libels are cast out against the
Magistrates. They inveigh outragiously one against another in their Pulpits.
Each one pretends his doctrine to be the more ancient, as being more
conformable (...) the Word of God. In private Families, in Meetings, at Feasts,
at the Bourse, in the Shops you should he^^ nothing but discourses of Grace and
Predestination. Every where disputing, every where wrangling. From words
sometimes they fall to blows, and parricular quarrels turn to a kind of civil
war. Wheresoever one party finds it self the stronger, At Amsterdam, at Leyden,
at Utrecht, etc
the other is sure to fare bad enough. Nay, they go so far as even to levy
Soldiers to strengthen their Faction, and maintain it where it has got the
upper-hand. In one word, an utter Desolation seems to threaten the whole State;
and the Union of the United-Provinces is in great danger of being broken, by
the division of judgments in these points of Controversy.

The States General who have the Sovereign Authority in those Provinces,
applied themselves in earnest to find some efficacious remedy for so great a
mischief, which so much Writing, so much Disputing, so many Conferences could
do no good in. They had, and advise in the case. Arminius himself, who was one
of the Company; had given his consent with the rest. Bu^ it was not then put in
execution; partly through the cunning shifts of the A^minians, partly by the
contrivance (...) Barnevelt their Protector, and partly by reason of some
other affairs, (...)
which caused a diversion, or rather a suspension of the proceeding at present.

For when the danger grew greater and the Truce which they had been (...)
Treaty about with the King of Spain gave them leave to apply themselves more
seriously to this business, their fell again upon the same design. The King of
England wrote unto them about it, and gave them also his judgment, at a
public Audience, by his Ambassador: that for the settling those troubles, and
putting an end to those Contests, there was but one only mea^^ which the
Church had ever mad^nse of, to wit, a National Sy^^^ which was to be Judge in
the case, and (...) decide, which of the two opinions was more conformable to
the Word of God: or at lea^^ how, and in what manner the one orthe other might
be tolerated in the Church of God.

The States of Zealand, and those of most of the other Provinces moved for the
same. The Protestant Princes of Germany and the neighboring Republics, made
the like Remonstrance. It was from all parts solemnly declared, that it was
absolutely necessary for them to refer themselves to the Supreme Authority of
that Church of which the two Parties were members. Merc. To. 5. 1617. page 15
In conclusion the Arminians themselves agreed unto it: they were no longer
able to withsland that torrent of advise and votes which came from all parts,
to the same effect, recommending the Authority of a Synod.

Upon this, the States General put forth a Declaration, in which they made a
Protestation, that they prerended not, by the calling a National Synod, to
derogate from the Rights and Liberties of the Provinces, and that their
intention was no other, but to bring to trial, before the Supreme and legal
Authority, those Points which then were in Contest about matters of Religion;
that by Judgment therein, Peace might be restored to all the Reformed
Churches. This was done in conformity to the Pe^ition of the
Anti-Remonstrators, who demanded a National Synod for the ending of
Controversies, without pretending for all that, Ib. To. 5. p. 35.
that new Articles o^ Faith should be made.

After this, Circular Letters were written to all the Provinces, to the e^ that
every one should send unto the Synod six Deputies chosen out of the^ Ministers
and ablest Divines. The Wallon Churches had the same invita^on. The States did
also beseech the King of Great Britain, The Election Pa^atine and of
Brandebourg, the Land grave of Hesse, the Cantons of Zur^^ of Berne, of Bafile,
and of Schaffo^se the Counts of Veteravia, the Republics of Geneva, of Bremen,
and (...) Emden, to make choice of and dep^^^ the ablest Doctors amongst them,
to be assistant at this Synod, which thus became more than National, and was
begun at Dort, a Town of Holland, (...) the thirteenth of December in the Yea
of our Lord 1618.

The Protestants of France; wh^ were invited among the first, would no have
failed to have been present as we as those of Geneva. But as the King does not
permit Ministers of other Countries to come to those Synods which they hold in
his Kingdom; so does he not also permit that those of his Kingdom go to those
of other Nations. This, notwithstanding, did not hinder the Ministers of France
from assisting in the best manner they could. For, not being allowed to go
thither in person, the chief of them sent their Opinions; and that of Monsieur
Du Moulin, Sess. 1434
which was read publicly at the Synod, and agrees exactly with the
Determination of the said Synod, is still to be seen at this day.

It is further remarkable, that the year following, all the Protestant Churches
of France, in a National Synod held at Alez, received all those Decrees,
obliging all the Ministers and Elders deputed for that Assembly, to take a
solemn Oath, and protest in the sight of God, that they did admit of and
embrase the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort, as entirely conformable with the
Word of God, and that they would maintain the same to the utmost of their power
so long as they had breath in their bodies. This is what they solemnly swore
unto according to the form of the Oath which you may see annexed to the end of
this Treatise. By which appears, that these Gentlemen can now, neither in
Honor not Conscience, refuse submission to the Decisions and Authority of the
said Synod. 11. December. 1618.


In the twenty seventh Session the Remonstrators, who were not satisfied with,
and mistrusted their Judges, made solemn Protestation against the Authority of
the Synod, declaring that they could not acknowledge them for lawful Judges in
the case, because the greaest part of them consisted of Parties, and had
already publicly declared against their Doctrine.

All the Deputies of foreign Churches gave their Opinions in Writing
concerning this Protestation, The Judgment of the English Divines.
and all unanimously declared, that they judged it null and void, most
unreasonable, and against the Custom and practice of the first Council of
Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Calcedon, where the Bishops, who were,
from the first, against the opinions of Arius, Maced^nius, Nestorius, and
Eutyches, did not cease notwithstanding, to be their lawful Judges in those
sacred Assemblies, which represented the Church, unto which all Parties owed
subjection.

That if that Protestation were admitted as reasonable; it never was, The
Judgment of the Divines of Hesse.
nor ever could be possible to assemble a lawful Council for the deciding of
Controversies and suppressing of Errors; fince the most zealous Pastors and the
ablest Divines were always those, who, either by Word of Mouth or by Writing,
made chief opposition against such Opinions as they esteemed Heretical.

That if one upon such grounds must lose his right of assisting at Councils,
The Judgment of the Divines of Bremen.
all the Heresies imaginable might be eflablished without refrstance, none
opposing them for fear of bringing so great a prejudice upon themselves.

That it cannot be said upon that score, that a man is judge in his own cause,
because in Contests of that nature, when it is in question, Which is Orthodox
Doctrine, it is not properly the Cause of every or any particular person, but
it is in reality, the Cause of God and his Holy Church, which is in agitation.

That for the deciding of this, The Judgment of the Divines of the Palatinat.
when Disputes do arise, we are not to apply our selves to the Jews and
Gentiles, who may seem nenters in the case, as having no interest in either
Opinion; but that it ought to be referred to the Pastors and Brethren of the
same Church being met together to decide it according the Word of God, Optat.
Milevit l. 5. advers. Parmenian.
whatever Opinion they happened to be of during the time of the Contest.

And finally, that, Sentence being given by the Assembly, submission is to be
yielded: and that if the Remonstrators do refuse to conform, adhering still to
their Protestation, they do thereby declare; that they do renounce Communion
with the Reformed Churches; and that in that case it belongs to the Sovereign
Power to determine what is to be done. In these very words, did the Divines of
Geneva declare themselves.

Upon this the Deputies of the States General declared, against the Protestanon
of the Remonstrators, that the National Synod was lawful and Soveraig^ Judge in
this Controversy, as the same Synod had formerly declared in the 26.
Autoritatem ejus non defugerent, sed eandem pro legitimo causae judice
agnoscerent.
Session. In pursuance hereof they summoned them to renounce their
Proteslation, and to give in Writing what they had to say in defense of their
five Articles; which in conclusion they did. After this, all the Reasons of
both sides being fully examined in several Sessions, Sess. 138.24. Apr. 1619.
the Synod Condemned the five Propositions of the Arminians, as full of Error
and contrary to the Word of God, and forbad them to be held or taught in any of
the Reformed Churches, as also, to admit any person to the Minislery who had
not subscribed the contrary Doctrine, which was approved as only True and
Orthodox by the Decree of the Council. 2. Jul. 1619
The States General hereupon sent Orders into all the Provinces, forbidding any
other Doctrine to be taught, but what did punctually agree with the Judgment
of the Synod concerning these five Articles, with express. Command to all
Governors and Magistrates, to see the said Decrees exactly observed.

Moreover Barnevelt, who had been the Head and chief Protector of the
Remonstrators, and had endeavored, in their defense, to hinder the convocating
of the National Synod, was seized upon, 24. Aug. 1618.
and taken Prisoner some three months before the beginning of the said Synod,
14 May 1619.
and four days after the concluding thereof, with a Condemn^tion of the
Arminians, was Condemned to die, Merc. Franc. To. 5. page 43
and was beheaded, Because (as is specified in the first and second Article of
the Sentence given against him) he had raised troubles in Religi^ and
contristated, as much as in him lay the Church of God, in maintaining, a^^
causing, by his Partisans, to be maintarxed, and instilled into the minds of
ma^^ people that extravagant and pernicion Maxim: That it belongs to every
particular Province, within their Precinct^^ to ordain of matters of Religion,
with^^ any obligation of giving notice thereof (...) other Provinces. And for
having pretested without Commission in the name of the Provinces of Holland,
U^recht, and Overisle that the Deputies of the other Province who did press
for, and forward the convocation of a National Synod, would be the cause and
Authors of much danger (...) mischief.

After this, who can any longer question but the Protestant Churches (...)
England, rance, Germany, Swisserland and the Low Countries, do hold as a
Fundamental Maxim: That in such Controversies as do arise, concerning Doctrine
in matters of Religion, tho True Church, of which the dissenting Parties are
members, has full and Sovereign Power to declare, according to the Word of God,
what is of Faith, and that there is an obligation of standing to her Decrees
under pain of being Schismatics. We know very well also that in conformity
with this privilege and practice, the like Synods have been held in France,
concerning some other Points, wherein the Ministers were (...) some variance,
and that it has been absolutely and authoritatively defined what was to be
believed. After which, The Judge meant of the Divines of^ Geneva.
it has not been held lawful to contest or argue for the contrary, without
incurring the penalty of being cut off from the Body of the Church; and this
because the Gospel says, That he, who does not admit of the decisious of the
Church, is to be accounted as an Infidel and Publican.

9. Ordo obfervatur qualem Deus sancivit, and sanctificavit exemplo,
Apostolorum and omnium aetatum Ecclesiae confirmavit reduetive ad dictum
Christi, dic Ecclesiae si Ecclesiam non audierit etc.
The Divines of Geneva thought good to make use of this passage in the
Judgment they gave against the Protestation of the Arminians, to pro^^ that
Verity in the Synod of Dort, whi^^ also confirmed it.

Wherefore I do, now before hand humbly befeech Monsieur Claude, th^^ he go not
about to tell me, that according to their Doctrine, even the Tr^ Church is not
infallible, and that she may have het errors. Whether Monsieur Claude (whom I
hold to be ^ man of too much Wit and Reason (...) be of that opinion) does for
his parti^ cular, Quare in sententia omnino debent stare judicio corporis
repraesentati per Synodum, loquentem mandato, ore and ex sensu totius corporis,
nec licet ipsis corpus in parts vncare, vel sibi adversarium fingere, vels
sibi jus corporis arrogar^^ quod ipsis nulla lege permi^titur.
really think so, I cannot tell^ but in this I am very well satisfied tha^
there are many Ministers who have he^ it, and who, for all that I know, (...)
at this very day, as much in the (...) mour to maintain it resolutely and
po^tively as ever.

And for this very reason I do declare that as I am resolved to have no
de^^ings of this nature, neither with his nor them, so will I not run riot,
(...) forsake the quiet path I am already (...) to engage my self in the way of
(...) guing and Disputing; which I purpo^^ to avoid. Live. 1. c. 13.
Cardinal Richelicu has (...) ready treated that Controversy with all the
vigor imaginable; and has demonstrated by most convincing Reafons, that the
True Church of God being guided by the Spirit of God, as we must suppose her to
be, Vel abjiecere debent omnem Protestationem ad versus Synodum, and subjicere
sua dogmata illius judicio; vel certe si manent in Protestatione immoti, eo
ipso se declarant Unio^i Ecclesiarum Reformataru^ renuntiare; quod si faciant,
dispiciat postea summa potesta^ quid facto sit opus.
cannot be deceived. But that I may not be obliged to fight (though with so
much advantage under the conduct of so great a Person) I am resolved not to
enter into the field. Let that pass then, for the present, untouched, whether
the Church can or cannot be deceived; this is not the business now in
agitation. It is sufficient, for what I would be at, that our Brethren the
Protestants do avert, as von have seen in the proceedings of the Council of
Dort, that those who are of this Church are obliged to hold, that she is not
deceived; that what she defines is the pure Truth according to the true meaning
of the Word of God; and, consequently, that they must submit to all her
Decisions in matters of Faith, under pain of being excommunicated, and declared
Heretics and Schismatics, notwithstanding they still Protest, as the
Arminians and all other Heretics have ever done, that they have the Word of
God on their side. For of this very poin^ it was that the Reformed Church gave
Judgment in the Synod of Dort.

In reality, as we are agreed on a^ sides, that, in all Contests, we are (...)
stick to that which is conformable to the Word of God, and that we are to
reject what is not so; the question is finally reduced to this: how that (the
Word of God) is to be understood, when it is alleged by both sides for the
supporting their Opinions. The Disciples of Arminius had their place^ of Holy
Scripture in defense of the^ five Articles. The Gomarists maintained a Doctrine
contrary to those Articles by other passages which they produced out of the
same Holy Scripture. They were at as great odds concerning the sense or meaning
of those Places and Passages, each Party challenging the true one on their
side. It being then avouched that it belongs unto the Synod to end the Debate,
it does also, without all doubt, belong to the same Synod to determine in what
sense the words cited out of Holy Scripture are to be understood.

Now I would gladly desire these Gentlemen, to tell me, whether that Synod,
which represented, as they believe, the True Church, was infallible o^ no. If
it was infallible, then Infallibly the objection they make is of no force;
since they agree with us, that the True Church cannot err. But now if it was
not infallible, they must, at least, affirm, that this did not hinder but they
were obliged to submit to the Decisions made therein, under the penalty of
being Schismatics; the Divines Deputed from their several Churches having
solemnly declared, that they were to subscribe to the Decrees, and reject as
Erroneous, what should be condemned.

But that which the Synod of Delpht does clearly and positively declare upon
this occasion, takes away all force from, enervates and quite destroys this
objection. The Remonstrators at the first, would not be brought to submit to
the National Synod, because (said they amongst other reasons which they
alleged for their refusal) it may err as all other, even Ecumenical Councils
may, they being not infallible, as the Apostles were, Christus Dominus qui
Apostolis promisit Spiritum Veritatis, qui ipsos ducturus esset in omnem
veritatatem, Ecclesiae quoque suae pollicitus est se cum ea usque ad finem
saeculi mansurum. Mart. 28.20 Et ubi duo vel tres, etc. Matt. 18.10.
who were guided immediately by the Holy Ghost. The States^ Holland and
Westfriesland advised abo^^ this with their Synod which was the^ held at
Delpht. And it was answered: tha^ that reason did not hinder, but that they
were obliged to receive the decisions o^ the Synod, and to follow the Judgment
thereof when a doctrine is condemned; because as Christ our Lord did promise
his Spirit unto the Apostles for the instructing them in all Truth, he has also
promised his Church to be with her to the end of the world; and that when two
or three of them should be assembled together in his Name, he would be in the
midst of them. The same Synod adds, that when Quando piiac docti Pastores, ex
diversis Ecclesiis, diversisque regionibus or^^ Christiani in timore Domini
convenient, ut ex Dei verbo justcent, quid in Ecclesia Dei doceri, aut non
deceri conveniat, ^^nino credendum est Christum juxta promissionem suam
ejus^adi conventui interfuturum, at que ^undum sancto suo Spirit^ illustraturum
ac recturum, ut nihil in eo quod ad veritatis, a^ regni ejus detrimentum verti
possit, decernatur.

Nullus ords, nulla pax esse poterit in Ecclia Dei, si e^ilibet quidlibet
docere permi^tatur, nec ad rationem doctrinae sat reddendam, nec se judicio
alicujus Synodici conventus submittendum, obligetur, juxta praeceptum Apostoli,
1 Cor. 14 2. and 31. ut judicetur de his quae Prophetae loquuntur, and
Prophetarum spiritus Prophetis subjecti sint. Jud Syn Delph Sess 26. Syn. Derdr.


many pious and learned Pastors sent from several Churches of Christendom do
meet together, to determine according to the Word of God, what is to be taught,
or rejected in his Church, it is to be believed with all confidence, that our
Blessed Savior, according to his promise, will be present at such an Assembly,
and will not fail to enlighten and guide them by his Holy Spirit, that they may
not determine any thing prejudicial to Truth. After which, toward the end,
follows; that there would be no Order in the Church of God, nor ever could be
any hopes of Peace, if every one were permitted to teach what he pleased, and
not bound to give any account of his Doctrine, nor submit himself to the
judgment of a Synod, according to the Command of the Apostle, who ordains that
what is taught by Prophets, should be judged of by the Spirit of Prophets.

This makes it further more manifest, that it cannot be said, that the Decrees
of Synods are only Rules of Policy, which do not reach unto Doctrine; and only
serve for exterior order, which is the utmost limit of their authority For it
is most evident, that this Assembly at Dort did pretend to regulate i^ self
according to the four first Councils whose example they proposed unto
themseles. In the mean time these Gentlemen do acknowledge, that those Councils
did condemn the doctrine of those Arch heretics, whom they gave Sentence
against, in such manner, that it was not lawful to hold it, not adhere unto
their Party, without becoming, like unto them, Heretics and Schismatics. It
cannot then be doubted but this Synod pretended to the same thing, and that by
declaring that the Doctrine of the Arminians was full of errors and contrary to
the Word of God, they intended to say an obligation of renouncing the said
Doctrine, by subscribing to their Decrees, that they might not become guilty of
Schism and Heresy. But without any great necessity of reasoning the business,
it is but hearing how the Synod delivers it self upon this subject. For you
must know, that the Arminians refused to observe the Order which was appointed
for the discussion and examination of their Articles, Nay, they were so bold as
to maintain that they could not in Conscience accommodate themselves to that
Method which they apprehended to be so prejudicial to the good Cause. The Synod
thereupon declares, Quin potius si conscientiae suae quam debent, rationem
habereve lint, e^s ad obtemper andum aequissimis supremarum potestarum
mandatis, hujusque Synodi ordini and judicio acquiescendum teneri. Seff 42. die
29, Decemb^is.
that it belongs to them, as Judges, to prescribe the Order which was to be
observed in a Hearing of that nature, and not at all to the Parties, upon whom
Sentence was to pass: and that the pretext of Conscience which was laid hold on
upon this occasion, is no ways juf^ifiable; because, there being nothing here
in concern but the examination of the business, their Consciences in this can
suffer nothing. Then they add these decisive words; That if they on the
contrary, intend to have any regard to their Consciences, as they ought in
duty, they are obliged to obey the Commands of Higher Powers, to follow Orders,
and to acquiesce unto the Judgment of the Synod.

To this purpose it is that they allege that passage of the Gospel which
commands to esteem him as an Infidel, who does not obey the Church. It is
pretended then that this Synod which represents their Church, obliges to
another kind of Obedience then merely Political, and that in matters of Faith,
where there is an obligation to believe under pain of damnation, there is a
duty incumbent upon Conscience to submit unto her Decrees; Eandem pro legitimo
causae Judice agnoscerent.
because, as is there expressly determined in the 26. Sess It is The Synod which
is Lawful Judge in this Cause.

11. Certainly the Synod had a great deal of reason to speak in that mannen For
in so remarkable a Contest as this between two such Parties, who were in
Dispute of matters of such importance, presupposed that they looked upon
themselves as the Representative Body of the Church of Christ, the^ could not
in reason discover any other Judge but themselves. For they saw manifestly, in
that conjuncture, that the Scripture could not be it; for so much as the two
Parties upholding the^^ Opinions by Scripture, as it has always happened in all
the Conrests which have risen in the Primitive Church, the Controversy between
them was concerning the true meaning of those passaged which were alleged on
both sides. Neither these Passages then, nor those other which were brought for
the explication of these, and about which there was as hot a Dispute as about
the former, could ever end the difference between them; because indeed, they
were the very Subject of the Dispute. And, consequently, they found that there
was a necessity of some other Supreme Authority which should give Sentence
about the matter in contest, and appease those troubles which otherwise must
prove endless in the same Church.

This is the very Reason the Synod gives when they cite the Remonstrators to
appear, Sess. 5.16. November. Sess. 23.7. Decembr. Pro certa ac indubitata
fidei regula adqibiturum.
and oblige them to submit to their Decrees. This is that makes them protest so
often, and take their solemn Oaths, that they will determine things according
to the Word of God: Which they will make use of as a certain and indubitable
Rule in matters of Faith. In which proceeding of theirs, they show excellently
well, that there is a great distinction to be made between him that Judges, and
the Rule he follows to Judge well by. In all the well governed Societies of the
world, there may arise differences; yea, even such as may, by the contesting
parties be managed bona fide. But for the ending of them, it is requisite there
be a Court appointed and authorized from the Highest Power to Judge of them,
and by pronouncing Sentence, to give clear notice to the Parties which of them
has got the day. Behold here ^ Judge. Behold a Court. But this Judge and this
Court are not without Laws and Orders, according to which Judgment is to be
given. Which Laws and Orders are many times the Subject of great Disputes, each
Party endeavoring to make them appear favour^ble to their side; which Point is
to (...) cleared by the Sentence of the Judg^. Here is the Rule he is to
follow. It (...) not the Law it self, the meaning whereof is actually in
dispute, that is Judge. Were it otherwise, it were impossible ever to determine
any thing. For the Law it self cannot explicate nor declare it self for either
side: but it is He that has received Authority, who is to en^ the strife
according to Law, the meaning whereof he determines and applies to the present
case.

The Assembly of Dort knew very well, that this was the very state and
condition of things in the Church of God, which is without doubt, the most holy
and best ordered Community in the world. In this Community, notwithstanding,
there have happened great differences in matters of great importance, and where
the Contest has also been managed, many times, with a great deal of good
meaning on all sides, every one believing they had the Scriptures on their
sides. Witness S. Hier^me, and S. Augustine in that difference between St.
Peter and St. Paul: witness S. Cyprian who was so earnest against the validity
of the Baptism of Heretics, and a thousand others of the same nature.

It is necessary there be a Judge, Synodi mandato morem gerant, quo praesentem
hanc Synodum pro legitimo causae Judice agnoscere jubentur. Sess. 25.
who has received power and Authority from our Blessed Lord, to decide all
these differences, and that this Judge have a Rule and a Law which he is to
follow in giving Judgment, that his Sentence may be just and secure. This Rule
is the Word of God, which rightly applied, renders Judgment highly equitable.
Now the Synod of Dort acknowledges, that an Assembly of lawful Pastors
representing the Body of the true Church is this Judge, to whom it appertains
to judge of the true sense of the Word of God; and afterward to resolve,
according to this Rule, any cause depending.

12. I do now earnestly beseech our Brethren of the Reformed Churches to
reflect seriously upon these two Propositions I am now about to make.

The first is: That as the Word of God is infallible in it self, so certainly
the Judgment of him, who truly judges according to this Rule, is also
Infallible: and consequently, they are obliged to believe, that the Church,
when she Judges according to this Rule or the Word of God, does not only not
err, but that she also cannot err.

The second is: that they are bound (as well as we) to believe that the Church
of God, deciding controversies of Faith, does judge according to the true sense
of the Word of God: because, upon the matter, it is concerning this very sense
that she gives Judgment between the Parties who give it a different sense, and
who are oblig^ in Conscience to submit to her Judgment, under pain of being
Schismatics, and Heretics; as their Synod of Dort has positively declared.

From hence follows, by necessary consequence, according to their own
Principles, that they are bound to believe, with us, that the True Church of
Jesus; Christ is infallible in the Judgment she judicially pronounces touching
matters of Faith.

13. I think there can now be no (...) but they are obliged according to their
own grounds, to acknowledge the infallibility of the Church of Christ. But I am
contented for the present not to press them so far, nor to make use of that
right which I might justly challange. It is sufficient, that the Synod, which,
in these Gentlemen's opinion, represents the True Church, is lawful judge in
this case, as the Synod is self declares, obliging them in Confidence to adhere
to and obey the Decisions made therein. It is not then lawful for them who are
of that Church, and are at Difference amongst themselves, to condeman the Synod
of Error, then judgment ^s given in order to the clearing Points of Faith
confessed among them. They have no power to frame a different Judgment from
that of the Synod, and adhering to it, to sepor^are themselves from communion
with the rest. They are bound to acknowledge the Authority of the Synod, which
is lawful Judge, and submit unto it, believing that what is there desined
(...) Truth it self stand this without any necessity of entering upon the
question of its Infallibility.

I demand nothing more for the prese^s, I will content my (...) with what
themselves do grant. That Church, of which the Partins Contesting are members
(be she fallible or infallible) has full Power to Debide differentes, and (...)
oblige under the pen^ry of being Schismatics. And now having (as I make my
self believe) give Monsient Claude all the satisfaction he can in (...) require
concerning this Point. I (...) on my course perceably and quietly, and make
bold to give him notice, that.

14. Here is that the Prescription, that (...) Point, an^ ^oisputable P^^ciple,
to which a receisary adhfione required, when there arise Disputes between
Parties, for the discovering whether an Opinion be or be not contrary to the
true Rule of Faith, which is the Word of God, and whether we, stand bound to
believe it as a Point of Faith. Were it antecedently distinctly believed as
such or no. Disputation will only serve to render the Debate eternal. Both
Parties will go on challenging the true sense of Scripture and Tradiuon on
their sides: Books shall be written without number for the asserting of it; and
that without any hopes or appearance of any end of these, learned indeed, but
redious Contests; which prove many times so intricate and confused, that every
one standing his ground, and being strongly and wilfully resolved not to
yield, reproaches his Adversary with affected Obstinacy against known Truth. We
must then make up to that unquestionable Point, in which both Parties meet, and
which Tertullian so boldly establishes, as the principal Rule or Prescription
for the ending all differences which may arise about the agreeing or conformity
with the Word of God, which every one is so ready to challenge to himself.

This Learned Father having said in his twentieth Chapter, A quibus traducem
fidei and semina doctrinae, caeterae deinde Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and
quotidie mutuontur ut Ecclesiae fiant. Ataque tot ac tantae Ecclesiae una est
illa ab Apostolis prima ex qua ommes.

Quid autem praedicavevint, id est, quid eis Christus revelaverit, and hic
praescriham, non alite p^obari debere nisi per easdem Ecclesias quas ipsi
condiderunt, ipsi eis praedicando tam viva qu^d ^iunt voce, quam per epistolas
postea, de Praes. c. 21.


that the Apostles, who were sent by our Blessed Savior, Founded many Churches
in several places, and that many others came from these by communication of the
same Doctrine, and that they all of them together make but one true Catholic
and Apostolic Church; he add in the next Chapter, that true Prescription is;
that nothing be received but what he revealed unto his Apostles, whom he sent
to Preach his Doctrine unto the world. But in case there does arise any Contest
concerning any particular Point, and that we be in some trouble or doubt
whether they Preac^^ed it or no; and by consequence, whether they learned it of
their Master or no; (behold here his solid Rule or Prescription, in this great
maxim) that this is not to be made out or cleared by any other means, but by
those Churches which they founded either by Preaching or by Writing, and which,
as we lately touched, all of them make but one only Church. To this Church then
it does belong to determine what our Blessed Savior did reveal in his Holy
Word, whenever there is any cause of doubt, in such Contests as do arise; and
what she defines, what she declares in the case, whatever former times did
believe, it now to be held as matter of Faith.

15. As Protestants do acknowledge this Verity, as I have made it appear, so do
we also most willingly submit unto it, and entirely profess that the holy
Church is lawful Judge of Controversies, and that (as Tertullian says)
addresses are to be made to her, upon difference of Opinions, that we may learn
what the Son of God revealed unto his Apostles; that is, what is the true
meaning of Holy Scripture, and what Consequences are to be drawn from those
Principles. We have a very pregnant example of this in that famous Contest,
which has been, for some Ages past, between Catholics, concerning the
Immaculate Conception of our Blessed Lady. It is certain, that in former times
men did not set themselves to search into that particular subject, because they
did not so much as reflect upon it. There was only a confused kind of
knowledge and a general Id^^ of the privileges and Prerogatives of the Blessed
Virgin above the rest of Mankind, without descending to particulars. People
were wholly taken up with opposing those Heretics who drew up against the
Honor of the Blessed Virgin, who would have deprived her of the glory of her
admirable and perpetual Virginity, even after Childbearing; and above all,
those who so violently pleaded against the glorious title of Mother of God,
which is the ground of all her other Privileges. They were satisfied to
ascertain that true source or fountain of all her greatness fortifying it by
Scripture and Apostolic Tradition, without regarding to penetrate further into
that suite or train of other privileges which did accompany that one great
prerogative; or examining particularly, whether it were to be concluded, by a
legal ensequence flowing from that Principle, that she was preserved at the
first instant of her being, from Original sin. It was not at that time
positively believed that she was exempt from that stain; neither was the
contrary in their Creed. And this because it was not so much as thought upon.

At another time it has been thought good to employ many serious-thoughts upon
this subject, and to search more narrowly into the business. Great Contests
have risen about it. Whole Volames have been written by Learned men, who have
produced strong and clear testimonies out of the Holy Scriprures for it, and
have endeavored to derive it from the very Fountain of Apostolical Doctrine,
by the way of Tradition. Whole Universities, and especially that of Sorbon have
spoken loud in favor of that Opinion, and engaged themselves by solemn Oath to
maintain it. And yet notwithstanding the Church has not thought fit absolutely
to determine any thing concerning this matter of so great importance: But
leaves us at liberty to believe what we please, concerning it.

She has not proceeded in the same manner concerning her exemption from all
guilt, even of venial sin. For this she has decided and resolved upon as a
matter of Faith: not that she had any new revelation thereof since the time of
the Apostles; but that before, the proposing this verity to the world (...) be
believed, she consulted with the holy Scriptures, Apostolical Tradition, and
the opinions of holy Fathers, concerning the preeminence and qualition of the
Mother of God, for the finding out the whole extent of them. An having
discovered by this means, the her being exempted from venial sin w^
comprehended in that Supreme Dignty, as a necessary consequence is ^^cluded in
its Principle, she has defined as a Point of faith revealed in the We of God,
in which it is contained. The is the reflection of the most eminent as Learned
Cardinal de Lugo in his exc^lent. Treatise of Faith. Disp. 3. Sect. 5. n. 7.

Let us now imagine the Churd should do the same concerning the (...) emption
of the Blessed Virgin from Original sin. Let us suppose that she h^ving
examined the passages of Host Writ, and the Testimonies of Trad^^ on which are
alleged upon this subject should find this also included, as in necestary
consequence, as she did the other (as it is not unlikely she would, If she
should think fit to proceed to a further examine of the business) then all we
who are Catholics, and agreed in this, that the Church is Judge of
Controversies, and that we are bound to submit to her Decrees, should quickly
lay aside all difference of opinions, ^^d, although we had not hitherto held
seas matter of Faith, should then believe it to be so; not because there had
been any new Revelation concerning it, ^^t because the Church should have
declared it to have been always revealed, although there was not a general
Agreement concerning that Revelation.

16. Behold then us and Protestants agreed, as I take it, upon this Principle;
that the true Church of Christ has power to decide and propose that as an
Article of Faith, which antecedently to that decision and proposal was not of
obligation to be believed. From whence is easily concluded, that, for the
franing an exact rational discourse in matters of Faith, it is necessary to
avoid these two extremes, which a loose kind of reasoning is apt enough to fall
into. The first is; That this has not always been believed, therefore it is
not now to be believed. The second: This is (...) believed; ergo, it has
always and in a^ Ages of the Church been distinctly believed. It is evident by
our Principle^ that this way of reasoning is very salk and erroneous.

Here then is the reason why, when there happens a Contest between two Parties
of the same Church (supposed always the true Church, as we shall by and by
show) it is not always necessary that we search narrowly into the doctrine of
Antiquity, for the discovering what was held in those days concerning the
matter in Dispute: It suffices for ending all debates, that we know what the
Church (having taken full cognizance of the matter) shall have determined by a
solemn judgment and Sentence according to the usual form and method. What she
resolves in such occurrences according to the Word of God, the true meaning
whereof she faithfully gives us, is to be received as matter of Faith, whether
it were beforehand known, or not known to be so. And the contrary is an Error,
which we are obliged, with her, to condemn and anathematise, unless we intend
to become Infidel; and Schismatics. Here is the Principle we are agreed upon
on all sides, as I have made appear both by the Doctrine and proceedings of our
Adversanes themselves. It imports now very much to apply this to the particular
subject we have in hand, and it shall be my endeavor to effect it.

CHAP. III. The applying this agreed-on Principle to the Subject of the Holy
Eucharist.
TO make a due Application of this general Principle to the subject of the Holy
Eucharist, with the same peaceableness and quiet, we have hither to endeavored
to maintain, and together with the consent of Parties, we must needs step a
little aside, but still in such order and measure, that we may go friendly on
in the same path hand in hand together, without justling one another, still
laying all Disputes aside.

The first step therefore, that I make of this kind, is, to produce what is
agreed upon on all sides to have been in all Ages believed concerning the Holy
Eucharist: to wit, that it is a Sacrament which is a Memorial of the Death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is there present, and wherein his blessed Body and
precious Blood are truly received by the Faithful according to the express
words of the Son of God himself, who says: Take and eat, this is my Body; do
this in memory of me. This is what Protestants themselves (in the self-same
terms) do own and profess. For they will not have the Sacrament to be a mere
figure or empty sign without efficacy, but they do maint a^ that it does
communicate unto us, in a most real and most effectual man men; the Body of
Jesus Christ to be the food of our Souls. page 232.
And Monsieur Claude acknowledges, that before this pretended novelty of Local
presence and Transubstantion was introduced, by way of illustrating or
explaining the matter; Every one believed that Jesus Christ is present in the
Sacrament; that his Body and Blood are there truly received by the Faithful,
and that the Sacrament is a Sign and a memorial of the death of Jesus Christ.

Behold here, I think, the same words I my self made use of.

We also all say the very fame in the self-same terms. For we believe that this
Sacrament is a Sign and a Memorial of the Death of Jesus Christ; that he is
there present, and that his Body and Blood are there truly received by the
Faithful; and we maintain that this has always been held in the Church. We are
hitherto agreed. Nothing of all this is questioned or disputed between Monsieur
Arnaud and Monsieur Claude. What then? These two things which follow.

2. The first is; page 295.
that Monsieur Claude will have it, that in those Primitive times, which he
calls the good days of the Church, Pastors being careful to express themselves
clearly unto the People, and to prevent ertors in their understandings.
Christians were perfectly instructed how the Body and Blood of our blessed
Savior are present in the Sacrament, not locally and substantially but
mystically; and that they are received by us, not with the mouth of flesh, but
by the operation of faith, so that in those times they had a clear and distinct
knowledge of the Real Absence. Monsieur Arnaud, on the contrary, maintained
stiffly in his chiee Tracts, and gives us hopes to make is appear in a fourth,
by an inquiry into the Fathers of the six first Ages, that they had a knowledge
and a clear distinct belief of the Real Presence.

The second is, page 162.240 and 290.
that Monsient Cla^ds will have it, that there was a certain time, when by the
negligence and ignotance of Pastors. Christians had only a confused knowledge
of this Mystery, without positively believing or rejecting a Real Presence or
Real Absence, and that because they did not so much as enter into any
apprehension of either. And now again Monsieur Arnaud evers, and positively
proves in the whole sixth Book of his last Work, that that time never was, and
that there always ought to have been in the Church a dislinct belief either of
Real Presence or Absence.

I have already told you, that I pretended and intended, throughout all this my
little Treatise, to hold off from all Disputes, and that my meaning was only to
step quietly aside, that I might not be stopped upon the way by meeting some body
who might be resolved to Dispute the passage with me. This being so, it is
decreed that I will not thrust my self into the quarrel, but will be contented
with what I think cannot, in reason, be refused me.

3. As to the first then of those two Points in contest, I say: That it is the
Subject of those great Works, which will give immortal fame to Bellarmin,
Petron, and so many others who have accompanied them in that glorious design of
setting forth the Antiquity of our. Belief by the testimony of the first
Fathers of the Church. It must be granted that the success has been happy to
admiration: and I do here protest, for mine own particular, that having seen
their Discourses and Learn^^ observations upon so many rare passage as they
produce, I am fully satis^^ that the Ancient Fathers were of the same positive
Belief we now are of concerning the Real Presence, and of that which some ages
past, has been called by the name of Transubstan^^tion; and that they could
hardly have expressed themselves more clearly and more pithily for that verity
than they have done. It is to be hoped also that Mr. Arnaud, who, I presume,
has bestowed much of his time, in that his lare retirement, upon a distinct and
^^rious perusal of the Holy Fathers, and is now preparing an entire Volume upon
this Subject, will afford us something more effectual and more express, if it
be possible, by making some new disco^eries in that rich Country, and i^ those
happy times, which have afterdy been so often viewed and traversed.

This, notwithstanding, we must gr^^t that though so much has been said and
written to prove this matter of (...), et our Adversaries are not satisfied; or
at least make as if they were not. It is to be owned, that they still maintan
the Dispute concerning those Passages: that they explicate them, at least,
colourably, to reduce them to their own sense: that they allege other places
against us, which, as they imagine, have, a first sight, something of intricacy
in them, and serve to dazzle our eyes, and ^ye us some trouble: These they force
us to qualify with some moderation, to explicate and distinguish so to reduce
them to their true sense and natural meaning. We cannot deny but they have
composed, and are still composing great Volumes for drawing unto their Party,
and the apposing against us those very Fathers whom we allege against them;
and that what we say of their Objections and Authors, they pretend, at least, a
right to say against ours. For my part I am resolved to bring no action in the
case. But I must desire them, notwithstanding, to deal like honest men, and
such as would not forfeit common sense, for that ingenuity and fair dealing
which becomes persons of Honor, even in treating with an enemy; and to tell me
heartily whether it be not true: that what I have just now alleged for them
against our selves, may with as little difficulty and as much equity be said
for us against themselves. I am very confident they shall need but interchange
persons to make the same Discourse, in the self same terms, on out behalf. In a
word, let them reflect, that we do answer the places by them alleged, and that
they find themselves often enough in some trouble and perplexity to give a
satisfactory answer to ours. Let it then be left uncertain, for the present, to
which side the Fathers of the Primitive times do incline. I am contented, at
present, to endure patiently that you be not of my opinion concerning the sense
and meaning which I really think ought to be given to the words of these Holy
Fathers. But I beseech you Gentlemen, be not then displeased, if I be not of
you minds in the application and explication you make of those places which
seem so evidently to favor us. Let the business remain uncertain, in
expectation of some greater evidence, and let (...) also say of them (since you
will needs have it so) what one of the Learned Ministers of the Church of
Paris said pleasantly enough: Mr. Dialle in his Book of the true use of the
Fathers.
that as by force of imagination (which modells the sound, and determines it to
the expression it fancies) we make the Bells speak what we list; even so in
citing and alleging the Fathers, we make them say whatever we have a mind they
should have said: and it is the resolution of drawing them to our side, which
determines their sayings to a particular pretended sense or meaning. I require
then of you, for the present, that you rest upon what was said, on this
subject, by that Minister who was so long and so faithful a Servant to the
Party. This has so much reason and equity in it, that I make my self believe
you will never have the heart to refuse it.

And now, in case the Fathers by you cited, should not be found to have so
positively mentioned the Real Absence, as you pretend they have done, and we
deny, you would not be upon much worse terms, as to the main business: Because,
according to you, the Fathers are not the R^le of Faith. So likewise, if it
should happen that those, whom we make use of in opposition to you, should not
have declared themselves so clearly and distinctly for a Real Presence, as we
suppose they have done, and you deny it; for the same reason we should not be
much inconvenienced by it; seeing especially, that the true Church, in which
resides the power (when Contests do arise) of defining what is of Faith (in
such manner as we have already mentioned) has yet determined nothing in the
case, nor declared in particular what is the meaning of this or that passage of
St. Cyprian, St. Cyrill, or St. Augustine etc, Let this then, for the present,
remain undecided; and let us proceed as if these Fathers, who are the occasion
of this dispute, had said nothing clearly and distinctly concerning this
matte^y think there can be nothing more (...) and reasonable then this. And I
can not apprehend that either Monsie^ Claude, or any of his Party, will think
fit to Dispute this Point with us. For if they object Fathers against us, it is
nor than (according to their Principle^) they pretend they are infal^ible, and
that what is to be believed is to be decided by their Authority; but it is to
show us, that they can fight us at the same weapon we sometimes make use of
against them.

4. As to the second thing in Contest, to wit: Whether there ever was a time in
the Church, wherein there was but a confused kind of knowledge touching this
Mystery, without reflection upon either Real Presence or Real Absence; Monsieur
Arnaud proves in one whole Book, that this could not be. And for mine own part,
I confess unto him, that if he had none else to deal with besides my self, he
should not at all ^eed to give himself any further trouble of arguing the
business, for I am absolutely of his persuasion: Nay, (I Will add further) should
make a scruple in Conscience to refuse my consent to so rational and
well-grounded an assertion. But (by misfortune) Monsieur Claude is not of my
humor, and will not yield the least in a point where he imagins he has some
advantage: and which he seems resolved to make good to the very last. Behold
why I am more than half persuaded to ield up something of that right which I
might so justly claim; and this for peace and quietness sake, and that I may
not be engaged in a Dispute, which I have resolved to decline as much as may
be. Let us then frankly grant what he demands, although we are far enough from
agreeing with him upon the matter. Let us not contest with him about a Point,
which we may dispense with, without any great difficulty. Let him have full
scope to fancy to himself such an obscure dark season of confused knowledge.
Let that invention of his own brain pass for a reality; and that Christians
actually (as he will have it) were, at that time, in a state of ignorance and
obscurity. I am contented to yield so far for his satisfaction.

And now, by way of one little peaceable digression more.

5. I will grant moreoever, that this great Mystery has not at all times been
examined to the bottom; and that men did not employ themselves so much in the
discussion of this, as of many other Points. The Fathers indeed have not
written such large Treatises of it^ as afterward were written, and as
themselves have written concerning other Mysteries, which they were obliged to
maintain against those who opposed them.

All the Heresies of those days, which interrupted the peace of the Church,
were chiefly concerning the most Blessed Trinity, concerning the Divinity and
Incarnation the Word Eternal. They were at peace and quiet concerning the most
Holy Eucharist. It was not at all questioned by the Heretics of those days.
The hour for that was not yet come. Here you have the reason why the Holy
Fathers insisted chiefly upon the defense of such Mysteries as were then
questioned or opposed. It was upon those occasions they compiled those great
Works of theirs, with so much exactness, explaining and clearing many
particular Points, which were not much looked upon before those Contests were
raised in the Church upon different occasions.

Without question, there can be no great difficulty to agree, that the same has
happened in the subject of the Holy Eucharist. That there was a time; when men
did not set themselves to Write purposely of the depth of the great Mystery, as
they did of some others about which men's wits were at work by occasion of some
Propositions which had caused some disturbance. There has been another time,
when men did upon design, fall a writing more at large, for the explicating,
not only the nature of this Sacrament, but also of the Mysteries contained
therein. It is most certain, that about the beginning of the ninth Age, Anno
818. Bell. Sermon. Defense of the Perpet. l. 8. c. 10. page 840.
Pascasius Radber^^ writ a Treatise of this nature, in the Book he made
concerning the Body and Blood of our Savior. Whether he were the first or no
that treated of this subject in that manner, discussing the particulars
more-minutely, with method and at large, uniting together all the parts
belonging to this glorio^ Mystery: Whether there were at the beginning many
adversaries who showed themselves in opposition to his Doctrine, Page 227. Page
629. l. 8. c. 8.
as is pretended by Mr. Claud^, or very few, and those who durst not publicly
show themselves, as Monsieur Aenand evidences very learnedly and clearly:
concerns me not at all. It is sufficient for me, that it is most true, as both
agree, that that Book, in fine, Ibid.
was cause of some trouble, and (as is said of it in the Defense of the
Perpetuity) had this effect in some, Page 813.
that having given them occasion to look more particularly into the
Difficulties of this Holy Sacrament, they were struck at them, and did
accordingly seek to lessen the weight of this Mystery by humane ways and
Philosophical explications and to qualify them with certain solutions which
drew near to those of the Calvinists.

Moreover whether Ioannes Scotus, and Bertramus be two several Authors, or but
one and the same. Whether he or they did directly oppose the Doctrine of
Posc^sius; or whether they only gave him a hit indirectly, by teaching a
Doctrine contrary to his, in the ninth Age: Whether his or their Scholars did,
or did not follow the blow in the tenth Age: Whether their Disputes grew cold
or hot at the beginning of the eleventh Age: And whether Leutherilus
Archbishop of Sens did, or did not engage in the quarrel for a Real Absence:
(all which is matter of Contest between Monsieur Arnaud and Monsient Claude) it
is enough for me that after opposition was made against the Doctrine of
Pascasius, at such time as his Book was come to be public and common, there
were occasioned again very frequent and most earnest Disputes concerning the
same Subject, during the life of Berengarius, and after his death. For although
we should grant unto Mr. Claude, what we may with reason enough refuse him, we
shall still find ways enough to come handsomely and quietly off, and we find our
selves still in that very posture and condition, where we should just be for
the ending this difference without violating that peace we endeavor to
preserve.

For, in fine, Monsieur Claude will have it, that people had for some time,
only a coufused kind of knowledge, without positively believing or rejecting a
Real Presence or Real Absence; That Pascasius was the first who took upon him
to propose distinctly the Doctrine of Real Presence, by way of addition,
explication, and confirmation of the Mystery: that notwithstanding the
opposition which was made, this Doctrine insensibly got the upper hand by the
care which his disciples took for the spreading of it abroad and establishing
it in the world. He is obliged also to acknowledge, that in the time of
Berergarius, those who stood for a Real Absence taking courage from the number
of their Partisans, renewed the Contest with a great deal of heat and
earnestness, even to the making a great noise in the Church, which continued
many years after the decease of Berengarius. The Controversy was concerning
Scripture, and the meaning of those Places which were alleged on both sides,
out of the Holy Fathers. Every one pretended to have them on their sides, and
boasted of Antiquity, which they would needs have to stand for them. Each Party
maintained that their Opinion had the true marks thereof and that such had been
the Belief of former Ages. Behold here the very state of affairs between the
Arminians and the Gomarists, before the National Synod. Here are just the
circumstances, in which (as we have seen) the Church had power to make use of
her legal Right in deciding and proposing Points of Faith, and obliging the
Faithful to a belief of them, even although they were not clearly and
distinctly known for suczh, before the raising of the Contest. And
consequently, laying all other Disputes aside, for the present, I think we have
now outhing else to do, but to see whether the Church did, in those days,
define any thing concerning this matter that we may stick to this, as to the
settled and resolved of Point, which (...) never to be forsaken. And this is
what remains to be done in this last undertaking.

6. It is not my intention here to ^^course the matter concerning the ma^^ and
qualities of the True Church. This is already done to my hand by the Learned
Cardinal Bellarmin, and C^dinal Richelieu, with exceeding great strength of wit
and clearness of reas^ in those great Works of theirs, in which they have also
apprepriated them to the Church of Rome. Should I take (...) road, I know I
should be stopped more than once by those Gentlemen, who will not at all allow
of what they (...) of this kind in those Works, although those Great men say
nothing upon this subject (as I must needs think) but what they prove most
evidently and convincingly. But since it does not please these Gentlemen to
think so, and I for my part, profess not to intermeddle, in this small
Treatise, with things of that nature, and to reliuquish some part of my right,
rather than come to Dispute it, I am willing to take another more peaceable
way, and propose nothing as yet, which themselves are not ^^liged to grant me,
if they be not re^^ved to condemn their own proceedings. I have, therefore,
only this little short Discourse to make by way of cer^in Corollaries which
follow, out of what seems already agreed upon.

First, When we are of a Community or Church, which is presupposed to be the
True one, we are bound to acknowledge, that an Assembly of the Passors of that
Church, which is made by public Authority according to Rule and Custom, does
represent the said Church.

Secondly, That that Church, of which the first Contestors were Members (before
one Party separated themselves, upon their condemnation) was the true Church;
because she was the only Church, before separation made. It cannot then be
questioned, both Patties must of necessity be agreed upon it, but that she
being the only Church owned by both Parties, was also, without all doubt, at
that time, even in their own opinions, the True Church and the Spouse of Christ.

Thirdly, That it belongs to this Assembly representing this Church, to
determine all Differences and Contests which may arise in any matter of
Religion whatsoever.

Fourthly, That particular persons who argue pro or con concerning the Point in
Contest of what quality soever they be, and those who take part with one or
other side for the upholding either, are the Parties Contesting; and as such,
and under that notion, cannot represent the Church, which is Judge in the case.

Fifthly, That they, as all others, are bound to submit to the Decisions of the
said Assemblies.

Sixthly, That if they refuse obedience, and separate themselves from her,
framing another independent Body and Community by themselves, they are declared
rebels and Schismatics.

And finally, That those who adhere unto them, whether presently, or a long
time after, are guilty of the same crime.

I think there is nothing more evident and certain, than what I have now
proposed. Otherwise the Church, which Jesus Christ, who is the God of Order,
has established with so much Wisdom (He who is Wisdom it self) would prove a
mere Babylon, and a fearful Confusion of all things, where there never were
any distinction to be made between good and bad, true and false; since it would
be in the power of every one, with the assistance of a Party, to make himself
at his pleasure, Judge and Church, and any thing, for the making that pass for
Truth, which was rejected as a notorious falsehood.

7. In Civil Communities there are always Courts of Justice, which have
received full Authority to Judge of Causes and Actions between particular
persons. When there happens a Sure at Law between two, be they of what quality
and condition they will, (even members of the Court it self) they are no other
than Parties Contesting; Plaintiff and Defendant. They must also have their
Solicitors, their Attournies, and their Counsil to Plead for them; but it is
the Judge's business to give Sentence. And when Sentence is once given, if he
who was cast should slight the Decree of the Court, and be so bold as to say,
that he owns it not as legal, nor the Court as lawful Judges; and that it is He
and his Solicitors, and Council, and those who are his Abettors who constitute
a true Court and Seat of Justice: I think he would be taken for no better than
a Rebel and as Outlaw, or one that were not in his right wits. And those who,
an hundred years after, should dare to say, that he had reason to do as he did,
would be thought to have as little judgment and reason as he.

Now can it be imagined, that God would permit such an irregularity, such a
fearful disorder in the Government of his Church? He has been pleased to give
Power and Authority to an Assembly of Pastors, who are the Representative of
his Church, to end all Contests in matters of Faith, in such manner as we have
already seen. It is one, this or that may be held or denied, before Judgment
given, as any one with his Party may think fit. But when the Decree is once
passed, and it comes to be defined by this Church, or Representative of the
Church, what is to be believed concerning the Point controverted, he who has
lost the cause (be he who he will) having, antecedently to such definition,
owned that Church to be the True one, must not, nor cannot now say, that it is
not the Assembly, but that it is he himsef, his followers and Disciples who do
represent, and in reality constitute the True Church. He who uses this
language, and those who take part with him, in, and at what time soever it does
happen, can be held for no other than true Schismatics.

8. This is clearly to be seen in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the
Ecclesiastical History; and Protestants themselves will, without difficulty,
grant it, as they have already acknowledged it, and solemnly professed it in
the Synod of Dort. The Primitive Church was made up of Jews and Gentile who
had, received the Holy Gospel. It happened, as it is recounted in the 15. of
the Acts, that some of those, who had been converted from Judaisme, coming to
Antioch taught this Doctrine: That if those who were of Gentiles become
Christians were not Circumcised, according to the Custom of Moses his Law,
they could not be saved. There fell to be a great Contest, and a great
disturbance in the Church about the matter; St. Paul and St. Barnaby strongly,
opposing that Opinion: and others maintaining it with a great deal of
earnestness. For the composing the business it was thought fit to send these
two Saints, and some of those of the contrary persuasion, to the Apostles and
Priests at Jerusalem, to propose unto them the difficulty. They failed not in
the performance of their charge, S. Paul and S. Barnabas relating unto them the
favors which it had pleased God to, show to the Gentiles by help of their
Ministry, without the assistance of the Law of Moses; and those others
(especially some of the Pharisees who had been Convertedo) urging very hotly,
Surrexerunt quidam de heresi Pharisaeorum qui crediderunt, dicentes, quia
oportet circuncidi eos, etc.
that it was necessary to oblige them to be Circumcised; and to observe the Law
of Moses in its full (...) Upon this the Apostles assembled a Council, at which
all those of chiefest note were summoned to be present, for the serious
examination of the business.

And having weighed the Reasons on both sides at a large Conference,
Convenerunt Apostoli and Seniores etc. Cum autem magna conquisitio fieret, etc.
and St. Peter having first declared himself upon the Point, and being seconded
by St. James, with the general consent of the Holy Assembly, there passed a
Decree, which was received by the whole Church, in which was defined and
declared (with the assistance of the Holy Ghost who inspired them for the
understanding Scripture) that Circumcision was not at all necessary for
salvation, Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis etc.
as it had formerly been during the Law of Moses, which was now to give place
to the Law of Jesus Christ. The business being thus concluded, this Doctrine
became a Point of Faith, and those of the Pharisees who remained still
obstinate in their opinion, and those others who took part with them, still
pressing for a conformity with the Jews, were now indeed true Pharisees in
Christianity; that is to say, people cut of from the True Church, however they
pretended that she was only in them and their Party.

9. The same may be said of other Councils, which have been afterward held
according to the example of that one, which is the Model of all the rest.

Before the Heresy of Arius there was no speech of Consubstantiation. That
wicked Priest having dared to teach, that The Blessed Word, though Son of God,
was not of the same substance with the Father, but only like unto him; found
many passionate followers of his doctrine even among the Bishops, who grounded
themselves upon some passages of Holy Writ. About which there arose a most
desperate Dispute in the Church, which caused a general disturbance to the
peace thereof. For the settling whereof, and reaniting men's Spirits in one and
the same Doctrine, the great Council of Nice was called, which did define: that
The Word was Consubstantial with the Father; which was also inserted in the
Symbol or Creed. When this was done, notwithstanding that many Bishops, even of
those who had assisted at the Council, remained still of the Opinion of Arius,
and had made a strong and numerous Party, who styled themselves the True
Church, and called Councils amongst themselves: they are still held, and
Protestants (generally) do even at this day, hold them for Heretics, and all
those who, after so many Ages, have followed that Sect, are treated with the
same style by them.

The same is to be said of the Macedonians, of the Nestorians, Syn. Constable. Syn.
Ephesians. Sy. Chalced. VI. Synod.
of the Eutychians, of the Monothelites, and the like, who stand condemned in
other Councils. For although after their condemnations, they protested that
they were the True Church, slighting the Councils which had Condemned their
Opinions, yet have they always been accounted Heretics, and are so at this
time by Protestants themselves. And now, if after they had rejected and
condemned the Articles of the Arminians in their Synod of Dort, those condemned
persons should have made a wilful separation from them, and declared themselves
new Protestants, by a new Protestation: that according to, and in conformity
with Holy Scripture, which they only relied upon, their Doctrine was purely
Orthodox, and that they were the true Church: it is certain they would have
either heartily contemned their rashness, or commiserated their extreme folly.
And if they had continued refractory and obstinate in their resolution, they
would have cut them off as corrupt members from the Body of their pretended
Reformed Church.

And this is not to be wondered at; because in this they are agreed, as well as
we; That an Assembly of Pastors convocated by Authority represents that Church
of which those persons, who were at Debate, are members and is acknowledged by
them to be the True Church, because the only Church before Separation; and that
it belongs to her to end all Differences: it not being in the power of the
contestors to refuse submission to her Decrees, or to fall off from her,
calling themselves the true Church, at a less rate then being esteemed
Schismatics, and people that proceed very irrationally.

This being so solidly grounded and settled by mutual consent it seems to me we
are now in a very ready way to end all our quarrels, and reunite our
understandings, by an application of this undubitable maxim unto the matter in
hand, according to the Principles of Monsieur Claude himself. For he will needs
have it, as we have already taken notice (and in this very knack it is that
consists the great Secret of the change he so strongly fancies) that there was
a time, when the True Church had but a confused knowledge of this Mystery,
without so much as dreaming of a Real Presence or Real Absence.

Those who first took upon them, as he says, to maintain a Real Presence, were
of that Church, and those who opposed it, were also of the same Church; because
before Sentence given in the case, the Church, which was fallen into that
confused knowledge, had not yet resolved which, distinctly and positively,
Presence or Absence, was of obligation to be believed; and consequently, of
what belief soever any one, for his particular, was, there was no separation
from her made or intended.

Afterward Debates and Disputes increased confiderably, and broke out at
length into very great heats and violence, which forced the said Church to call
an Assembly of her Pastors, who were her Representatives, for the clearing and
deciding a Point of so great importance. Behold us now in the very same
conjuncture of things, and upon the self-same terms with the Synod of Dort.

And it is very certain, that that Church in which the followers of Pascasius
were, and those, who, according to Monsieur Claude, opposed his Doctrine, held
no Council in the ninth or tenth Age, wherein this difference was decided in
favor of a Real Absence. There is not any one of our adversaries, who so much
as pretends to this advantage against us. I am also satisfied, that there was
none during that time, which did conclude the business, by settling the Doctrine
of Real Presence. We can only infer from hence, that the Church having not, as
yet, declared for either side, was in the same state and condition, she then
was in, when both Parties acknowledged her for the True Church. And even this
gives us sufficiently to understand, that those disputes (if there were any)
concerning the Doctrine of Pascasius, were not then come to any great height or
heat; since the Church in which the Parties were, did not, as yet, take any
notice of them. And certainly it is no easy matter to make it out, that there
was any considerable Contest concerning this subject during the time of the
tenth Age. But when, in the eleventh Age those who appeared in opposition to
this Doctrine, made so much stir and noise, as to oblige the Church to prevent
the mischief by a seasonable and solemn Judgment; then was it, that this same
Church, which, before she declared her self, was owned for, and in reality was
lawful Judge in the case, did not omit to call a Canonical Council for deciding
the matter. And (which is very remarkable) never did hold a more solemn one,
nor ever did she express her self more clearly and more effectually concerning
any subject.

For when Berringarius: Archdeacon of Angiers, (who had also wrought upon, and
gained Bruno Bishop of the same Church unto his Party) began to take up, and
engage for the Doctrine of John Scotus or Bertram (which at the first had made
no great noise) and to maintain it, with a great deal of vapouring and busle,
against the Real Presence, two Councils were held in one year, Anno 1050.
the one at Rome, and the other at Vercelles, where the Opinion of Berengarius
was declared heretical, as being contrary to the Word of God; and the Book of
John Scotus from whence he had taken it, (raising it a strain higher against
the Real Presence) was also condemned.

About some five years after, Tours, where berengarius himself appeared, to
give an account of his Doctrine, which was examined in his presence, and
condemned by a Decree made against it, to which he subscribed with his own
hand, abjuring his Error, and promising under oath never to defend it more.

But, he breaking his oath, and falling again to broach his old Principles,
another Council of an hundred and thirteen Bishops, was solemnly held at Rome,
where this Archdeacon was again heard speak for himself also, Formula: Ego
Berengarius, etc. de consecr. did. 2.
which was composed and approved by the whole Council, himself having desired
it should so be done, after he had burnt the Books of John Scotus in full and
open Council.

But he being of a most unsettled spirit, and finding much difficulty to quit
the honor of being Head of a Party, which was highly agreeable to his
ambitious humor, quickly began again to instruct his Scholars in the old way,
and that he might make them the more sure to him, had the boldness to write
against that very Formula which himself had signed with his own hand.

This was the cause, that, Rome, where this poor Relapsed creature, being now
about fourscore years old, did again ask pardon for that miserable relapse he
had made into that Error, which he now the third time retracted, and abjured,
signing a new Formula, which did contain, in more clear and express terms, the
Real Presence, and the changing of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of
our Lord. And he signed it purposely in that manner, because his Disciples,
following his example, had perverted the words of the other Formula, into quite
another sense.

This last time he showed himself by his constancy to be more man than
formerly. For he persevered in repentance until his death, which happened ten
years after upon the Feast of the Epiphany of our Lord, when (as is related by
William of Malmsbury) he said: On this day it is that we Celebrate the Feast of
the Apparition of our blessed Savior, and on this day it is, that h^ will
appear to me, either to receive me into his glory, as I have some hopes he
will, in regard of that Penance I have done: or (which I have too much reason
to fear) to punish me, for having seduced so many poor souls.

The truth is, he left many disciples after him, who proved more obstinate in
Error than himself had been, and who, from time to time, had the luck to make
such Proselites, as our Protestants perchance, would make some difficulty to
admit into their Communion. For this cause, six years after his decease, his
Error was condemned afresh in the Council of Plaisance, Italy, France, Germany
and other parts of Europe, even from the Empire of Constantinople, with the
Ambassadors of Alexis, who there demanded succor against the Infidels. The
Historian who was contemporary with this Council, Berthol. Constantiens.
and gives us an Abridgement of it, having been himself there present in the
company of nigh four thousand Ecclesiastical persons, and above thirty thousand
of the Laity, who were as Spectators of it, has these very words: Moreover the
Heresy of Berengarius, which long ago had been anathematis'd, was here again
Condemned, and the contrary, Catholic Doctrine confirmed, to wit: that the
Bread and Wine when they are Consecrated at the Altar, are truly and
essentially, not figuratively only, changed into the Body and Blood of o^ Lord.

After this, Item haeresis. Berengariana, jam ab antiquo saepissime
anathematifata, iterum, damnata est, and sententia Catholicae Fides contra
candem firmata, videlicet quod panis and vinum cum in Altari consecrantur, non
solum figurate, sed vere and essentialiter in Corpus and Sanguinem Domini
convertuntur. 1215.
some time passed in the Church without hearing any more of this business. But
the Albigenses undertaking it again about the twelfth Age, the fourth Council
of Lateran renewed the condemnation of it about the beginning of the
thirteenth. There was also to be seen one of the goodliest and most numerous
Assamblies of the Clergy, that ever had been, known. For it consisted of four
hundred and twelve Bishops Greek and Latin; of above eight hundred other
Prelates and Doctors from all parts of the Christian world, with the
Ambassadors of both the Emperors, and of all the Kings. There was solemnly
confirmed the Doctrine of the Real Presence, and the substantial change made in
the Holy Eucharist. And as in the great Council of Nice, they made use of the
word Consubstantiality, for expressing what the Word of God teaches concerning
the Divinity of the word Eternal: So in that of Lateran, they applied the word
Transubstantiation, for the expressing that admirable change, which the Church,
Transubstantiatis pane and vino in Corpus, etc. t. 4. Conc. Extrav. de sum.
Trin. (...) firmiter.
by a necessary sequel, has deduced out of the words of Christ himself.

11. Our Brethren of the Reformed Church, will here, peradventure, tell me,
that they do, by no means, acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the True
Church, as Berengarius did, and that they have no intention to follow him in
obeying her Decrees, as that Archdeacon did. I did foresee well enough that
this might be objected by them, to give me occasion to fall into Dispute. But
this snare is easily avoided, by telling them, that this is not our business
for the present. It is not now our question, whether the Church of Rome have
yet at this day all the Marks of the True Church: whether she be the Holy City
of God, or become a Babylon, being fallen into an horrid confusion and
corruption of Doctrine. They may, if they please, find wherewithal to satisfy
themselves in this Point, in those Doctors who have treated of Controversies,
and particularly in that great Work of the great Cardinal Richelieu who has
scarce omitted any thing which might be said upon this Subject. And,
consequently, I think it were not hard, by very good reasons and motives, to
show these Gentlemen, that they have done themselves no great right in
separating themselves from her. But this being a Point which may afford matter
of Dispute for all such as are in the humor to quarrel with any thing which is
not according their fancy: I have taken special care to avoid it, and to say
nothing of the Church of Rome. We speak here only of that Church, of which,
those, who first began the debate, were members, before she had determined any
thing on either side. Whether this Church were the Church of Rome, of not the
Church of Rome, concerns us not at all; so we be agreed in this, that it was
the True Church at that time. I have need of no more. I will have nothing at
present, but what Monsieur Claude pleases to afford me.

I will enter, with him, upon the ninth Age, when the True Church, after her
good days, which lasted eight hundred years, found her self, I know not how,
in a confusion of knowledge. After which, some there were, who montioned a Real
Presence; others opposed it, still remaining jointly together in the same
Church, before they separated by a refusal of obedience to her Decrees.
Hereupon the Dispute growing hotter and hotter, the Church gives Sentence. That
Church, I mean, whereof the two Parties contesting are members: which Church is
the True one, because the only one before separation made for the constituting
another Church apart; and which Church also has full power to end all
Differences, so as to oblige to a submission to her Decrees. Behold here what
is precisely required, for the concluding all I pretend to, which I shall now
endeavor to make out.

12. Let us then now come to reunite all the parts of this Discourse, that we
may make it up with the consent and agreement of Monsieur Claude. Behold here,
people who are of the same Church with us, which Church, even according to
himself, is the true Church there being but one in the world for them and us
too at such time as all, according to him, were yet in that confusion of
knowledge.

Some, as he tells us, think good to propose a Real Presence: Others oppose it;
and stand for an Absence. Here you have the Parties contesting.

When the Dispute grows hot and makes too much noise, a general Council is
held, which represents this Church, and which upon the emergency of concestors,
as we are agreed, has power to determine what is to be believed as matter of
Faith, even although there was a general ignorance of it before.

When the Decree is passed, those who are cast, and who before their
condemnation were of the same Church, must not say that she is unchurched, and
that it is they themselves who now make up the Church, under pain of being
held, not only Schismatics, but also very extravagant fantastical persons.
And those who follow them after this, and declare for them, at what time soever
it be, become fully as criminal as those who first separated themselves from
the Church in so unreasonable and so unjustifiable a manner.

This Assembly or Representative, having examined the proofs and reasons on
both sides, and consulted with the Holy Scriptures, which are the Rule of
Faith, has often declared, that the Rea Presence and a substantial Change are
to be believed; and has condemned as an Heresy, that opinion which stands for
Real Absence.

Of all that I have now said, I cannot imagine any one Point, which can be
called in question, as I have stated the business. And I think I have made it
appear by the very words and Principles of Monsieur Claude himself, that he is
bound to agree with me in every particular; since by following his own conduct,
we find our selves exactly and precisely in the state and condition of the
Synod of Dort. In the mean time those who first stood for a Real Absence,
against those who proposed a Real Presence, when they saw themselves condemned
by that Church of which they were, and which before their condemnation, was to
all intents and purposes, the real True Church, as we are agreed, undertake to
say, that she is not so, and that they only, who maintain what she condemns,
do constitute the True Church.

Now, according to the Principles a greed upon, I cannot discover how they can
avoid being held Schismatics. And, by unavoidable consequence, all those who
have taken part with them these five hundred years, must needs be subject to
the same censure. It being certain that they join with those, who separated
themselves from the True Church of Christ, for no other reason, but because
they found themselves condemned by her.

It is true that that Church which is acknowledged to have been at that time
the True Church, was indeed the Church of Rome or Roman Church. But what
follows from thence, according to the Principles agreed upon, but that we must
conclude for Her, all that has been said in behalf of the True Church, even by
the consent of our adversaries themselves. And that those who were of that
Church, before they withdrew themselves, upon that Judgment she gave against
them, could not in reason and suffice, say, that she did now cease to be the
True Church, and that she misunderstood the meaning of Holy Scripture* For she
being the True Church, as themselves grant, before this happened 'twas she that
was Judge thereof, according to the Decree of the Synod of Dort, and not they,
who (according to the same Synod) were bound to submit to her Judgment, and to
hold that for the true sense of Scripture, which she followed in her decisions.

All this is so clearly proved, without mixture of any proofs by way of
Disputation, that I think I shall do well to stop here, without pretending any
further, that I may peaceably draw those consequences which this great
Principle affords us.

CHAP. IV. The Consequences which naturally flow from this Principle, by a due
application thereof.
1. IN the second Chapter you may have seen, how the True Church when contests
do arise, has power to decide them according to the Word of God, and to propose
that unto Christians as matter of Faith, which, antecedently to such decision,
they were not obliged to believe, because it was not clearly and distinctly
known, but remained as yet involved in a general and confused knowledge.

In the third Chapter we did apply that uncontrollable Principle unto the
subject of the Holy Eucharist, and have clearly showed, that the Church of
which the first contestors then were, and which being the only Church, before
separation made by one of the Parties, was also the True Church, did decide
this matter, according to method and Rule, in favor of the Real Presence.

From these two Verities thus established, even without Dispute, and by-ways,
we were all the way agreed upon (taking along with us the thoughts of Monsieur
Claude, and allowing him whatsoever he was pleased to ask) it will not be hard
(in this Chapter) to to draw some consequences which offer themselves unto us,
and which it is impossible not to discover, how little soever we desire to
reflect upon what we have fairly and heartily acknowledged to be true.

2. For first, who does not see, that it is necessarily inferred from thence,
that although the Real Presence had not been believed before the tenth Age,
(which notwithstanding is a great mistake) yet we are now obliged to believe
it: Because the True Church of which the first Contesting Parties were members,
and before their being condemned, acknowledged her for such, has put an end to
the quarrel, giving Sentence for, and proposing as matter of Faith, the said
Real Presence.

Moreover that those first Abettors of a Real Absence, by refusing to submit to
her Judgment, became Schismatics; and that all those who declared afterward
for that Faction, are as faulty, and in the same crime with them. I do
absolutely believe, with the Author of The Perpetuity, etc. that, considering
some circumstances and certain matters of fact, which cannot be denied, it was
morally impossible that such an insensible change should have been made, by
passing imperceptibly from a belief, which is pretended to have been of a Real
Absence to that which we now have of a Real Presence. But in case such a change
was made, not by way of negation, but of Addition, passing, from an obscure
confused kind of knowledge, to a distinct positive Belief of the Real Presence,
proposed for the lucidation or clearing this great Mystery (in such manner as
Monsieur Claude is pleased subtily enough to imagine) yet the obligation of
believing it would still subsist and stand in force. Because the same Church,
of which the Parties, who were first in Dispute about this matter, were lawful
subjects, having heard and examined their Reasons, did judge, according to
Rule, that it was of Faith.

It is not therefore now lawful to follow those who revolted against their
Mother Church: for the same cause that Monsieur Claude will, without question,
freely grant, that it was not lawful in Conscience, to side and take part with
the Monothelites, who would by no means receive the Decree and decision of the
Church they lived in, touching two wills and operations in Christ. On the
contrary I am sure he does reteive and reverence that Doctrine as an
apputtenance of faith, although here was also a change in the same manner (by
way of Addition) in the belief of the Church; and that this distinction of
wills and operations was not, before, clearly and distinctly known.

Some body, perchance, may here tell me, that, for this very reason, the
Protestants of these days ought to stick to the decisions of their Church, in
matters contested between them and us, because they own her for the True Church.

But I think it is not at all hard to discover a great difference. For making
up to the head or source of the decision, we shall find those who first raised
the doubt, and brought these Points into debate, were of the same Church, which
was accordingly the True, because the only Church, and owned for such by both
Parties, before she declared her self upon the matter in dispute, which without
trouble, we are agreed upon with Monsieur Claude.

The case is not here so. Because we who are at Dispute with Protestants, are
not of the same Church with them, and so are not within the limits of thy
maxim, which has with mutual corsent, been established and received. Again,
they having taken part with those who at that time revolted from the True
Church, because they would not obey her Decrees made by Canonical Judgment; it
is manifest that their Community, is but a false and Schismatical Church
according to the Principles received from them in the Synod of Dort.

3. Secondly, the Church, before she gives Sentence upon any Point proposed
examining it by Scripture and real Tradition, and for the better understanding
them, searching into the Sentences of the Ancient Holy Fathers, endeavoring
thus to reascend unto the Apostles themselves; we are from hence to conclude,
that, she being inspired by the Holy Ghost, who has promised to teach her all
Truths, as occasions require, what she defines is always conformable both to
Scripture and Tradition.

Thus it is that we are to learn, by her definitions, what is the true meaning
or sense of Scripture, when there is place for doubting thereof.

Before the Council of Nice, there were most desperate Disputes concerning
certain passages of Scripture, which the followers of Arius alleged for the
upholding their upstart doctrine. As for example, about that in the fifth of
St. John, where our Blessed Savior says that his Father is greater than he:
Quia Pater major me est, Joh. 5.
from whence they inferred, that he was not of the same Substance. The others,
on the contrary, maintained, that this passage was to be understood, of the Son
of God considered according to Humane nature, which places him infinitely below
the Father, and makes him submit even to the death of the Cross; but not
according to his Divine nature, which renders him equal, and makes them both to
be of one and the same Substance. These two sense were hotly maintained by the
two Parries, each of them challenging the true sense or meaning of Scripture on
their side. But when the Council, having thoroughly examined this important
question, had defined the Consubstantiality of The Word, making use of a term,
which is not found in Holy Writ, for the clearer expressing that Truth which
she discovered there; then was there no more time nor place to doubt what was
the lawful sense thereof, and there arose an obligation (through this
definition) of believing that that was the true one, which was given by the
Divines who opposed the faction of the Arians.

The same is certainly to be said upon this occasion; especially our present
cause being upon much better termy, and more strongly provided for by the
evidence of the Texts alleged for it. When at first the poposition was made
concerning the Real Presence, in the time of Pascasius (as Mr. Claude pretends)
and presently opposition was made, as he is pleased to say (for at present we
will assume nothing but of his free gift) there happened a great Contest, which
grew yet much greater, after some time, concerning the true sense of those
words: This is my Body: One side maintaining, that they did express a Real
Presence; and the other pretending that they only signified, that that which
our Blessed Savior gave unto his Apostles, represented his Body. Both parties,
as we have often taken notice, were of the same Church, which they acknowledged
and owned to be the True Church. This Church having thoroughly examined the
business in her General Councils, defines a Real Presence, and substantial
change, even to the making use of the word Transubstantiation, which is not
literally found in the Gospel, for the expressing more clearly that verity
which she discovered therein, and for the efficacious obstructing any other
sense which might be given to those words, This is my Body. From that time
forward it was no longer lawful to doubt of the sense of them.

And by this definition, men stood obliged to believe, that they were to be
understood plainly and literally, not metaphorically. When there is really
place of doubt, it is not for particular persons, who are at strife, to
determine the sense of the Text in Dispute, but this belongs properly to the
Church, which is Judge in the case. For else there could never be any end of
Disputes, and God should not have furnished us with any certain means for the
finding out Truth, when doubts do arise concerning Holy Scripture, nor,
consequently, for the clearing those debates which may arise in matters of
Religion. Which certainly would be the same, as to say, that he had not
provided for the Government, quiet and peace of his Church. Non quia Canon
solus non sibi ad universa sufficiat: sed quia verba divina pro suo quique
arbitratu interpretantes, varias opiniones erroresque concipiant. Atque ideo
necesse fit ut ad unam Ecclesiastici sensus regulam, scriptueae caelestis
intelligentiae dirigatur. Common. 2. c. antep. Cap. Penul.
It is not (as Vincentius Lirientius says) that the Word of God does not
contain all the Verities which we believe, but because many presuming to
interpret the Holy Text according to their fancy, mishape their errors
accordingly. Thus it becomes necessary upon such occurences, to regulate the
sense we are to give to Holy Scripture, by that meaning which the holy Church
gives it. And from hence it was that he took occasion, some three years after
the Council of Ephesus, to enveigh so sharply against that desperate
presumption of wicked Nestorius, who had the impudence to maintain, that he
alone had the gift of Understanding those Texts of Scripture which he alleged
for the authorizing his impious blasphemies, and that the whole Church
represented in that Council, had erred grossly for want of understanding them.
Thus when Disputes arise, we ought not to judge of the Doctrine of the Church,
by that sense which our selves give of Holy Scripture, but we must judge of the
true sense of Holy Scripture, by the Doctrine of the Church.

The same, in proportion, is to be said of the passages of Holy Fathers. For it
being the custom and order of the Church to advise with them concerning the
Judgment she is to give; regularly speaking, we ought to understand them
according to her Doctrine, whenever these arises a controversy concerning the
meaning of their words, which do not always prove so very intelligible, even
to the Learneder sort of men. There is, notwithstanding, this difference, that
as no one of those Fathers in particular, is the Rule of her belief, so does
she not so abselutely determine by her Decrees, what is the meaning of such or
such a passage of theirs (leaving it many times to our discussion) as she does
that of holy Scripture, which she permits not to be called in question.

4. And from hence we draw a third Conclusion; that, when in any Province or
Kingdom, a difficulty does arise in matter of Religion, it is very uneffectual
and preposto us to undertake to compose it by way of Disputation or Conference.
Experience has often showed, that such proceedings serve only to increase the
Division and render it endless; provoking high spirits, and putting them upon a
pike of Honor, which permits them not to be much moved with any reasons of an
Adversary.

We must come quickly to that fixed and settled Point (I mean the Sovereign
undeclinable Judgment of the Church) in which there are two several times or
seasons which are, of necessity, to be distinguished: that which goes before,
and that which follows after.

In the first of these, writing on both sides, so it be without bitterness,
with a good intent and design to make Truth appear, is very lawful. And then
the Reasons alleged in such Writings, the Fathers who happen to be cited pro
and con, do make (as it were) Plaintiff and Defendant, Counsil and Plea in the
Court. They are the Bills and Answers. The Replies and Reparties are the
difficulties proposed on both sides. But what the Church definitively
pronounces, having taken cognizance of, and examined things according to the
Rules and proceedings of the Court, this becomes a Decree, this is Truth, this
is the fixed Point we must stick to and rely upon, whether the Fathers cited
did distinctly believe it or no.

In the second of these times or seasons, in case those whose doctrine stands
condemned, will not acquiesce and submit to Judgment, Princes and Magistrates,
who are as Protectors of the Canons and Definitions of the Church, have a duty
incumbent upon them, to procure and exact that obedience which is due, and to
endeavor the quieting and reducing such turbulent spirits by such means as
they shall judge most efficacious. And, in the mean time it shall be lawful for
the Learned to Write more vigourously against them, and to bring Scripture and
Fathers (as has been practiced by many knowing Controvertists) not by way of
discussing a matter which is yet within the bounds of incertitude; but to make
the weakness of Falsity appear, and to show the force of Truth, and the
conformity of the Judgment of the Church with the Doctrine of Antiquity.

For all other Persons, it is much more to their purpose, not to meddle with,
not hearken to any thing of this kind, but to satisfy themselves, saying: This
the Church has desined, this I ascept, this I will stick close unto. In my
opinion this is all which ought to be proposed to the Faithful, without making
them Judges of Controversies is Faith, and without giving them occasion to
enter into Dispute concerning this place of Scripture and that of Holy Fathers,
which for the most part, are things beyond their reach and capacity. Si quid
tibi videtur vel ambiguitate pendere, vel obscuritate obumbrari. Tertull. de
praesc. c. 14.
Curiosity does frequently come in for a part: and that serves only to beget
troubles and perplexities, when they are not able to penetrate to the secret
meaning or bo^tom o^ such passages; or to raise a p^esumption in them, when
they imagine they comprehend the matter: and so come to fancy themselves no mean
persons searching curiously into every thing, with a great deal of hazard and
danger to light at length upon something that may give them a check, and make
them begin to waver for want of understanding, Ignorare melius est* ne quod non
debeas noris. Ibid.
together with an excess of rashness and boldness. It is much better (says
Tertullian) to be ignorant in that kind, lest by some gross mistake or
ill-understanding you come at length unfortunately to know what you had better
been ignorant of. Fides tua, inquit, te salvum fecit, non exercitatio
Scripturarum. Fides in regula posita est, exercitatio autem in curiositate
consistit, habens gloriam solam de peritiae studio. Cedat curiositas Fidei,
cedat gloria saluti.
It Is Faith a Christian is to be saved by, not by discussing Texts of Scripture
and passages of Holy Fathers. For the having faith, it suffices to stick to The
Rule, learning the true sense of Scripture from the Doctrine of the Church. But
the Spirit of arguing and disculling, which I here point at, comes very
ordinarily from an excess of curiosity, and is only subservient to vanity,
for the gaining a little glory, by making a vain ostentation of the knowledge
one has got by his own industry and study. It Is but reason that Curiosity
should give place to Faith; and and vainglory to serious thoughts and care of
our Salvation. To this end it is necessary we stick close to that Rule, to that
settled Principle, which is the true Science of a Christian, I mean, we ought to
learn of the Church what the Word of God teaches us, and what is the meaning
thereof. Non obstrepant adversus regulam, nihil ultra scire, omnia scire est.
Let no m^^ oppose this rare Maxim. To know nothing more then this, is, in
reality, to know all things.

5. From what has been now said, we may yet draw a fourth Sequel: That this
general Rule and universal Prindple received and allowed of by all, (...) such
manner as it has been propounded may and ought to be applied to every
particular Point controverted, that we may come to have a ready and certain
solution thereof. For those who first opposed the Doctrine we now make
profession of, in any Article debated, either were at that time of the fame
Church with those whom they opposed* which Church they owned for the True
Church, there being as yet no separation made; or they were already dismissed
from her. If they were of the same, it is but seeing what that Church, by her
Representative, has declated concerning the matter in debate. For we are agred
that they were obliged to submit to her Judgment; so far as that, in case of
contempt, it could not be lawful to take part with them, without falling, after
their example, into open and direct Schism. But if they were already divorced
from her, upon any other ground, or for any other precedent cause, it is
evident from the same reason, that they were, upon the whole matter, already
true Schismatics, because, either they themselves, or their Predecessors
having formerly been of that Church, they ought not, after legal Sentence
given, to have made a Separation; and consequently, that it is not lawful at
this day to join with them, without becoming accomplices with them, and guilty of
their revolt.

This is that we call a true, solid and general Prescription against all those
who contend with us. Behold here an end of the war, a conclusion of all
Disputes the bond of peace, the union of hearts and understandings, the certain
Rule, the immovable Point, the unquestionable Principle, and sole abridgement
of all Controversies. What we are to believe concerning the Invocation of
Saints, the veneration of holy Images, of the number of Sacraments, of
Purgatory, of Grace, of Free Will, and of Justification. Let us not now renew
those old quarrels, which have set the Christian World at odds, concerning
these points. Let us not again fall a questioning and discussing all those
Texts and passages which have been a thousand times mentioned, a thousand times
brought on one side, and as often returned on the other in a quite contrary
sense. Let us not engage our selves in those quarrels, where the victory never
appears certain, because such Champions are always in a readiness to charge
the enemy afresh, being never out of breath, and resolved never to quit the
field, nor lay down their arms.

Behold what will set us all right and bring us to an agreement in a moment,
putting a period to all our troubles even before they begin.

Let us see what that Church, which was common Mother and commander of both
Parties, when the war first began, has resolved in each of these particulars.
Here you shall be able to discover wherein true Faith consists. Because the
True Church, which in all men's opinions, has power (when the question is moved)
to declare what is to be believed, has judged thus and thus according to those
Rules, which (she never failing to apply them in due manner and just
proportion) can never be deficient. He, whosoever he was, who refused obedience
to that Decree, became ipso facto a Schismatic. And it is no less evident,
that all who join with him are in the same Predicament. This is that one
Fundamental and allresolving Point, which alone can end the quarrel: and that
in the most peaceable manner imaginable, without being obliged to enter into
further debate or discussion of the matter.

And this is the reason, why, speaking all this while of a True Church, (which
certainly is somewhere or other, as all the world acknowledges) I have
purposely omitted to say any thing of the Church of Rome or of the Authority of
the Pope, or of his quality or prerogatives as Head thereof. For, infallibly I
should have met with some rub or other, this being a Point highly contested
between us: whereas, for my part, I was resolved to enter into no quarrel, but
to be at perfect agreement, and go on my way hand in hand with those of the
Protestant Church. For, I conceive, we have nothing else to do but to apply
this our Rule and agreed upon Principle unto the present matter, and to allow
unto St. Peter and his Successors that which the Gospel gives him, as it is
understood by that Church, of which we all were, when Disputes first arose
concerning that subject, and according to what that Church has set forth in
those great and holy Assemblies of the first Ecumenical Councils, which are,
and ought to be reverenced and respected by all who call themselves Christians.

I ask but this, which I think cannot be denied me, and this alone is an
assured means to bring us speedily to an agreement, and to cause a cessation of
that lamentable division which is amongst us, and is so unfortunate to the
Church; so pernicious to the public good; so injurious to the peace and quiet
of the People, and so fatally prejudicial to the safety and Salvation of so
many Persons.

Wherefore (for a conclusion) I humbly, and with my whole heart and foul
beseech our Brethren of the Reformed Church, in the fight and presence of God,
to lay aside that inveterate prejudice they have against us, (...)
which obstructs their peaceable treating with us, as if we were people who
refused the Word of God for the Rule of our Faith and actions.

I beseech you, Gentlemen, do not eternally use that language to us: Templum
Domini, Templum Domini. Jer. 7.
The Temple of the Lord the pure Word of God, the pure Word of God without any
mixture of humane inventions and Traditions. This was, and is, at this day, the
custom and practice of the Ariant; the Sabellians, the Nestorians, the
M^nothelites; the Anabaptists the Socinians, the Independents and Quakers,
whose language this ever was, and to this hour, is; and yet I do not find, you
have any great correspondence with, or kindness for that gang of people, whom,
we suppose, you have as great dislike of as we our selves. Have you not taken
notice, that the Enemy of Mankind himself, when 'twas to his purpose, made use
of Scripture? That father of lies said it as boldly, as some of his children
afterward, that the true sense of the Word of God made for him. It Is a
Reflection of Vincentius Lirinensis, who was much esteemed in the fifth Age of
the Church, and is highly extolled even by the Magdebargian Centuriatores
themselves. Cent. 5. c. 10.
That wicked fiend (says he) that teaches and Master of Heretics would needs
persuade the Son of God, that, if he was the true Messiah, he must cast himself
down from the Pinnacle of the Temple to make himself known to the world. There
is nothing more false. And yet, for proof, he produced that passage of the 90
Psalm, Psalm. 90. v. 11, 22. Sicut tunc. caput capiti, ita nune membra membris
l^quuatur, membra scilicet Diaboli membris Christi, perfidi fidelibus,
sacrilegi religiosis, Haeretici postremo Catholicis. Common. ^. c. 37.
where it is said, He has given his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee
in all thy ways. In their hands they shall bear thee; lest perhaps thou knock
thy foot against a stone. What the Chief of Heretics said at that time to the
Chief of Christians, the same do the members of that wicked one say at this
time to the members of Jesus Christ, the Infidels to the Faithful, Heretics to
Catholics, ever alleging Scripture for themselves. The question therefore is
not; whether the Word of God be that Rule which we are bound to follow. There
is not, not ever was any Heretic upon the face of the earth, who did not
affirm this as stoutly and resolutely as any Catholic can do. As the debate
never arose about this, so shall the decision of this Point never end the
quarrel, nor bring peace among us. There is no body questions it: neither you
nor we doubt the least of it. And yet the feud for all that still increases.
That then which is of true importance or concern, is, to know, whether that
which we call the Word of God be really so, or no: and whether the
interpretation which I give or that which you give for the holding or
renouncing an Article, be the true one. The first of these you can no more know
or be secured of then we, Aug. cont. Ep. Man. qu. voc. fund.
unless by means of the Church, to whom it is derived by certain Tradition.
Learn the second then by the same way, since there is no other, by which you
can come to any light thereof. This is what Vincentius Lirinensir shows in that
excellent Work of his.

All is not done when we have got the Rule, it must also be rightly applied and
according to art. For, when in the heat of those earnest and tedious contests,
which do arise about some subject or other, every one will confidently affirm
that he applies it right and that it is in his sense that Scripture is to be
understood, who can end the quarrel, or who has so much power and authority
with the parties, as that his Opinion or judgment shall be regarded and bear
the sway with them? Is it not absolutely necessary that it be some Judge, who
has received both authority and light from God himself for the performing this
office? And who can be that Judge but the True Church, in which the Parties
were before separation, and her lawful Representative a Canonical Assembly,
which alone has full power and Sovereign Authority to say ^uridically: It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us? Visum est Spiritui sancto, and nobis.
Act. 15.
Whatever else you can allege, may as well be alleged by another, who may
make his advantage of it in as good measure and proportion as your self can
possibly do. The gift of Understanding, the interior Unction, the revelation
of the Father, the private Spirit, and a hundred other pretty inventions, which
have been, and are at this day made use of, contain nothing of regular, general
or certain in them, or which an adversary may not affirm he has as much right
to challenge as you. Who then is able to free us from uncertainties, in such
encounters as these? who can restore us a calm after such a Tempest? who will
bring back day to us after so dark a night? who will bless us with peace after
war? who can bring such spirits together again into the same Sheepfold under
one and the same Shepherd? Can this be done but by the Church of Jesus Christ?
That Church which is The pillar and ground of 1 Timothy 3.1.
Truth. That House of God, which is built upon a living Rock, Mat. 16.18.
and when all the powers of Hell shall never shake, which most certainly they
had done before this, had she once erred in defining matters of Faith. Finally
that Spouse of Jesus Christ which he has endowed and quickened with his own
Spirit for the instruction and education of the Children of his Family.

7. I know you will approve of this. Nay I know it is to her you pretend to
resort and make your addresses in your Assemblies or Synods for the clearing
your doubts, and determining matters of difficulty and differences which often
arise among you. I ask but this one thing at your hands. Do but proceed
faithfully and sincerely therein. Omnes nos necesse est apud Christi tribunal
adstare, redentes rationem, imprimis ipfius Fidei. Tertull. de praescr. c. 44.
And to this end, I beg of you in the Name of that Great God whom we adore, and
who is to be our Judge, demanding of us principally an account of our Faith,
that returning back to the source of our divisions, you will be pleased to
reflect, that those who first questioned and disputed the Points which made the
breach, were, even in their own judgments, of the same Church, which before
the breach, was the only, and by necessary consequence, the True Church: That,
consequently, that Church, during the contest, had full power to judge
according to Rule and Order, and to define what was to be believed, and that
the Parties were bound to submit to her Decrees: That those who stood condemned
by her Canons, having separated themselves from her, became Schismatics, as
well as Heretics. Because not adhering to the Doctrine of the True Church, of
which they were members before their condemnation, they made a Party against
her, and withdrew themselves into a society apart, which was cut off from
Communion with her. And that finally all those who follow or take part with
them, though a thousand years after, are no other then disciples and followers
of Schismatics and Heretics.

This is the Total of what in this linde Treatise (principally in the matter
of the Blessed Sacrament) I have endeavored to evince (without con^^ing or
Disputing the matter) out of such Principles, or the necessary consequences
drawn from them, as we have been perfectly agreed upon.

8. Now I beseech you, Gentlemen, give me leave to tell you with as real a
desire of your eternal Salvation, as the Prophet Nathan had for that of David,
when he spoke those moving words to him, which pearc'd his heart: Tu es ille
vir. Alas! Gentlemen, it is you who unfortunately are engaged in the party of
those first rebels, who forsook the Church, to revenge themselves of those
Decrees which condemned their Opinions. As the Laws both Humane and Divine,
right reason, natural understanding, and the order and method which your selves
do observe, oblige you to acknowledge, that they were bound to submit to the
Judgment of that Church which themselves owned to be the True one, and that
they could not separate from her, but by evident Schism: so is it certain,
that you (after so many ages which have passed since their Condemnation) cannot
join with them, following their Doctrine and proceedings, without bearing a
part with them in their crime, and becoming guilty of their defection. Rather
quit their company, wihose origin your selves condemn. Return into the bosom of
that Church, from which you find the first Authors of that Sect could not, in
Conscience and natural equity, withdraw themselves, as they did, upon that
score only, that the Decree was not in favor of their cause. Do not any
longer trouble your selves, as they do, with Disputing, pleading, and
excepting, after Sentence is once passed. Allow me to speak unto you in the
language of that worthy Martyr of Christ, and great Bishop of Lions, St.
Irenaeus: Why do you, Non op^rte^ adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem quam
facile est a^ Ecclesia sumere, cum Apostoli quasi in depositorium dives
plenissime in eam contulerint omnia quae sunt veritatis, ut omni^ quicunque
velit sumat ex ea potum vitae. Haec est enim vitae introitus, omnes autem
reliqui fures sunt and latrones, propter quod oportet devit^^ quidem ilios:
quae aut^m sunt Ecclesiae tum summa diligentia deligere, and apprehendere
vertatis t^^^tionem. ^ren. lib. 3. adv. haer. c. 4 C^ucirc;m^^sta quae^in
flu(...) and var^^^ haberet i^ter se collega um, sal^a un^ta (...) hoc per
universam Catholicam observari placuit quod tenemus. (...) con. Crescon. c. 32.
Scripturarum etiam a nobis tene^^ veritas, cum hoc facimus, quod universae
placuit. Ecclesie, quam ipsarum Scripturatum commendat auctoritas. Ib. c. 33
with such pains, seek for Truth elsewhere, since it is so very easy to find
it in the Church? for the Apostles having received it from Christ himself, have
placed it there in trust, as in a rich Treasury, or in a great and stately
Vessel, to the end that all those who thirst after that living water, may draw
it from thence. For it is she which gives entry to life. Those who first
separated themselves from her are but thieves and robbers, who are by all means
to be avoided, that we may join closely and solely with what comes from her,
and learn from her the Tradition of Truth.

To conclude, That we may all be of one Soul, and one heart, being all of one
and the same judgment in the unity of true Faith let us end all Disputes by
the Authority of the Church, as many great Prelates have done, who were before
of different opinions concerning the Baptism of Heretics, always
notwithstanding, providing for unity, as St. Augustine witnesses. And without
entering into further Disputes concerning Texts of Holy Scripture, to which
every one is apt to give their own meaning, let us hold it (as a thing
unquestionable) with that great Saint; that we always act according to
Scripture, when we do what the Church ordains, and submit to what she defines,
she being fully authorized to that purpose by Scripture it self. Ut quoniam
sancta Scriptura fallere non potest quisquis falli metuit huj^^ obscuritate
quaestionis, eandem Ecclesia^ de illa consulat, quam sine ulla ambiguitate
Sancta Scriptura demonstrat. To the end that, as the Holy Scripture cannot
deceive us, if any, through the obscurity of the question in agitation, fears
to be deceived, he may take advice and counfil therein of that very Church
which the Scripture it self, in clear terms, recommends unto us.

Et ego dico tibi, quia tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
mean, and portae Inferi non prevalebunt adversus eam. Matthew. 16. And I say to
thee, that them are Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall (...) prevail against it. Matt. 16. v. 18.
An Extract of the National Synod held at Alez 1620.
Whereas it was proposed unto the Synod, as necessary to deliberate upon some
efficacious means for hindering the Errors of the Arminians, which had caused
so much trouble in the Low Countries, from getting entrance also into this
Kingdom: The Congregation having admitted of the said Proposal as laudable,
just and necessary for the peace of the Church. for preserving purity of
Doctrine, and for a streighter union with all other the Reformed Churches has
thought good, that as the distemper of the Churches of the Low Countries puts
us in mind of looking to our selves, so we ought to follow their example, and
prevent the mischief by the same means by which they have expelled it.

Wherefore seeing that the National Synod of Dart convened by the Anthority,
wise counfil, and vigilance of the most Illustrious Lords States General of all
the Provinces under their command, at which were present many great Divines of
the other Reformed Churches, has been to the said Low Countries, and is found
to be at this hour a most effectual remedy for the purging the said Church, and
rooting out Heresies in the Point of Predestination, and other Points thereon
depending; This Congregation, after having invoked the Name of God, resolved,
That the Canons of the said Council of Dort should be read in full and open
Synod; and recital thereof having been made accordingly, and every particular
Article seriously and attentively weighed and pondered, they were by consent
received and approved of as conformable to the Word of God, and to the
Confession of Faith of our Churches, designed and contrived with a great deal
of prudence and purity; most proper for discovering and convincing the Errors
of the Arminians. For which reason all the Ministers and Elders deputed for
this Assembly have sworn and protested, every one for himself, that they do
approve of and agree unto the said Doctrine, and that they will maintain it to
the utmost of their powers, so long as they have breath in their bodies. The
form and tenor of which said Oath, together with the names of the Deputies
underwritten shall be annexed to the said Canons and Oath. And for the rendering
the said Agreement more authentic, and of greater authority to the obliging
all the Provinces thereby; it is ordered by the said Congregation, that this
present Article shall be printed and added to the Canons of the said Council,
and that it shall be read in all Provincial Synods, and Universities, there to
be allowed, sworn unto and signed by the Pastors, Elders, and Professors of the
Universities; as also by all those who pretend to be received into the holy
Ministry, and Profession in Universities. But if any one shall, either in
whole or in part, reject the Doctrine contained in, and decreed by the Canons
of the said Council, or shall refuse to make oath of his consent and
approbation, it is resolved and ordained by the said Congregation, that such
Rejecter or Refuser shall not be admitted to any charge or employment
Ecclesiastical or Scholastical whatsoever.

The Form of the Oath.
I A. B. do swear and protest in the sight of God and this Holy Assembly, that
I do receive, approve of, and embrace all the Doctrine taught and agreed upon
in the National Synod of Dort, as entirely conformable with the Word of God,
and that Confession of faith which is professed in our Churches. I do moreover
swear and promise to presevere, during life, in the profession of the said
Doctrine, and to maintain it to the utmost of my power: and that neither in
Pulpit nor in Schools, nor, in Writing, I will depart from that Rule. I do also
declare and protest, that I do reject and condemn the doctrine of the
Arminians, as making the Election of God to depend upon the will of Man,
extenuating and annihilating the Grace of God, elevating man, and the force of
his Freewill for the more dangerous precipitating of him; bringing in
Pelagianisme again, disguising Popery, and overthrowing all certainty of
Salvation. So help me God, and be merciful to me, as I swear all as above
without any equivocation or mental reservation.

An Appendix of the Translatour.
IT is scarce to be hoped, especially as the world now goes, that this little
Treatise, though written in as peaceable and civil a Method (according to the
Authors promise and design) as ever, I think, any thing of this nature has been
published, will pass without censure and exceptions. Some perchance will wonder
what a French Writer; what Monsieur Arnand and Monsieur Clande do upon our
stage. But I hope they may be persuaded, that it is not the first time a French
man has spoke good fence, though in bad English. As we willingly receive
Merchandise, which is for our turn, from any place, so need we not be ashamed
to admit of Reason from any part. The Reformed Churches of France, which ours
here have, upon occasion, acknowledged a very tender respect and kindness for,
do own Monsieur Claud^ to be their great and Learned Champion; and it must be
granted. I think, by all, that Monsieur Arnaud has in this late famous Contest,
behaved himself as a valiant and skilful Soldier of the Catholic Church. The
subject of Dispute between them is of common concern. And, perchance the
settling of that one Point, upon such grounds as my Author, in a moderate
peaceable way endeavors to lay down, may prove final to all other debates
whatsoever.

I foresee that his Instance for agreement upon Principles taken, in part, from
the Council of Dort, will not be allowed by all as sterling. It Is possible
there may be some left who retain a greater kindness for both the Person and
Principles of Arminius, than for Gomarus and his Predestiparians. It Is pity
Countries and Climates should have an influence upon Reason and Principles of
Religion, as they have upon Complexions and Constitutions. Now certain it is
that generally among the Reformed of France, for whom this Author chiefly
designed his Work, the Council of Dort, and the Transactions and Decrees
thereof (as you may plainy discover by the annexed Extract of the Synod of Alez
and others) have been, and, to this hour, are in great esteem. And it may be
supposed, both by the unanimous Votes of the select Divines of all the Reformed
Churches then in being: and by the solid and impregnable grounds of their
proceedings, that there is a great deal of reason for their so doing: such as
(setting aside passion and preingagement) cannot be parllel'd by any of the
diffenters.

But as I must confess my self a friend of my Authors Method, particularly in
assuming nothing but what his Adversary seems to grant, so will I not make it
my business to apologia: for that Council, which to some may seem to lie open
to exceptions. It shall be sufficient for me, to give a hint at what has past
within our own Dominions, much of the same nature; and to give occasion to
those who make any question of it, to search into the several Parliamentary and
Synodical proceedings of our own Reformed Church in late days; that is in
Queen Elizabeth's, King James's, and King Charles his time; when the 39.
Articles, and some other Points belonging to Religion, have been advanced with
as great a claim of Legislative Power and Definitive Authority, as any Council,
either of the Catholic or Reformed Church ever challenged to themselves. See
if you please, the very Title of the 39. Articles: That these Articles were
drawn up for the avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for the establishing
consent touching true Religion, requiring all the Subjects of this Church to
continue in uniform profession thereof, and prohibiting the least difference
from the said Articles. And again, ^an. 5. in 1603. Whosoever shall hereafter
affirm, that any of the 39. Articles agreed upon by the whole Clergy in the
Conv^cation held 1562. for the avoiding diversity of Opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion, are in any part erroneons, or
such as he may not with a good Conscience subscribe unto, let him be
Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but after his repentance and
public revocation of such his wicked error. And now I am apt to believe that
those Learned men who could not choose but understand very well of what weight
an Excommunication is, were in very good earnest; and that the transgression,
which they, by the threat of so severe a penalty, endeavored to prevent, was
esteemed by them no mean enormity.

The same seems to be the sense of the whole Parliament, 13 Eliz. 12. That
every one thath an Ecclesiastical living declare his assent and subscribe to
the 39. Articles of Religion, etc. And that no person be admitted to any
Benefice with Cure, except he shall first have subscribed the same Articles
with declaration of his unfeigned assent to the same. And now, though this
Injunction seems immediately to reach the Clergy only, yet it being
particularly contrived for those who are to be admitted to Benefices with Cure;
that is, to the charge of Instructing others, the Parliament does in this
sufficiently declare, what Principles they are obliged to be of: and,
consequently, what Doctrine they are bound to teach, and what others ought to
learn.

The Statute of 1 Eliz. 1. is yet more comprehensive, as intended for the
regulating all in general. By this Statute it is Enacted that no manner of
Order, Act or Determination for any matter of Religion or cause Ecclesiastical,
had or made by the Authority of this present Parliament, shall be accepted,
deemed, interpreted, or adjudged at any time hereafter to be any Hersie,
Schism, or Schismatical Opinion: any. Order, Decree, Sentence, Constitution or
Law whatsoever the same be to the contrary notwithstanding. And then limiting
the power of Ordinaries in things of this nature, tells us: That they shall not
in any wise have Authority or Power to Order, Determine or adjudge any matter
or cause to be Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been determined,
ordered or adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures,
or by the first four General Councils, or any of them, or by any other General
Council, wherein the same was declared Heresy by the express and plain words
of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be Ordered,
Judged, or determined to be Heresy by the High^ Court of Parliament of this
Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.

It is to be presumed that this High Court of Parliament was very well informed
that there had been more Heresies than one in times past; and that they thought
it very necessary to appoint some effectual means for the suppressing others
which might arise. Those means thus deliberately appointed by the Legislative
Power of the Nation are deservedly to be reflected unon.

First, The Canonical Scripture^. And here, by the way, let me entreat you to
call to mind the Discourse concerning this Point, which I suppose you have
already perused in the second Chapter, Sect. 11. etc. of this small Treatise;
then which, I must needs think, nothing can be more rational, in order to the
convincing a necessity of a further Determinative Power, either for the
clearing the Scriptures themselves to be truly Canonical; or for making out the
true fence and meaning of them, so as to render them truly and effectually
useful.

Secondly, as to the respect and Authority allowed here by Act of Parliament to
the four first General Councils, it were to be wished that some good solid
Reason might be made appear, why those other subsequent Councils, which had the
same Promise of special assistance from him who was and is able to make his
Word good, may not be supposed to have proceeded according to the same Rule of
those former, defining and declaring according to the express and plain words
of the Canonical Scriptures: and who it is (by the express and plain words of
the said Canonical Scriptures) who has received Commission to Judge of the Case.

But lastly, (which is chiefly to my present purpose) does not here an High
Court of Parliament (the Legislative obliging Power of the Nation, with the
assent of the Clergy in their Convocation) assert and assume unto themselves as
absolute an Authority of Determining matters of Faith, and declaring Heresies,
etc. as was ever yet challenged by any Body-Politick or Ecclesiastical.

Many other proceedings of Parliaments, Canons and Constitutions of Synocts
might be alleged, were not the matter of fact so obvious and well known to
every one, that it acquits me of that labor. And now if all this, to a common
English man's understanding, does not speak a claim of an Authority obliging all
to submission and conformity, I think we are very much to seek for expressions.
And certainly, supposing what was supposed, there could be nothing more
rational or conformable to those first Councils we all so much receive; as also
to the manifest letter of, or evident deductions from Holy Writ it self. Mat.
1^.17.
If he shall not hear the Church, let him be accounted as a Heathen or
Publican. And why? Because it is in Christianity to be supposed that there is a
Church, and that this Church (the true Spouse of Jesus Christ) is the Pillar
and Foundation of Truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.


This then being granted (and I think he must be very bold, who dares reject
the Authority of so many eminent Persons, or contemn their public proceedings)
I persuade my self, I need not be very solicitous for Instances drawn from the
Council of Dort. Certainly we have as special and as remarkable ones nearer
home for the making good an Agreement upon this great Maxithe: That there is in
the Church of Christ (wherever that is) a Sovereign Authority obliging
Christians in matters of Faith to submission and conformity.

The Consequence has been the chief endeavor of this small Tract; And I hope
it will be seriously reflected upon, how necessarily (not to say unavoidably)
the Premises usher it in.

But because I see there are some (for what reasons and foreseen consequences;
I will not pass my conjecture) who have endeavored to find out new Glosses,
not only for the Scriptures, but also for Acts and Statutes of Parliaments;
Canons and Constitutions of Councils (even with seeming violence to the Laws
of the Nation and the Decrees of their own Mother Church) telling us, that
nothing is meant or intended by the said Acts and Decrees, etc. but only an
obligation to exterior Conformity and Non contradiction. I will still adhere
to my Authors peceable Method, hoping they will take me for one who desires to
deal civilly, If I require no more, at present, for the making good what this
Author pretends to. For I am very much inclined to believe, that this kind of
Conformity or Non contradiction, supposed obligatory, and practiced in due time
and place (when differences first appeared) would have left a much more easy
way for composing and reducing unsettled and unquiet spirits; and would have
brought them by little and little, into so pleasant a path, as would have led
them, in a short time, into the high way of happy peace and union. For, were
the liberty of that voluble member, Jac. 3.8.
that Inquietum malum of the tongue (so apt, either out of vanity or
presumption, to break out into expressions of our interior sentiments)
effectually restreyned, it were much to be hoped those troubled and troublesome
fancies which insect the understanding, would, by little and little, sink or
fall down, so, as to leave it to its natural clearness, fitted of it self to
receive better impressions either from Reason or just Authority. Not that I
think any rational man, unless much put to his shifts, can in earnest, maintain
this Negative kind of compliance to be sufficient for attaining the end
pretended to, which, I suppose, is an exterior, at least, Conformity or
Uniformity, for the avoiding division and confusion. For never was it yet heard
of, nor can it possibly be expected, that the Index or Hand of a Watch or
Clock, should show the right hour, for any considerable time, much less
constantly, unless the inward work or wheels be in good order. Would to God
there were not so sad experience of this (practically certain) Truth.

Those Divisions, Sub-divisions, and Subsub-divisions breaking into visible
Confusions, which certainly cannot be imagined the lawful Issue of true
Christian Principles, do, to the eye, demonstrate that there is something
wanting; that this is not the way intended by him who came to bring Peace to
the World, and who promised his constant Presence for the maintaining of it to
the worlds end, not by a visible appearance, but invisible assistance of that
Church which he commands all to hearken unto and obey, under so severe a
penalty, as being accounted (upon default) Heathens and Publicans.

To conclude, let me be so bold, as to desire these Gentlemen, who go so far,
at least, as to think this Exterior Conformity or Non-contradiction obliging
and necessary, to take the pains to reflect soberly, whether this which they
do, and must grant, does not oblige them to make one step further, and upon the
same grounds (either of authority, whether Humane or Divine, or principles of
reason; or for the necessary avoiding experienced inconveniences) to allow an
obedience and assent of an higher nature. The Authorities of Scriptures and
Fathers are alleged as plausibly for it. The reasons, taken, either from the
experienced insufficiency of the one Cause; or the just and exact proportion of
the other, to the so much desired effect of peace and unity, are demonstrable.
As the inconveniences and continual disturbances of the one Part are but too
too visible; so the settled quiet and comfort of Spirit, which the other
constantly enjoyes, are experimentally best known to those, who upon the first
appearance of difficulties and debates, fly to the bosom, and rely upon the
Judgment and Determination of the Church, owned by all who call themselves
Christians, to have some degree of Power and Authority, and the extent thereof
not to be regulated or confined (she being the Sovereign and Supreme Court of
this nature) but by her own declaration only. Demonstrably not to be judged or
regulated, in case of debate, by particular Parties, who (for the avoiding
otherwise unavoidable confusion) are themselves by her to be regulated and
judged.

Now which Church this must needs be, is not hard to discover out of the
foregoing Discourse, wherein Differences and Debates are brought to their first
rise, when the Parties dissenting were both, ownedly, members and subjects of
the same Church, and which Church, by legal Consequence, was their lawful
Judge, as being then the only, and, by a necessary Sequel, the True Church,
and that firm Rock, against which, the Promise of God himself is upon Record,
that the Gates of Hell should never prevail.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge ^. Line 15 read Defeats. p. 8 in the margin r. inferri. p. 13 l. 16 for
there r. three. p. 33 l 7 in the marg. add sed p. 35 l. 12 dele which. p. 50 l.
8 r to the Word p. 70 l. 27 in the marg. r ^liter. p. 7 l. 28 r sin. p. 89 l.
10 r of the Word. p. 91 l 27 r Eeuthericus. p. 103 l. 1 r into. p. 06 l. 9 r
Representative. p. 114 l. 11 r to their fancy p. 116 l. 11 r Contests. p. 121
l. 7 for by-ways r by ways. 122 l. 23 r clucidation. p. 124 3 for decision r
devision Ibid. l. 7 for accordingly r avowedly. p. 125 l. 3 for Sentences r
Sentiments. p. 128 l. 23 r Licinensis. p. 1^0 l. 18 r preposterous. p. 144 l. 2
for when r which.


