A MOST Learned and Eloquent SPEECH, Spoken and Delivered in the HOUSE OF
COMMONS, AT WESTMINSTER, By a most LEARNED LAWYER, the 23th June, 1647.
Mr. Speaker,
I Know no man weaker than my self; who do acknowledge I am as unfitting to
speak in this Honorable House, as Phormio the Philosopher was, to prattle an
Oration of War-Discipline to the great Soldier Hanibal, in the presence of
King M. (...) Yet out of the debility of my Knowledge, the inability of my
Learning, the imbecility of my Judgment, the nobility of this
Transcript-Senate, the mutability of their Censures, the instability of
Opinions, the timorosity of Offending, the volubility of Scandal, and the
impotency of my Utterance, I have, maugre all these perilous Impediments,
adventured to unbosom and disburden my mind before these unmatchable Patriots.

Mr. Speaker, I am not ignorant that you are appointed in the Parliament, to be
Ear of the King, and Mouth of the Commons; And I desire that your hearing may
not take offense at my words, nor your tongue retort me a reproof instead of an
applause. Mr. Speaker, In my Introduction to Grammar, vulgarly called,
Accidence, I found Eight Parts of Speech, which is now an Introduction to me to
divide my Speech into Eight Parts:

Viz. 1. What we have done for Religion. 2. What for the Church. 3. What for
the King. 4. What for the Laws. 5. What for the Kingdom. 6. What for the
Subject. 7. What for Reformation. 8. What we have done for our selves.


Of all these in order, as my infirm loquacity can demonstrate. Mr. Speaker, I
do not herein declare, either of neither, the Opinions of this Honorable
Assembly or my own; but I will make plain unto you, how the Malignants esteem
us, and into what Odium we are fallen among Foreign Nations.

First, For Religion, the Malignants say; We have thrust out one and taken in
two; that we have thrown down Protestantism, and erected Anabaptism, and
Brownism; and that in our Doctrine we abuse the Renowned Memories of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and consequently King Charles; that in their Religions
they were Papistically minded, which their Lives and Acts, did and do manifest
the contrary. And the Malignants say, it is no less than odious Treason, either
of these deceased or surviving Princes, to traduce with such false and
scandalous aspersions.

Mr. Speaker, I would not be mistaken, I say not my own words, but I say what
the Malignants say of us, and my Lord Say; And they the Protestant and
Protestant Church, was wont to be, and ought to be an inward robe and vesture
for the Soul and Conscience of all true Believers; And that the Bishops,
Ancient Fathers, and all Orthodox Divines have, and had a care to keep her neat
and hansom, in as spotless integrity, as a Militant Church in this imperfect
Age could keep it.

But our Adversaries, they say, That we have in our Religion an outward
Garment, or Cloak of any color, which none do wear amongst us but Sectaries,
Fools, Knaves, and Rebels; the said Cloak, being with often turning worn as
threadbare as our Public Faith is, full of wrinckles, spots, and stains,
neither brushed, spunged, nor made clean, with as many patches as Beggars
Coats, and that our preaching or prattling, as they also say, it is kept by
Cobblers, Tinkers, Weavers, Wyer-Drawers, and Hostlers; so that all order and
decent comeliness is thrust out of the Church; all laudable Ornaments (and
indifferent beseeming Ceremonies) are cried down, trod down and banished, under
the false and scandalous terms of Popery, and in the place thereof is most
nasty, filthy, loathsome and slovenly beastliness or Doctrine, being vented in
long and tedious Sermons, to move and stir up the People to Rebellion and
Traiterous Contributions; to exhort them to Murder, Rapine, Robbery,
Disloyalty, and all manner of mischief that may be, to the confusion of their
Souls and Bodies: All these damnable Villainies, our Adversaries say, are the
accursed Fruits which our new-moulded Linsy-Woolsey Religion has produced; for
they say, our Doctrine is neither derived from the Old or New Testament, that
all the Fathers and Testant Doctors and Martyrs, never heard of it, that Christ
and his Apostles never knew it. And for the Book of Common Prayer, they say in
Verse of that,

Ten thousand such as we can never devise,
A Book so good, as that which we despise,
The Common Prayer they mean, if we should sit,
Ten thousand years, with all our brains and wit,
We should prove Coxcombs all, and in the end,
New make so good, it is too good for us to mend.
And so much they say, we have done for Religion, it being the First Part of my
Eighth Part of Speech, as my weakness and your patience will permit; I will
more briefly and compendiously proceed to the second.

Secondly, For the Churches, we are taxed by the Malignants with profane and
more than barbarous pollutions of the Churches, or Houses dedicated to God's
Service: they say, we never built any, but have taken too much accursed pains
to deface and pull down many, or perverting the right use of them, into
Stables, Brothels, Receptacles for Strumpets, Luxurious Villainies, and infernal
stinking smoke of Mundungus, as a Common Stable, destroying those things which
were with great maturity of Judgment, Learning, and Wisdom, enacted by former
Parliaments, most execrably spoiling all by the usurping Power of this
Parliament.

Mr. Speaker, It is a rigorous medicine for the Toothache, to knock out the
brains of the Patient, he is no wise man that takes violent Physic, and kills
himself to purge a little phlegm, nor is he a prudent Builder, that if his House
do want some slight repair, will pull it all down; a man that loves his Wife
will not cast her away for a few needless black patches that her face is
disfigured withal. In like manner the Malignants conceive, if any things were
amiss, either in Ornament, Gesture, Ceremony, Lyturgy, or whatsoever might have
been proved unfitting, scandalous, or justly offensive, as is conceived, it
might have been removed or reconciled in a more Christian way, than by
Ruinating, Demolishing, Tearing, and Violating, Defiling and Spoiling, all
without regard of either, Humanity, Christianity, Charity, Law, or order from
God or man, as too many Parishes and other places in this Famous Kingdom, can
most truly, woefully testify. And these sweet pieces of services our
Adversaries say, we have done for the Churches.

Thirdly, Concerning our Loyalty and Obedience to the King; It is manifest, we
have all taken the Oath of Allegiance to His Majesty, and that we have also
lately taken Oaths and Covenants to make War against Him; our Enemies would
fain know, who had power of dispense, to free us from these Oaths, and likewise
by what authority? The latter Covenant and Oaths, were imposed upon the
consciences of men; for my own part, if there were no wiser men than my self,
this ambiguous Aenigma should never have gone so far; but it is reported by
them, that if we had kept our first Oaths religiously, and not taken the second
most perjuriously, and performed them so impiously, then we had never so
rebelliously offended so Gracious a Majesty.

Mr. Speaker, Our Adversaries do further allege, that our Obedience to His
Majesty is apparently manifest many strange ways: we have disburdened Him of
His large Revenues, we have cased Him of the charge of Royal Housekeeping, we
have cleared Him from repairing of it, or repairing to His Stately Palaces,
Magnificent Mansions, and Defensive Castles and Garrisons, and we have put Him
out of care of repairing his Armories, Arms, Ammunition and Artillery; we have
been at the charge of the keeping of His Children, and most trusty Servants
from or for Him; we have taken order and given ordinances, that He shall not be
troubled, either with much money or meat, and that His Queen and lawful Wife
shall not so much as darken His doors, and we have stroven by open Rebellion to
release Him of troublesome Life and Reign, by hunting Him like a Partridge over
the Mountains, and by shooting Bullets at His Person for His Majesty's
Preservation, on purpose to make Him glorious in another World; we have also
eased Him of a great number of His Friends, Subjects, and Servants, by either
charitable famishing, brotherly banishing, liberal and free imprisoning,
Parliamental Plundering, friendly throat-cutting, and unlawful beheading and
hanging, or utterly ruinating as many as we could lay hold of, that either
loved, served, or honored Him.

All these heavy Burdens we have eased Him of, and over-loaded our selves with
the usurped ponderosity of them; so our Adversaries say, that the weight of
them will shortly either break our backs, or sink us for ever.

And they further say, that since the World's Creation, never so good a King
was so bardly used, or so traitorously abused and dealt withal.

Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, It is questioned what we have done for the Law, there
are some Malignants, that are not afraid to say, that we have transformed and
metamorphosed the Common Law of the Land, into the Lands common calamity; that
instead of the common benefit, which the Laws in community should yield to all,
we have now perverted the same, to the private profit of our selves and some
particular Persons; The Civil War is turned to uncivil War, Blasphemies,
Atheism, Sacrilege, Obscenity, Profaneness, Incest, Adultery, Fornication,
Leignany, Polligany, Bastard-bearing, Cuckold-making, and all sorts of beastly
baudry, is so far from being punished, that it is greatly connived at, or
totally tolerated; and that those, who should be punishers of these gross and
crying Crimes, as Judges, Officials, Doctors, Proctors, and Apparitors, these
are scorned, reviled, libelled against, cried down, and made to be the shooting
stake and laughing stock of every libidinous incontinent Whore and Whore-monger.

The Law of God, contained in the Decalogy or Ten Commandments, they say, we
have cast out of the Church, not so much as suffering it to be read; and the
New Testament, which was the last that Christ commanded, That we should love
one another; we have turned the clean contrary way, to the spoiling and
murdering of one another; and for the Law of Nature, it is most unnaturally
changed, to a Brutish, Heathenish Inhumanity, Paricide, Intricide, Fratricide,
and Homicide, and has been, and is by us defended maintained, and rewarded; no
Affinity, Consanguinity, Alliance, Friendship, or Fellowship, has or can have
any true Protestant or Loyal Subject, either of Life, Goods, Safety or Freedom:
These are the best Reports our Adversaries the Malignants do give us, to have
done for the Laws.

Nay, they say further, we have infringed and violated the Law of Arms here,
and the Law of Nations abroad; for whereas Messengers and Ambassadors, have
always had, and ought to have free and safe passage, with fair and courteous
accommodation and entertainment; but we, contrary to them, and repugnant to
Christianity and Christians, have suffered Ambassadors to be Rifled, Robbed,
and Ill-intreated, and we have caused His Majesty's Messengers to be hanged,
whom he most graciously has sent to us with Conditions of Peace, by Vox
Populi, or common Vote of the People, without we are pleased, to call
Malignants Popish Enemies to the State, with other scandalous names,
reproachful words and Epithites, which they utterly deny, and we know both in
their words and practice: we are justly taxed to be the mean independent and
pestilent propogation of all mischiefs that this afflicted miserable Kingdom
groans and bleeds under; for they say that the Old Statutes of Magna Charta are
overthrown by us, under the color of supporting them by our Votes and
Ordinances, Precepts and Proclamations, Edicts, Mandates and Commands; we have
countermanded, abrogated, annihilated, abolished, violated, and made void all
the Laws of God and Nature, of Arms and Arts too, and instead of them we have
unlawfully erected Marshal Law, Club-Law, Strafford's-Law, and such Laws as
make most for Treason, Rebellion, Murder, Sacrilege, Envy and Plunder; but as
for the King, we have not allowed Him so much Law as a Huntsman allows a Hare;
these are our Enemies words, and thus much say they we have done for the Laws.

Fifthly, The first Question or Quere is, what we have done for the Kingdom.

It is spoken, we have done and undone the Kingdom; this Ancient Famous
Kingdom, the Envy of the World for happiness, this Eden of the Universe, this
Terrestrial Paradise, this abstract of Heaven's blessing, and Earth's content,
the Epitome of nature's glory, this exact extraction of Piety, Learning, and
magnanimous Chivalry, this nursery of Religion, Arms, Arts, Laudable
Endeavors, this brood of men, this wonder of Nations, formerly renowned,
feared, loved and honored, as far as ever our Sun and Moon did shine, this
England, which has been a Kingdom, a Monarchy many hundred years under the
Reigns of 168 Kings and Queens, this Kingdom that has conquered Kingdoms, that
has made, India, Palestina, Cyprus, tributary tremblers, has made France
shake, Spain quake, relieved and defended Scotland from French Slavery, that
saved and protected the Netherlands from Spanish Tyranny, Now we have made this
Kingdom of England a most miserable Slave to it self, an universal Golgotha, a
purple gore Ackeldema, a Bloody Field, a Gehenna, a Den of Devils, ot Infernal
Furies, and finally an Earthly Hell, were it not for these differences, that
here the best men are punished, and in Hell the worst only are plagued; here no
good man escapes torments nor any bad man is troubled, the Gracious King is
abused, for being good and just, and his true and loyal Subjects and Servants
massacred, and maligned for their fidelity, the Protestants are called Papists,
because they will not be Brownists, Anabaptists and Rebels, and Adversaries are
so bold to say, that we have plotted and labored long to turn this glorious
Monarchy into a pelting holy polly Independent Anarchy, and to make the Kingdom
to be no Kingdom, so much they say we have done for the Kingdom.

Sixthly, Mr. Speaker, we are questioned what good we have done for the Benefit
and Liberty of the Subject: Some of them say nothing at all, which they find by
lamentable experience, that we have turned their Liberty into Bondage, their
Freedom into Slavery, and their Happiness into Unhappiness and Misery; nay, it
is reported we have found no way to Hell for them, which we are persuaded to be
the way to Heaven, which is to Rebel or Perjure, to fight in Person against the
King, and to be forsworn, to owe Him no Duty and Allegiance; tush, these are
but trifles, and may be answered at any easy rate, a small matter will clear
the hearing; it is no more than everlasting damnation, from which Speech, Master
Speaker, I am bold to make use of a Speech in the distastful Letany, Good Lord
deliver us.

Master Speaker, the Malignants do compare the Commonwealth to an Old Kettle,
with here and there a fault, a hole, a crack, or a flaw in it; and that we in
imitation of our blessed Brethren of Banbury, were entrusted to mend the said
Kettle, but like deceitful heatings, Tinkers, we have instead of stopping one
hole made three or fourscore: For the People chose us for to ease them of some
idle and tolerable Grievances, which we have done so cunningly and
superficially, that all the Subjects cry out and complain, that the Medicine is
forty times worse than the Disease, and the Remedy an hundred times worse than
the Medicine, and so much is reported we have done for the Subject, which is
either enough or too much.

Seventhly, Master Speaker, the seventh Malignants Question or Quere is, what
we have done for Reformation? what by our industrious care and long sitting we
have Reformed? how the Sermon and Word of God is by us religiously, sincerely,
zealously, frequently and orderly preached and practiced? what we have amended
either in the Church or Kingdom? how either the King is by us honored, or the
Subject eased? or what we have done these four or five years? the Malignants
would fain know with what faces we can look on the Freeholders and
Corporations in every Shire, County, City, Town, and Borough in this Kingdom,
who cried us up with their voices, and carried us up like Popes, on their
shoulders with an Elle, to be Elected Knights and Burgesses: which way, Mr.
Speaker, can we answer them, for our many Breaches of that great Trust which
they entrusted us withal? (I tell you, Mr. Speaker, these are home Questions)
and that they say plainly, that our Reformation is Non-confirmation, and by
sure Confirmation, true Defamation, and that we have by cunning Transformation
turned all to Deformation, so that our Predecessors and Ancestors that are
deceased this Life, to a better or worse, should or could they arise out of
their Graves, and see the change, alteration and unmannerly manners, that has
overspread this Church and Kingdom, they would think they were in Turkey,
Barbaria, Cerilia, Tartaria, or some Land that is inhabited by Infidels,
Pagans, or Devils; for England as it is, looks no more like England, as it was
six years agone, than a Camel or a Cockle are like an Owl or a Red-herring.

Eighthly and lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Malignants question us, what we have
done for our selves? It is true, Charity begins at home, and we ought to make
much of and strengthen our selves; but we have run as the Adversaries say, to
the hazarding of our Estates, to be justly forfeited for Rebellion against so
just, merciful, and truly religious a King, our Lives are liable to the censure
of such Laws as former Parliaments have Enacted against Rebels and Traytorous
Rebellion, and our souls are in danger of perdition, if submission, contrition,
and satisfaction be not humbly, heartily, speedily performed; for we and only
we have altered this Kingdoms Felicity to confusion and misery; from a blessed
merry Comedy, to a doleful bloody Tragedy, which may fill a large History of
perpetual memory to the everlasting oblivion, shame, and indignity of Us and
our Posterity: And thus, Mr. Speaker, with as much brevity as I could, I have
run over my Eight Parts of Speech, whereby may be perceived how our Malignant
Adversaries do esteem of Us, and our Actions: I could speak more than I have
said, and I could say more than I have spoken, but having done I hold it
manners and discretion to make an end.

FINIS.

