THE Most LAMENTABLE AND Deplorable Accident which on Friday last June 2^.
befell Laurence Cawthorn a butcher in St. Nicholas Shambles in Newgate Market,
wh^ being suspected to be Dead, by the two hasty covetousness and cruelty of
his Land-lady Mrs. Cook in Pincock-lane, was suddenly and inhumanely buried.

TOGETHER With the report of his moving of the Body as it was carrying by the
Bearers to his Grave, and the treating of his Winding sheet with his own hands,
and the Lamentable Shrieks and Groans he made on the Saturday and Sunday
following.

As also the Examination and Commitment of his Landlord and Land-Lady by the
Lord Mayor to the Prison of Newgate; And opening the Grave, the body exposed to
public view on the Monday following. And the Virdict and Sentence which the
Jury passed upon the sight of the Body, and the Examination of several
witnesses following.

For the further satisfaction of the people who have bin so extremely
misinformed in the particulars of this sad Accident, that the very name of the
person is most falsely represented.

LONDON, Printed for W. Gilbertson, 1661.

The most lamentable Death of Laurence Cauthorn, who being conceived to be
dead, was put into a Coffin, and buried on Friday June 21. and being afterward
heard to have made many hideous Yells and Groans, was taken up on Monday June
24. where he was found to have broken open his shroud, and to have beaten
himself to Death in the Coffin.
AMongst all the Torments that Mankind is capable of, the most dreadful of
them, and that which nature most shrinks at is to be buried alive. Death is
described to be the most dreadful of all things that are dreadful, because it
deprives the body of the soul, by the commerce whereof the body enjoyes all the
Comforts that Life is capable to entertain; And although through many
discontents and miseries, that Life it self is become unpleasant, yet we had
rather endure all Calamities then be beholding to death to release us from
them. The Old Man that stoops under the burden of his Age, though peradventure
he has all diseases upon him, and all extremities of want to make his Life
morefull of Affliction, yet tell him of death, and you shall find by him that
he would fain live longer, nay rather then death should seize upon him, you
shall find him to be ready to excuse his infirmities, and make you to believe
that he is younger, and richer, and stronger, then indeed he is. There is in
all Creatures a natural desire of Life; and Death though unavoydable is the
Common Enemy against which they do all labor to defend themselves.

We have read in Histories that some Men having committed the greatest Crimes,
have been sentenced to the most grievous punishments, as to be buried in the
ground up to the Arme-pits, and sometimes to the Chin, and all manner of
sustenance and comfort being denied them, to starve in the open Air, and cry
aloud for that Bread which it is Death for any man to give unto them. There is
nothing in Nature that does make men more heartily to desire death then Famine;
For Hunger is so violent that it breaks thorough Stone-walls, Women have been
Recorded to feed on their own Children being compelled thereunto by Hunger, and
Notorious Malefactors hanging alive on Gibbets have been known to feed on their
own Arms, or any other part of them that their Teeth could reach. But in this
extremity (although there is no question but the dolor is very great) there is
something to give some little comfort; as the sight of the Passengers whose
Pity and whose Prayers they have, the variety of Objects both of Beasts and
Birds, and some hope of Life whiles any thing alive is seen.

But from the Grave there is no redemption; has any one (says the Wise man)
returned from the Grave to acquaint us with the news of the Dead, and the sad
passages in the chambers of the grave? There is heard no joyful tread of
Friends, no Gratulations of acquaintance, but all Oblivion, Dust, and endless
darkness.

We have heard of some who have been buried, and yet have been both seen and
numbered gain amongst the living, as of the Prophet Jonas who lay three days and
three nights in the belly of the Whale. He had surely died if he had not been
buried; we have heard of others who by some sudden dilapidations having been
covered with rubbish, have as suddenly been rescued from that Ruin, and being
but dust themselves, have ever afterward acknowledged their thankfulness to
the Almighty who did thus deliver them from the malice of the Dust. But in this
strange* visitation whereof we come now to speak, we find a Man dead, struck
dead (if we will believe the Verdict of the Searchers) A young Man in the
strength and flourish of his youth: his complexion promised health, and his
youth the access of many years, and we find this man to be buried, and to be
buried alive.

The Searchers who too hastily said he was dead ought to have a new search to
be made after them, for it is to believed that this young man is not alone in
this Example, but that many others have suffered in the like nature, and who
might have been heard to make the complaint, had their Graves been dug no
deeper then this young Man's was? for if we may believe report, they made such
have to bury him, that the Grave at the most was not half a yard in the depth.

His Name was Laurence Cawthorn, by his trade a Butcher, and having not long
before lived out the time of his Apprentiship with commendable trust and
industry, he was now a Journyman to a Butcher in the Shambles Beyond Newgate.

To be more ready to discharge the trust reposed in him, he took a lodging at a
Victualers house, whose name is William Cook in Pincock-lane, and having on
Thursday toyled and sweated much in the employment of his Trade, he in the
Evening went to another Victualing house hard by, with some of his acquaintance
to refresh himself. He appeared then to be well and lusty, but whether he drank
too much of Hot Waters (as some say he did) or whether he was to high in any
other drink it is uncertain; it seems to me that neither the one or the other
was the occasion of this lamentable accident, for on his coming home, I find
him very careful of his business, as it became an honest, and a temperate man
to be. He desired some that were in the house to call him by three of the
Clock, because Friday being market day he had many Sheep and Lambs to kill,
which must be ready to be sold in the Shambles about seven or eight of the
Cloek, a great task, he said, he was to perform in a few hours.

The Task indeed was greater then he thought for little thinking that at that
time he was to encounter hn the next morning with so sore an enemy as Death.

Because he would be more early to follow his business he did not on that night
go to bed, but only lay on it, his resolution being fixed to be dressing of
meat for the next days Market by three of the clock in the Morning.

Much about that time he was called upon (according to his desires) to rise to
follow his Employment, they knoked at the door to waken him, and knocked again,
and again with louder violence, but hearing no answer returned, they went down
the stairs again, uncertain of the Event, and disputing with themselves what
the matter might be.

The Morning growing Older, and all the Butchers thereabouts being busy in
their employments, the Master of the Victualing house where he lay, whose name
is Cook, did go up the stairs himself to waken him, he often called upon him by
his name, and shaking and beating at the door he bad him rise, and told him how
much already of the Morning was lost, which to redeem he counseled him
presently to rise and follow his Business; but hearing not the least noise in
the Chamber and finding the door to be fast bolted he much admired what might
be the reason of it.

Going down the stairs he met with his wife, and some others, where after a
little respit of consultation it was concluded on by all to have the door broke
open.

The Smith immediately was sent for, and it was put in execution; Entering into
the Chamber they find their Lodger lying all along much like a dead man. Some
say that he opened his eyes twice or thrice when he heard his Name called upon,
and when they did stroke him and rub him to awaken. There are some others who
were then in the room that say he hardly opened his eyes at all; but yet they
perceived that still there was warmth and life in him, whereupon the Master of
the house and his wife pull off his clothes, and fairly lay him in the bed. And
a discourse there was amongst the Neighbors and themselves what should be the
reason of so great a distemper.

It is not to be dissembled, but some reported that on the night before he had
drank off with some few of his Companions a whole quart of hot Waters, and they
imputed (as indeed well they might) the violence of that dead sleep upon him to
the violence of the hot waters, the excess whereof had caused so profound a
slumber.

The Master of the Victualling house where he lay not knowing what to do,
repairs to a Neighbor hard by, who also keeps a Victualling house, and where
this young Butcher for the most part rendezvouzed when he had any hours of
leisure to drink with his Friends, he calls him about five of the clock in the
morning, and acquaints him in what a desperate condition Laurence Cawthorn (for
so was the Butcher called) lay.

He assures him that he went off well from his house about nine or ten of the
clock at night at the surthest, and wondering what might be the occasion of this
distemper, he goes along with him, and looking on him, he much laments his
Condition, and concludes he is a dead Man.

There are some (but I know not with what truth) that do give forth, that this
Laurence Cawthorn was subject to have strange Fits, and that sometimes he would
lie in a trance like a dead man for many hours together, they conjectured that
the heat of the waters meeting with such a distemper when it was growing on him
it did render his present condition so extremely desperate.

Howsoever it was; about six or seven of the clock in the morning, all that did
look upon him did conclude him to be dead, and that there was not the least
sign or appearance* of life in him.

Hereupon the Searchers were sent for, who turn and look upon the Corpse, and
with the more Circumspection because there were one or two at that time below
the Stairs, who said, that at the time of his departing, there were some Spo^s
appeared upon his breast, which presently afterward did vanish away and go in
again.

The Searchers gave no heed to that report, but concluded that he died of the
Quinsey, a Disease which swelling in the throat does in a short time deprive
the person that is afflicted with it of the use of his Breath.

They now provide for his Burial. The Woman in whose house he died would have
it performed that very Evening, which has brought no small suspicion upon her
she desired his Goods, which indeed were not very considerable, she had been
the occasion that the young Man made more have to his Grave then the course of
Nature does allow. She takes her husband with her, and repaireth to the other
Victualler where Laurence for the most part was accustomed to go, to know what
he would contribute to the burial; he told her that Laurence died twenty
shillings or thereabouts in his debt which he was well able to prove, and let
him have but his Clothes he would bury him like a Christian.

This she seemed unwilling to grant and faultred in her accounts, sometimes
pretending that her dead Tenant owed her so much Money, and sometimes so much,
which the neighbors that heard of it were unwilling to receive into their
belief; for it was agreed upon on all sides Laurence was an honest man, and
paying but 8 d. a week for his Lodging could not be much in her debt; and if he
had been backward to pay, yet her greedines of Money was such, especially where
she found any hopes of it to smile upon her, that she would not let him. She
makes use of his clothes for her own advantage and makes all things ready for
the Burial.

While the neighbors are murmuring at this dispatch, and that things are
carried in* so great a hurrey, the Bearers are come to carry their fatal Burden
to the Grave. Some there are who report that in the way one of them perceived
the Corpse to stir in the Coffin but it is not to be believed that any Man can
be guilty of so great an inhumanity.

The Body was buried in the common Churchyard belonging to Christ Church and it
is reported by diverse, that they heard on the Saturday and Sunday following
great groanings and shriekings in the same place where the Body was buried, and
one acquainting another with the wonder of it, they were all equally *amazed
and afrighted.

On Monday morning June 24. the dead Body was dug up, which was not buried
above half a yard in the Ground: and it being exposed to the public View every
one spoke of it as his Fancy did suggest unto him. Some said that the Shroud
was torn in pieces; others that the eyes were swollen, and the brains beaten
out of the head, and clots* of blood were to be seen at the mouth, and the
breast all over black and blew. The Coroner was sent for and a Jury
impannelled, who are to give their Virdict in tomorrow, being Thursday June 25.
In the mean time my Lord Mayor has committed the Man and Woman of the house
where the Butcher dyed to Newgate, where the Law* is to pass upon them
according to their demerit.

FINIS.

