THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE; OR, THE EXPEDITIONS OF THE Christian Princes FOR
THE CONQUEST OF THE Holy Land.

Written Originally in FRENCH, By the Famed MOUNSIEUR MAIMBOURG.

Englished by JOHN NALSON, L L. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for Thomas Dring, at the Corner of Chancery Lane next
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXV.

TO THE Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of CLARENDON, Lord Privy Seal.
My Lord,
I Am very sensible in what manner I expose my self, in adventuring to present
your Lordship this Translation; since not only my self, but the whole World
knows, that your early Loyalty, and Banishment for the Royal Cause, by your
Retreat in France, have made you an absolute Master of that Language, from
whence it is borrowed: So that I could not but foresee, That consequently your
Lordship is best able to distinguish, not only my own, but those Imperfections,
which of necessity must attend Copies, when compared with their Originals;
there being in all Languages some Graces and Beauties of their Native Idiom, so
peculiar to them, as are difficultly to be supplied, or tollerably Imitated by
any other. But, My Lord, your Noble Character is too well known, to permit me
to despair of Pardon; and since your Lordship is so publicly remarkable, for
your admirable Industry in Cultivating your Mind with all manner of Gentile
Reading, it gives me hopes, that your Lordship will not be displeased to see
those generous Inclinations cherished in others; and some Assistances and
Invitations given to such, whose Education has not made them acquainted with
Foreign Languages, whereby they may receive, in the familiar Dress of their
Native Country, the advantage of what has been written by Curious Pens of
other Nations.

However, My Lord, Gratitude, the only thing wherein I can be Liberal, as it
obliges me to celebrate your Lordship's Name, as having received those Favors
from your Lordship, for which I must acknowledge my self under such
Obligations, as lying nearest my Heart, will be forward to be upon my Lips; so
it is impossible for me not to lay hold, even with some precipitation, upon the
least Occasions, wherein I may, in any measure, Express, what I do not only
Esteem so much a Duty, but also so great a Pleasure to do my self the Honor of
telling the whole World, that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obliged, and most humble Servant, JOHN NALSON.
Ely, March 12th. 1684/5.
TO THE READER.
IT is I think, if it be a mistake, such a one as is common to the greatest
part of Mankind, to have that Opinion of their Sentiments, especially those of
Pleasure, to believe, that what they find divertive and agreeable to
themselves, must be so likewise to others, what ever Inconveniences this may
render men liable to in other matters, I am not either curious to know, or at
present to inquire, since I am assured that we are obliged to this Humor, for
the Communication of many admirable things, in History especially, which afford
us both Pleasure and Advantage; this being one of those sorts of Treasures,
which few People delight themselves with hoarding up; but there being a certain
pleasure in pleasing others, they are generally willing to be very bountiful in
what may enrich others without impoverishing themselves. I must ingenuously
confess, that it was this little Wheel, that gave me this Motion, and having
some hours liberty, I could not be contented with diverting my self, but must
needs endeavor to propagate the pleasure I found in this History of Monsieur
Maimbourg's, that others might share with me in it.

I am very sensible that many Persons of good Judgment have declared themselves
against all kind of Translations, except those of the Sacred Writings, and some
against those too, as disadvantageous to Learning, and especially to Industry,
and endeavors to attain the knowledge of Languages. Now for my own particular,
as I am satisfied that there are very few, who addict themselves to the more
difficult Studies of Learning or Languages, but such, who either out of
necessity, and upon the prospect of their future advancement by such
seize, as qualify them for the great Imploies of Church or State; or
such, whose natural Curiosity and Inclinations lead them to these researches,
or will ever bend their Minds to the attainment of Languages; so I am confident
that neither the natural desires and thirst of the one, nor the excited and
necessary endeavors of the other, will ever be abated by Translations, or
satisfied, but with the Originals; nor will they ever sit down by the Streams,
who can with ease and pleasure draw Learning from its Fountains.

Now there are a third sort of People, who neither are compelled by necessity,
nor inclined by Nature to give themselves any great trouble in point of
Learning; who yet, by Translations of Learning into their own Language, may
receive mighty Improvements in their Knowledge, Manners, Conduct, and
Understandings, and who may be thereby rendered very serviceable in their
several Stations to their Prince and Country, agreeable in Conversation, and
may likewise avoid the temptations of bestowing their spare hours upon such
Entertainments, to which, for want of Judgment, Experience, and more Innocent
Diversions, Nature, too much inclined to Vice and Folly, may be apt to tempt
them, and there can be no doubt but many Persons of great Natural Parts and
Ingenuity, who have fallen under the misfortune of the Want of such good
Education as they might have had, as does but too frequently happen to young
Gentlemen, whom either the Flattery of their Masters, Tutors, and Governors;
the fond Indulgence of Parents and Guardians, or the neglect of both, betrays
into so great a want of Learning, as hardly to understand truly their own
Native Language; these, I say when they come to see, and as I have known many
of them deplore their condition, would want all manner of assistance, to
cultivate and improve themselves, which they might have by having Learning
brought to them in an easy and familiar Language. Nor am I, if I could, to
make an Invidious Catalogue of many Worthy Men, who by these little and
inconsiderable helps have made such seize in necessary Knowledge, as have
rendered them very serviceable to the World in Employs both Civil and Military,
especially the last.

And indeed of all men living, the Martialists have generally the least
Inclination to Learning, though they can scarcely be good Soldiers without it;
For to them History is what the Seaman's Charts are in Navigation. There they
see the Reasons of all those great Events of former Ages, the occasions of the
loss and gaining of Battles, winning and loosing of Towns and Countries,
Provinces and Kingdoms; there they have a view of the many Stratagems of War,
diverse of which upon occasion suggest new ones to the Invention of the
Ingenious; there they have the Spurs of Emulation in seeing the Heroic Actions
of gallant men; sometimes their own Ancestors, whose Glory may excite their
Imitation, and whose Virtues may encourage them, whose Honors and Rewards may
move them for the Service of their Prince and Country, to mount by the same
Steps of Conduct, Bravery and Resolution, to the top of Honor and Glory; and
possibly had young Alexander never read the Stories of Achilles in his own
Language, in the admirable Poem of Homer, he had never obtained either the
Conquest he did, or the Immortal Surname of the Great, but had confined his
Ambition, which afterward one World could not suffice, together with his
Knowledge, within the narrow limits of his Macedon. And certainly as nothing
can be more delightful to the Genius of a Soldier, than the representation of
great Actions, Battles, Sieges, honorable Retreats, admirable Stratagems, and
regular Conducts, brave Performances, and the happy Successes of the Ancient
Hero's, so nothing can be more pleasant in the time of Peace, or more
serviceable to them in the time of War, than History, which so long as it is
veiled under such Languages as are strangers to them, is like Treasure in the
Mine, for which no man is the Richer or the better.

Nor is it of less advantage to the Statesman, who will there find those
admirable Maxims and Instructions, of which he may most successfully serve
himself to his own Honor, and the advantage of those by whom he is employed.
We in England, who have many Persons, who are in some degree or other to be
employed in the Administration of Public Affairs; such as are Justices of the
Peace, especially in Corporations and Buroughs, and such as serve for the
Representatives of those Places in the lower House of Parliament, have reason
to endeavor by all means to give them the opportunities of improving their
Understandings in such ways and measures as they are capable of, and as will
make them capable of discharging those Trusts to their own Reputation, the
satisfaction of the King, and the advantage of their Country. For though many
times it happens that the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and others, who have
opportunities of Learning fill those Charges; yet it is not intailed upon them,
and very frequently Persons, to whom it is no disparagement that they are not
Scholars, their Education having been to Trades and Mysteries necessary for the
public good of the Community, are chosen to those Offices and Trusts. Now
where men act in any public Capacity, especially in our Parliaments, whose
good or ill Conduct never fails to have a like influence upon the whole Nation,
it is of great advantage to have them in some measure acquainted with what is
their own Interest, and that of those whom they represent.

There is nothing that gives them a better or clearer Prospect in this matter
than the Histories of former Ages, both in their own and Foreign Countries, by
which they will be informed of the great necessity of their Duty in Order to
their own Happiness. There they will see how happy those Princes and People
have been, who have had the good Fortune to live in good Understanding one with
the other, and what fatal and dreadful Revolutions have happened upon Discords
and Disunions; and because men are not apt to flatter the Ashes of the Dead, we
see impartially the Defects and Failings of past Ages, we discover the Secret
Springs of those Disorders, which Popular, Ambitious, or Revengeful men have
made use of in Councils, to raise Seditions and Rebellions against their
Sovereigns, which whilst they lived, some would not, others durst not discover,
and, which they themselves do always most studiously endeavor to conceal. And
these Remarks in History are like Light Houses, Buoys and Beacons to Posterity,
to show them a dangerous Shore, and to give them notice to stand aloof, and
where they observe the same Practices, to fear the same Intentions, and avoid
the like Mischiefs and Dangers.

And herein, as I cannot but applaud the Ingenuity and Industry of the French
Nation, so I cannot but judge their procedure in this particular worthy of our
Notice. We are reputed in the World very fond of imitating those People even to
ridiculous extravagancy in Modes, Habits, and Dresses of the Body; and it were
not amiss if we could be persuaded to follow their Examples and Fashion in
cultivating and adorning of our Minds. It is the general and known observation,
that as that Language within this fifty Years has extended it felf farther
than in five hundred before, so the French are most extraordinarily improved in
all manner of Knowledge, and Learning, which may be of Public Use and
Advantage. Nor can this be attributed to any other Cause, but the industrious
care and diligence of the Learned and Ingenious Persons of that Nation, who
have with indefatigable application endeavored to bring all the Learning of
the World into their own Country, by making all the Writings of the Greeks,
Latins, Italians, and several other Nations, who have been Famous in any sort,
Denizens of France, and ^aching them to speak, some hundred Years since their
Death, a Language to which they were Strangers whilst they lived. Learning is
the glorious Light of the Universe, a Light which shows us not only how to
guide our steps for the present, and the future, but leads us back into the
darker times of Antiquity, and like the Perpetual Lamps so much admired, shows
us the Beauties and the Lineaments of Dead Ages, even in their Tombs; and
certainly they must be very envious, who would deny the World this Light, and
confine these Perpetual Lamps of Light and Knowledge still within the Vrns and
the Tombs of the Dead, or bury them in Closets and Libraries, where they appear
to very few. For my own particular, I must declare my self against such a
miserable Covetousness, which impoverishes a great many, without enriching the
Misers, who like Evil-Spirits sit watching that Treasure, which they neither
can make use of themselves, nor will permit others to possess, who would; and I
could wish that all manner of gentile and ingenuous Learning, (for I do not
speak of that which is Sacred, which ought not to be prostituted or made so
cheap, as to encourage idleness, or detract from the Majesty of the Schools, or
of Theology) were as common as the Air we breath, or the Beams of that glorious
Luminary, which bestows his pleasing Influences upon all the World.

The Author of this History is the Ingenious Monsieur Maimbourg, a Writer of
great Fame and Integrity, a Person of a solid Judgment, and every way a good
Historian; and, which I admire most in him, notwithstanding his Education and
Profession, a man that has the least of that foolish Bigotry, which never
fails to render any Profession of Religion ridiculous. He is a great Assertor
of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the Prerogatives of Princes
against the pretended Supremacy of Popes, and the Usurpations of those, who
style themselves the Successors of St. Peter, upon the Temporal Power of
Princes; and to me it is a mighty wonder to find a Romanist and a Jesuit speak
so freely and so plain; and I doubt not, did not he, as well as many others of
that Religion, labor under the hard prepossessions of Education, and the
disadvantages of prejudice, but they might be easily induced to throw off the
Manacles, which Innovation has laid upon them, and be persuaded to see, how
much the Church of England has done toward restoring the Catholic Religion
to its Primitive Antiquity, by disburthening it of the foolish Principles and
superstitious Practices, with which succeeding Ages have with more Zeal than
Prudence, overloaden Religion: But this is not any part of my present Province,
all that I have to say is to recommend this Historical Collection to the
Reader; who, if he will but first please with a favorable Pen to correct the
following Errors of the Press, which by reason of my distance from it, was not
in my power to remedy, he will I hope receive the same pleasure, and possibly
more advantage in reading it, than I have done in taking care to present it to
him.

THE Authors Epistle TO THE FRENCH KING.
To the King.
SIR,
THE Great Men, whom I have the Honor to present to your Majesty, are the
Hero's of these Famous Crusades, who have seven several times armed all Europe,
for the Conquest of the Holy Land. And possibly it may not be displeasing to
your Majesty, to see the most valiant Princes of their times, and above all the
Princes of your August, Consanguinity, whom the Glory which they have acquired
by a thousand Gallant Actions, has rendered Immortal. It is true, that their
Arms have not had all that happy Success, which they seemed to promise; and
that those of so many Barbarous Nations, who united against them, have at last
remained Victorious. But, Sir, after that which all the Earth has seen with
astonishment in this last Champaign, one may say, That there has not been for
this four hundred years and upwards, above one single Hero, who is to be found
in the Person of your Majesty, who has been able to atchieve so great and
Glorious an enterprise, and to triumph so gloriously over so many Enemies.

And in truth all the Forces of the Emperor, the King of Spain, the greatest
part of the Circles of the Empire, and all those of the Hollanders, both by Sea
and Land, are something more formidable than those of the Egyptians, the
Arabians, the Persians, and the Turks, and nevertheless your Majesty Commanding
either your self in Person, or causing your Orders to be executed by your
Lieutenants, has vanquished and dissipated them all; you only, without the
assistance of your Allies, who seemed as if they had taken Arms, only to be,
with more Pomp and Ceremony, the spectators of your Victories.

This Wonder, Sir, is the most surprising effect of a consummated Prudence, and
an Heroic Courage, accompanied with a Fortune always invincible, which may
justly acquire you the most Glorious Surnames of your Predecessors, which your
Majesty has long since Merited by the Conquests of the preceding Campaigns,
and by so many Royal Actions, as have in all things rendered the incomparable
greatness of your Soul most eminently conspicuous to the whole Earth.

After this can it be doubted, but that if Lewis the Great had reigned in the
Ages of these Crusades, or if the Age of the Crusades had been retarded, till
the Reign of Lewis the Great, we should have seen at this Day, the Empire of
Jesus Christ re-established in the Holy Land, without having any need of the
other Christian Princes to mingle their Arms with his, otherwise than to
celebrate his Triumphs?

As for my self, who have been always obliged to your Majesty, by an inviolable
Tie, both of my Duty and my Choice, and who have the Honor to be particularly
your Creature, by the effects of your Royal Bounty, I am confident to say, that
I should make more noise than all the rest, in such an agreeable Concert. I
hope also that I shall give some proofs to posterity, that I have the Idea of
your Majesty, so imprinted in my Heart and Soul, that I shall always borrow
some Lines from it, whether it be in the painting of my Hero's, who can never
appear so great, as when they come to be observed to have the good Fortune to
resemble your Majesty, or in recounting their admirable Actions, in such places
as they seem to imitate, though much short of them, the Greatness of yours.

This Testimony, Sir, of my Zeal for your Majesty's Glory, is no more than
Truth, for so great a King; and though possibly it may be too little for so good
a Master, yet since, in the condition wherein the Divine Providence has placed
me, it is all that I can do, to let the whole World understand, with how much
Ardor, Submission and Veneration, I am,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Servant and
Subject, Lewis Maimbourg.

An Advertisement of the Author's to the Reader.
AFTER what I have said to the Reader in my Advertisements to the History of
Arianism, and that of the Iconoclasts, I have not much to add, but only to
inform him, that having drawn from the ancient Authors, French, Italians,
Germans, and English, almost all that I have written in this History, I have
not believed that I was obliged to cite the Modern Historians, who have said
something of these Crusades, and who doubtless have drawn them from the same
Fountains which I have done. I have done the same thing in all my other
Histories, as where I recount the admirable Actions of St. Athanasius, St.
Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. John Chrysostom, and several other Famous
Saints. I have not produced for my Vouchers, Simeon Metaphrastes, Lipomannus,
Surius, Ribadeneira, or the other Writers or Collectors, who have given us the
Lives of the Saints, and much less the new Legend makers. For in those places
where we agree, it is not of them that I have made use, but of the Ancients
from whom they have borrowed what they have Written, as well as I: and in other
places where I am obliged to contradict them, as I am persuaded that they are
mistaken, I could not speak of them, but to refute their Errors. But that being
neither agreeable to my Humor, nor to my Duty in the Quality of an Historian,
and which would render me rather a Critic than an Historian. I have not
troubled my self, or the Reader, with what I believe is not by ingenious
Persons expected from me.

A Second Advertisement.
WHAT I have to add to my first Advertisement, is only for the satisfaction of
those, who possibly may imagine, that the Portraicts and Characters which are
to be seen in my Histories, are rather like those of Romances, the Designs of a
Luxuriant Fancy, than of a Modest Truth, or at least that like Paintings, they
are done with the utmost advantage, and not without Flattery. But it will not
be very difficult for me, to destroy an Imagination so little conformable to
reason, and I have nothing to do, but to desire the Reader to remove his
prejudice, by looking into the Authors, whom I have cited in the Margins, over
against these Portraicts, and there they shall find the Originals from which I
have honestly copied them. They may also observe as well as I, that I have not
contented my self with one Author, but have drawn them from diverse put
together, the Shape, the Color, the Complexion, the Mind, the Hair, the Beard,
the Eyes, the Nose, the Mouth, and the Lineaments, as well as the manners of
such whom I have undertaken to paint, and to show them to the Reader, such as
good Historians have represented them, herein following the Examples of
Plutarch, Suetonius, Salust, and a hundred other Famous Writers, Greeks and
Latins.

Eusebius, Nicephorus, Victor, St. Ambrose, St. Gregory Nazianzen, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Jornandus, and Paul the Deacon, have furnished me in the History
of Arianism, with the Portraicts of my Hero's, Romans, Goths, and Vandals.

Theophanes, Cedrenus, Zonaras, Michael Glycas, Eginhardus, Anastasius, the
Library keeper, Paul the Deacon, Marcardus Freherus, El-Macim, and the Oriental
Chronicle, have made me acquainted with the Greeks, the French and Sarasins,
whose Pictures I show in the History of the Iconoclasts.

Robert the Monk, the Abbot of Nogent, the Abbot Sugerius, Otho Frisingensis,
Otho de St. Blaise, the old French and English Historians, William of Tire,
Nicetas, the Abbot of Vrsperg, Cuspinian, and several others, are the Authors,
from whose Works I have furnished my self, to represent to the Life the
Illustrious Men of my Crusades, to which I have added nothing more than the
manner of expressing their thoughts in my own Words.

And it would have been very easy for me to verify this, by citing the very
Words of the Authors, from whom I draw my Portraicts, as in the third and
fourth Tome, I have placed in the Margin those of St. Anthonine, and of two or
three others, who have given us the Picture of Frederick the Second. But I have
nevertheless declined it, being unwilling to make the Margin swell bigger than
the Book it self. If these Writers say nothing of the lineaments of the Face,
or the rest of the Person of those of whom I write, I take care to say nothing,
and content my self with describing the qualities of the Soul, the Mind and the
Heart, witness the Portraicts of Luitprandus, the Emperor's Nicephorus, Michael
the stammering, Leo the Armenian, and Isaac Angelus. But when they give me
Instructions, as do many Famous Historians, whom I give for my Warrantees, I
cannot conceal this knowledge from my Readers, and if posterity hold themselves
obliged to every one of these Historians in particular, for having given every
one of them some particular stroke of these extraordinary Men, who have made
such a Figure in the World, I am not without hopes, but it may be very well
pleasing to them, that I have taken care to Collect and Unite all these
scattered Draughts, to compose those just Portraicts, which they may with
pleasure see in my Works.

For it has ever been and ever will be, that Mankind will have the Curiosity
to know those Persons, who are reported to have done so many great and
admirable things. And for this reason it is, that at this time more than ever,
there is such curious search made for Ancient Medals, which make up the fairest
part of the Cabinets, even of Kings and Princes; there being a great pleasure
to see the Faces of those Persons, of whose Fortune and Actions we read in
History. And as there has been lately a Medal of the King made with such
perfection, that nothing can be added to it, it will hereafter be sought for,
with as much Passion by the Curious, as are those of the Ancient Caesar's. For
most certainly in reading all the surprising Wonders, which the History of his
Reign, written by an able hand, must publish, though far short of what they are
in reality, one must be touched with a mighty desire to see that August Face,
wherein the incomparable greatness of his Soul, and all the Royal Virtues are
so well expressed, by that Heroic Air and those admirable traces of Majesty,
which will not suffer any that see them to hesitate one Moment, but that they
must acknowledge him to be the greatest and most admirable of all Monarchs.

After this I hope that all reasonable Persons will be satisfied with my
Conduct, which will encourage me to pursue, in my following History of the
Crusades, the Characters of those Popes, Emperors, Princes, Kings, and Great
Men, who are to appear upon the Theater of the following History.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 47. r. Salguc. ib. l. 54. r. Abutalip. p. 4. l. 42. for Lords r.
Letters. p. 7. l. 22. for Lies r. Letters. ib. l. 44. f. Seventh r. Seven. p.
9. l. 44. f. Persecution r. Prosecution. ib. 54. f. Christian r. Chieftaine. p.
12. l. 24. f. renounced r. renewed. p. 14. l. 11. r. Thiery. p. 15. l. 51. f.
many r. Manly. p. 22. l. 34. r. Cybotus. Civitot.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
BOOK I.
THE greatness of the Subject of the ensuing Hictory. The newness, and
advantage of it. The Original of the Turks, and their Conquest in Asia from the
Sarasins. The Conference of Peter the Hermit with the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
The Description of the Hermit. His Negotiation with Pope Urban the Second, and
his Preaching the Crusade. The Relation of the Council of Placentia, that of
the Council of Clermond. The horrible Disorders occasioned by the little Wars
between private persons which were tolerated in those times, and which were
regulated by the Canon of the Peace and the Truce. Aymar de Monteil, Bishop of
Pavia, Legate of the Pope for the Crusade. The prodigious number of those who
took upon them the Cross, and the disorders that ensued. The Names of the
Princes of the Crusade. An Account of Duke Godfrey, and his Character. He sends
Peter the Hermit before him. A Description of the Conduct and manner of living
of this Solitary. He divides his Army into two Bodies. The Disorder and the
Ruin of the first under Gautier Monyless. The greater Disorder and ill Fortune
of the Second commanded by Peter himself. The Defeat of two other Armies of
Crusades conducted by a Priest Godescalc and Count Emico, their overthrow by
the Hungarians. The Conference of Peter the Hermit with the Emperor Alexis.
The Character, Conduct, and secret designs of that Prince, and the reasons of
his perfidiousness. The passage of the Hermites Army into Asia, and the
continuance of their disorders. The Italians and Germans, separate from the
French. The first overthrown by young Solomon Sultan of Nice. The first Battle
of Nice where the other part are overthrown also by Solomon. The Voyage of
Godfrey of Bullen, and the Princes that accompanied him. The Voyage of Hugh the
Great, and the Princes that followed him, his Character, Conduct, and
Imprisonment by the Greek Emperor. The War of Godfrey against Alexis. The
Extremity to which the Emperor is reduced, and the Treaty concluded between him
and the Princes. The Relation of the Conquests and Settlement of the Normans in
Italy. The Voyage of Bohemond Prince of Tarentum, and the Princes that went
along with him. The Voyage of Raymond de Tholose, of Aymar de Monteil Bishop of
Pavia, and the other Princes and Lords, which accompanied them. The Chara^ter
of that Earl, his Conference with the Emperor, and the Treachery of that
Prince. The Voyage of Robert Duke of Normandy, his Character, and Treaty with
the Emperor. Page 1.

BOOK II.
The Description of the City of Nice in Bithynia, and the Siege thereof by the
Princes of the Crusade. The Second and third Battle of Nice, where the young
Solomon was beaten. The taking of that City, and the Treachery of the Greek
Emperor. The March of the Christian Army. One part thereof surprised by
Solomon. The Battle of the Gorgonian Valley. The Progress of the Christian Army
in the lesser Asia. The great danger of Duke Godfrey and his Combat with a
monstrous Bear. The difference and little Civil dissension between Baldwin and
Tancred. Baldwin makes himself Master of the Principality of Edessa. The
entrance of the Christian Army into Syria. The Description of the Famous City
of Antioch. It is besieged by the Princes. The Relation of this famous Siege.
The Combat at the Bridge of Antioch. The mavelous Actions of Duke Godfrey.
The Approach of Corbagath with a prodigious Army to relieve the City. The
Relation of the taking of Antioch by Bohemond by Intelligence in the City with
one Pyrrhus. The Christian Army at the same time besieged by Corbagath. A
Relation of the discovery of the top of a Spear, which was believed to be that
which pierced our Savior's side. The memorable Battle of Antioch, where the
whole power of the Turks and Sarasins in Asia was defeated by the Christians.
The death of Aymar de Monteil Bishop of Pavia. The quarrel between Count
Raymond and the Prince of Tarentum. The taking of Marra. A strange Relation of
the gratitude of a Lion. The Seige of Arcas. The odd Story of Anselm de
Ribemond, Earl of Bouchain and the deceased Engelram, Son to the Earl of St.
Paul. The taking of Torlosa by a stratagem by the Vicount de Turenne. The
Sultan of Egypt takes Jerusalem from the Turks, breaks his League with the
Princes of the Crusade. The Ambassadors of Alexis slighted. The advantageous
composition with the Emir of Tripolis. The March of the Christian Army to
Jerusalem. Lidda, Rama, Nicopolis and Bethlehem taken by the Christians. The
extraordinary expressions of their Devotion upon the first discovery of the
Holy City. p. 33.

BOOK III.
The Present State of Jerusalem when the Christian Princes Besieged it. The
Destribution of their Quarters. The ill Success of an Assault given against the
Rules of War, by the Advice of a Hermit, who pretended a Revelation for it.
The Description of Duke Godfrey's Engines. The solemn Procession of the
Besiegers about the City. The Second General Assault for three days together.
Two Magicians who were Conjuring upon the Walls, have their Brains beaten out
with a Stone from Duke Godfrey's wooden Castle. The Artifice of Godfrey to
drive the Enemies from the Walls. He is the first that by the Bridge of his
Castle mounts the Walls. Jerusalem taken. The fearful Slaughter of the
Sarasins. By Godfrey's Example the whole Army return solemn Thanks to God at
the Holy Sepulcher. An Assembly of the Princes to choose a King and a Patriarch.
The Speech of Robert, Duke of Normandy upon this Subject. Godfrey of Bullen
chosen and proclaimed King of Jerusalem. The memorable Battle of Ascalon
against the Sultan of Egypt, and the Victory of the Christians, which concluded
this first Crusade. The return of the Crusades. The Conquests of Godfrey of
Bullen, and his Death. An Abridgement of the History of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem till the time of the Second Crusade. The Reign of Baldwin the First.
The flourishing Estate of the Christians in the East, till his Death. The Reign
of Balwin the Second. The Relation of the founding the Military Orders of the
Knights Hospitallers. The Captivity of King Baldwin. His deliverance. His
Victories and Death. He is succeeded by his Son-in-Law Fowk d'Anjou. The
Prosperity of his Reign. His Death, and the Regency of Queen Melisintha, during
the Minority of Baldwin the Third. The Occasion of the second Expedition of the
Crusades. The Relation of the two Josselins de Courtenay, Earls of Edessa. The
taking of that City by Sanguin, Sultan if Alepo, and afterward by Noradin his
Son. The Character of that Prince, and his Conquests over the Christians.
Applications made to Lewis the young King of France. His Character, and what
moved him to undertake the Crusade. He consults St. Bernard concerning it. The
Character of that Saint, and the Order he received from Pope Eugenius the Third
to preach the Crusade. The General Assemblies of Bourges, Vezelay, and
Chartress, for the Crusade. It is published by Saint Bernard in France and
Germany. The Emperor and King take up the Cross. The Abbot Sugere declared
Regent in France. His Character and advice concerning the expedition. The
Voyage of the Emperor. The Description of the Tempest which almost ruined his
Army upon the Banks of the River Melas. The Fleet of the Crusades takes Lisbon
from the Sarasins. The Original of the Kings of Portugal. The Character and
Perfidy of the Greek Emperor Manuel. His underhand Treating with the Turks. The
miserable Overthrow of the Emperor's Army. The Voyage of King Lewis to
Constantinople, and his reception. The Advice of the Bishop of Langress, who
Counsels the King to take Constantinople; his Speech upon that Subject; the
reason that his Advice was not followed; the Treacheries of Manuel thereupon.
The Kings Voyage into Asia. His Interview with the Emperor Conrade, and the
Return of that Prince to Constantinople. The Description of the River Meander,
and the famous passage of the King of France with his Army over it. p. 68.

PART II.
BOOK I.
The Rereguard of the Kings Army Defeated in the Mountains of Laodicea for want
of observing the Kings Orders. The Description of that Combat. A most Heroic
Action of the King in an extreme Danger of his Life. His March, and admirable
Conduct to Attalia. The new Perfidy of the Greeks in Betraying the Royal Army.
The Arrival of the King at Antioch, and his Difference with Prince Raymond. The
Conquenty March to Jerusalem, where he is met by the Emperor Conrade. The
Council at Ptolemais, where the Seige of Damascus is resolved. The Description
of the City of Damascus. The manner of the March of the Christian Army toward
that City. The Young King Baldwin makes the first Attack, his Character, and
extraordinary Valor in the Attack against the Gardens and Suburbs of Damascus.
The great Combat upon the Bank of the River. A brave Action of the Emperor
Conrade. An Account of the Siege of Damascus and the Treachery of the Syrians,
which occasioned the ill Success of that Enterprise. The Return of the Emperor
and the King. The Murmurs against St. Bernard, and his Apology. The Conquest of
Noradin after the raising of the Siege. The Death of King Baldwin and his
Elogy. His Brother Amauri Succeeds him. The History of that Princes Life, who
by his Avarice loses the Opportunity of conquering all Egypt. The History of
Syracon, who seizes upon the Kingdom of Egypt, and leaves it to his Nephew
Saladin. The Elogy and first Conquest of that Prince. The Death of Amauri, and
the Troubles and Divisions which it caused in the Realm. The Conquests of
Saladin thereupon. The Reign of Baldwin the Leprous. The Embassage to the
Princes of the West, to desire their Help against Saladin. The Negotiation of
the Ambassadors with the Pope and Emperor, in France, and England with Henry
the Second. The Artifices of that King to elude this Embassage. A famous Care
of Conscience proposed in the Parliament at London upon this great Affair. The
reasons on one side and the other. The best opinion rejected by the Bishops as
False. The Displeasure of the Patriarch Heraclius against the King. The
Conference between Philip Augustus and King Henry, which recommences the War.
The Apostasy and Treason of a Templer. The Death of King Baldwin the Fourth,
and of the young King, his Nephew. The Artifice of Sybil, Mother to the
deceased Infant King to obtain the Crown for Guy de Lusignan her Second
Husband. The Despite of Raymond, Earl of Tripolis, thereupon. His Character,
His horrible Treason, and secret Treaty with Saladin, who enters Galilee and
besieges Tyberias. Division in the Council of War held by the King. The
unfortunate Battle of Tyberias; which was lost by the Treachery of Count
Raymond. The Advantage which Saladin made of his Victory. The Relation of the
Siege and taking of Jerusalem, by that Victorious Prince. The sorrowful
Departure of the Christians from Jerusalem, and the Generosity of Saladin. The
Cruelty, and miserable Death of the Earl of Tripolis. The Triumph of Saladin.
An Account of the Preserving of Tire by Marquis Conrade. The Causes of the Loss
of the Holy Land. p. 113.

BOOK II.
The Death of Pope Urban III. upon the News of the Loss of Jerusalem. The
Decrees of Pope Gregory VIII. and the Rules of the Cardinals, to move God
Almighty to Mercy and Compassion upon the Christians. Gregory makes Peace
between the Pisans and the Genoese. Clement III. his Successor sends his
Legates to the King of France, and to the King of England. The Conference at
Gisors. Where the Archbishop of Tire proposes the Crusade, which is received
by the two Kings. The Ordinances, which they made for the Regulation of it. The
War recommences between the two Kings, which hinders the Effect of the Crusade.
Richard, Duke of Guienne, joins with King Philip, against his own Father. The
Death of Henry II. King of England. His Elegy and Character. The Legates
propose the Crusade at the Diet at Mayence, The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
there takes upon him the Cross; as do many other Princes and Prelates of the
Empire. The Description of that Emperor. His March to Thracia, where he is
necessitated to Combat the Greeks. The Character of the Greek Emperor, Isaac
Angelus. The Reason why this Emperor betrayed the Ltains. The History of the
False Dositheus, who seduced him, and of Theodore Balsamon. The Victories of
Frederick in Thracia. The stupid Folly of Isaac. And his dishonorable Treaty
with the Emperor. The Passage and March of Frederick into Asia. The Treachery
of the Sultan of Iconium, and the Defeat of his Troops by a pretty Stratagem of
the Emperor 's. An Heroic Action of a certain Cavalier. The first Battle of
Iconium. The Description, Assaulting and Taking of that City. The Second Battle
of Iconium. The Triumph of the Emperor. The March of the Army toward Syria.
The Description, and the Passage of Mount Taurus. The Death of the Emperor and
his Elogy. Frederick, his Son, leads the Army to Antioch; after that, to Tire;
and from thence to the Camp at Ptolemais or Acon. The Description of that City,
and the adjacent Country. The Relation of the famous Siege against it, begun by
King Guy de Lusignan. The Succors of two fair Naval Armies. The Description of
the famous Battle of Ptolemais. The manner of the Christians Encampment. The
Reason of the length of the Siege. The Death of Queen Sybilla, and the Division
between Guy de Lusignan and the Marquis Conrade, who marries the Princess
Isabella, the Wife of Humphrey de Thoron. A general Assault given to Ptolemais
upon the Arrival of Frederick, Duke of Suabia. A brave Action of Leopold, Duke
of Austria. The Death of Frederick, and his admirable Virtue. p. 149

BOOK III.
The Beginning of the Reign of Richard Coeur de Lion, King of England, and his
Preparations for the Holy War. The Preparations of Philip the August. The
Conferences of Nonancour and Vezelay between the two Kings. The Portraict of
Philip the August. The Character of Richard King of England. The Voyage of the
two Kings to Messina. An adventure of the English Fleet. A Quarrel between the
English and the Messineses. The taking of that City. The Quarrel between the
two Kings, and their new Accommodation. The Relation of the Abbot Joachim, and
his Character. His Conference with King Richard. The Departure of King Philip,
and his Arrival before Acre. The Departure of Richard. The Relation of the
Conquest of the Kingdom of Cyprus by that Prince. His Arrival before Acre. A
new Difference between the two Kings, and the true Causes of it. Their Accord.
The Reduction of the City of Acre. The extreme Violence of King Richard. The
Return of Philip the August. The March of Richard. The Battle of Antipatris.
The single Combat between King Richard and Sultan Saladin. A noble Action of
William de Pourcelets, who saved the Life of that King. Richard presents
himself before Jerusalem at an unseasonable Time, and therefore retires, and
disperses his Army into Quarters. The Marquis Conrade slain by two Assassins,
of the old Mountain. The Description of that Government, and those People. A
wicked Action of the Templers, which hindered their Conversion. The Cause of the
Marquis his Death. Richard accused of that Crime. His Innocence is proved.
Isabella Marries Count Henry, and is declared Queen of Jerusalem. Guy de
Lusignan made King of Cyprus. Richard pretends a Second time to besiege
Jerusalem, defeats the Enemies, takes the Caravan of Egypt, but retires by a
cunning Agreement. A calumny against Richard, which he clears by a most
memorable Action. The Battle of Jaffa; and the taking of that Place from the
Sarasins by Richard. His Treaty with Saladin, and his unfortunate Return. He is
taken and Imprisoned. His Deliverance. The Justice which he demanded, and which
he obtains. A new division among the Princes of the East, appeased by the Count
de Champagne. The Death of Saladin and his Elogy. Division happens among the
Infidels, which gives occasion to a fourth Crusade. p. 186.

PART III.
BOOK I.
THe little disposition which was found in Europe to this fourth Crusade. The
Pope resolves, at last, to address himself to the Emperor, Henry VI. The Diet
of Worms, where the Princes of Germany take up the Cross. An Heroic Action of
Margarite, the Sister of Philip the August, Queen of Hungary, who takes upon
her the Cross. The Artifice of the Emperor, who raises three Armies, and makes
use of one of them to assure himself of the Kingdom of Naples; where he
extinguishes the whole race of the Norman Princes. The Arrival of the Armies,
by Sea and Land, at Ptolemais. The Truce broken by the Christians. The
deplorable Death of Henry Count de Champagne, and King of Jerusalem. Jaffa
taken by Saphadin. The Battle of Sidon, gained against Saphadin, by the Princes
of the Crusade. The greatest part of the Cities of Palestine taken by the
Christians. Emri, Brother of Guy de Lusignan, King of Cyprus, made King of
Jerusalem. The Siege of Thoron unhappily raised by the horrible Treason of the
Bishop of Wertzbourg, and his Punishment. Division among the Christians. The
Combat of Jaffa. The Death of the Emperor Henry VI. The Description of that
Prince. A Schism in the Empire occasions the sudden Return of the Princes of
the Crusade, who abandon the Holy Land to the Infidels. The Death of Pope
Celestin III. Innocent III. succeeds him. The Elogy and Portraict of that Pope.
He endeavors to set up a new and General Crusade. Fouques de Nevilli preaches
it in France. The Elogy and character of that holy Man. The Crusade is preached
in England. King Richard engages many of his Subjects in it. The Death of that
Prince, and his Penitence. The Counts of Champagne, Blois and Flanders take
upon them the Cross. Their Treaty with the Venetians, by the Undertaking of
Henry Dandolo, Doge of Venice. The Description and Elogy of that Prince. The
Death of the Count of Champagne. Boniface, Marquis of Montferrat, made chief of
the Crusade, in his place. The Death of Fouques de Nevilli. A new Treaty
between the Princes of the Crusade, and the Venetians, for the Siege of Zara. A
great division upon that Subject. Henry Dandolo takes upon him the Cross. The
Siege and Taking of Zara. The History of Isaac, and the two Alexises, Emperor's
of Constantinople. The young Alexis desires the Assistance of the Princes of
the Crusade, against his Uncle Alexis Comnenius, who had usurped the Imperial
Throne. The Speech of his Ambassadors. The Treaty of the French and Venetians
with this Prince, for his Re-establishment. A new Division upon this Subject. A
new Accord among the Confederate in the Isle of Corfu. The Description of their
Fleet, and their Arrival before Constantinople.

BOOK II.
The Condition wherein the City of Constantinople was when it was besieged by
the French and Venetian Crusades. The Defeat of the Usurpers Brother-in-Law by
a small Party of the French. The Passage and the Battle of the Bosphorus. The
taking of the Castle of Galatha. The Venetians force the Entry of the Port. An
Assault given both by Sea and Land, ^o Constantinople. The Venetians take five
and twenty Towers. A Sally made by the Emperor Alexis with a prodigious Army,
and his Infamous Cowardice. His Flight, and the Reduction of Constantinople.
The Establishment of Isaac, and the young Alexis. A Prolongation of the Treaty,
for a Year between that Emperor and the Confederate Princes. Their Exploits in
Thracia. A Dreadful Fire at Constantinople. The History of the horrible Treason
of Murtzuphle. The young Alexis suffers himself to be surprised by the
Artifices of that Traitor, and breaks with the Confederates. The Speech of
Conon de Bethune to the Emperors, to oblige them to accomplish their Treaty.
War declared against them upon their refusal. The Greeks attempt in Vain to
burn the Venetian Fleet. The Description of that wild Fire. The consequent
Treasons of Murtzuphle. The Election of Cannabus. The double Treason of
Murtzuphle; who makes himself be proclaimed Emperor. The Death of Isaac, and of
the young Alexis, whom Murtzuphle strangles with his own Hands. The
Confederates make War against the Tyrant. His Defeat by Henry the Brother of
Count Baldwin. The first Assault given upon the Port side of Constantinople,
wherein the Confederates are repulsed. The Second Assault by which the City is
taken by plain Force. The Flight of Murtzuphle. The Greeks lay down their Arms.
The City plundered, and the Booty there gained. The Relics from thence
transported to several Churches, of Europe. Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, chosen
Empeperor. The Policy of the Venetians in the Election of that Prince. His
Elogy and Character. The Election of a Patriarch. The Destribution of the
Provinces of the Empire. The happy Beginning of the Emperor, who reduces all
Thracia. Murtzuphle surprised, and betrayed by the Old Alexis, who puts out his
Eyes. The Flight of Alexis, and the taking of Murtzuphle. He is brought back to
Constantinople, where for the Punishment of his Crimes, he is thrown headlong
from a high Column. Old Alexis taken. His End. The Glorious Success of this
Crusade.

BOOK III.
The unfortunate Success of those who abandoned the Confederates to pass into
Syria. The Care of the Pope for Constantinople, who sends Doctors from Paris to
reduce the Schismatics. The Death of Mary the Empress, Wife of Baldwin. The
Death of Isabella Queen of Jerusalem. The Princess Mary her Daughter succeeds
in the Realm, and Marries Count John de Brienne. The Relation how that Prince
and Count Gautier his Brother conquered the Kingdom of Naples. The Exploits of
King John de Brienne. The Pope procures him Aid. A piteous Adventure of some
young Men, who by a strange Illusion took upon them the Cross. The design of
Pope Innocent to procure a general Crusade, favored by the Victory of Philip
the August against the Emperor Otho. The Battle of Bovines. The Relation of the
Council of Lateran, where the Crusade is Decreed. The Pope himself Preaches
it. His death in that Holy Exercise. A Fable concerning his Purgatory. The
Election of Pope Honorius III of that Name. His Zeal and Industry to promote
the Crusade. Andrew King of Hungary the Head thereof. The Princes that
Accompanied him, and their Voyage. Their Conjunction with King John de Brienne.
Their Expedition against Coradin. The Description of Thabor, and the Relation
of the Siege of that Fortress, which had been built there by Coradin. The
Return of the King into Hungary. The Arrival of the Northern Fleet of the
Crusades, under the Earl of Holland. The Relation of their Adventures and
Exploits against the Moors in Portugal. The Siege and Battle of Alcazar. The
Victory of the Crusades. Their Voyage to Ptolemais. The Reasons of the
Resolution which they took to attack Egypt. The Description of Damiata. The
Account of that memorable Siege, which lasted eighteen Months. The Attack and
taking of the Tower of Pharus. A Description of certain Engines of a new
Invention. The Death of Saphadin upon the News of the taking of that Place. His
Elogy and Character. Meledin succeeds him. An Error of the Christians after the
taking of Pharus. Cardinal Albano arrives with a potent Reinforcemet to the
Crusades. The Division between the King and the Legate, and the Cause of it. An
heroic Action of certain Soldiers, who break the Enemies Bridge. The Army
passes the Nile. Sultan Meledin flies. The City Besieged by Land. Two great
Armies of Sarasins besiege the Camp. They atack the Lines and force them. A
great Combat within the Lines. The Enemy at last repulsed. The Arrival of St.
Francis before Damiata. His Conference with the Sultan. The Battle without the
Lines lost by the Crusades. An Advantageous Peace offered to the Christians by
the Sultan. The Reasons for and against it. It is at last rejected by the
Legate. Damiata taken by Night.

PART IV.
BOOK I.
THE Condition, the manners, and the Religion of the People of Georgia, who
resolve to join with the Princes of the Crusade, but are hindered by an
irruption of the Tartars into their Country. The Emperor Frederick sends a
considerable relief to Damiata. The return of King John de Brienne to the Army
of the Crusades. The Legate Pelagius opposes his advice, and makes them
resolve upon a Battle against Meledin, who once more offers Peace upon most
advantageous Terms. The Legate occasions the refusal of them. The humor and
description of this Legate. An account of the miserable adventure of the
Christian Army, which by the inundation of the Nile, is reduced to the
Discretion of Meledin. The wise Policy of this Sultan, who saves the Army by a
Treaty, which he was willing to make with the Crusades. This misfortune is
followed by the Rupture of Frederick the Emperor with the Pope. The Character
of that Emperor. The Complaints of Pope Honorius against him. His Answers and
their Reconciliation. A famous Conference for the Holy War. King John de
Brienne comes to desire assistance throughout Europe. The Death of Philip the
August. His Elogy, his Will, and his Funerals. New endeavors of the Pope and
the Emperor for the Holy War. The Marriage of Frederick with the Princess
Jolante, the daughter of King John de Brienne, Heiress of the Realm of
Jerusalem. John de Brienne is dispoiled of his Crown by his new Son-in-Law. He
puts himself under the Protection of the Pope Honorius. The good Offices of the
Pope to pacify the Princes. The death of Lewis the eight King of France. He is
succeeded by his Son Lewis the ninth. The Death of Pope Honorius. He is
succeeded by Gregory the ninth. The Portraict of this new Pope. The Army of the
Crusades much diminished by diseases. The Emperor takes shipping. He stays at
Otranto, where the Lantgrave of Thuringia dies. A great rupture between the
Pope and the Emperor. The Pope excommunicates him. Their Manifests. The Revenge
which Frederick takes. He passes at last into Syria. His differences with the
Patriarch and the Templers. His Treaty with the Sultan, his Coronation at
Jerusalem, his return and accord with the Pope. The Conference of Spolata, for
the Continuation of the Crusade. The History of Theobald the fifth Earl of
Champagne, and King of Navarr. His Voyage to the Holy Land with the other
Princes of the Crusade. His description, and his Elogy. A Crusade published for
the Succor of Constantinople. An Abridgement of the History of the Latin
Emperors there. The Causes of the little Success of the King of Navarr's
Enterprise. A new Rupture between the Pope and the Emperor. The Occasions
thereof. The deplorable effects of that breach, which ruins the Affairs of the
Holy Land. The Jealousy among the Princes occasions their loss. Their defeat
at the Battle of Gaza. The unsuccessful Voyage of Richard Earl of Cornwall. The
death of the Constable Amauri de Montfort. His Elogy, his Burial, and that of
his Ancestors, and of Simon de Montfort, in the Monastery of Hautebruiere. A
Council called at Rome. The Pope's Fleet defeated by the Emperor's, and the
taking of the Legates and Prelates going to the Council. The death of Pope
Gregory. The election of Celestin the fourth, and of Innocent the fourth. He
breaks with the Emperor, and retires into France.

BOOK II.
THE Original of the Tartars, and their Empire. They drive the Corasmins, the
Descendants of the Ancient Parthians, out of Persia. The Irruption of these
Barbarians into Palestine. The entire Desolation of Jerusalem. The Effect which
this produced in the West. The Relation of the first Council of Lions, where
Frederick is excommunicated and deposed. The Decree of the Council for the
Crusade. The Decision of the Pope touching the Deposition of Dom Sanches, King
of Portugal. A mavelous Example of Fidelity in the Governor of Conimbra. The
Emperor's Manifest, and his Exploits. A Crusade published against him, which
hinders the Effect of the General Crusade for the deliverance of the Holy Land.
St. Lewis undertakes it singly with the French. He takes the Cross, and causes
many of the Nobility and Gentry of France, to follow his Example in the
Assembly of Paris. The Conference of Clugri for this Crusade. The Embassage of
Frederick to St. Lewis, and the wise Conduct of the King in reference to the
Emperor. The Politic Reasons to justify this Enterprise of St. Lewis, with an
account of what was done at the beginning of it. His Voyage to Aigues-Mortes,
where he takes shipping. His arrival in the Isle of Cyprus. He commits a great
Error by staying there six Months. The Death of diverse Lords there. That of
Archambald de Bourbon. The Marriage of his Granddaughter, Beatrix of Burgundy,
with Robert the fourth, the Son of St. Lewis, from whom the Princes of the
August House of Bourbon are descended. The Embassage of the Tartars to St.
Lewis, during his stay in Cyprus. His arrival in Egypt. The Battle of Damiata,
and the taking of that City from the Sarasins, who abandon it, and the reason
of their doing so. The Entry of the King into Damiata. The Error which he
commits by stopping there. The Army grows dissolute and debauched by lying idly
there. The arrival of the Count de Poitiers. The Resolution which is taken of
going directly to Caire. The Situation of the Places where the two Armies are
encamped. The unsuccessful attempt of the Crusades to turn the Nile. They pass
the River. The first Battle of Massore, where the Count d' Artois is slain. The
second Battle, and the admirable Actions of the King. The Plague and Famine in
the Camp. An unfortunate Retreat wherein the whole Army is defeated, and the
King, with all the Princes and Lords are taken Prisoners. An Heroic Action of
Gaucher de Chastillon in this Retreat. The admirable Constancy of the King in
his Imprisonment. His Treaty with the Sultan. The Original of the Mamalukes.
The Revolution in the Empire of Egypt by the Murder of the Sultan. The
Confirmation of the Treaty, with the Admirals. The King absolutely refuses to
take the Oath, which these Barbarians would exact from him. The Refutation of
the Fable touching the pawning of the Holy Eucharist to the Sarasins by the
King Lewis. His deliverance, and admirable Fidelity to his Promise, and the
perfidiousness of the Egyptians.

BOOK III.
The General Consternation all over France, upon the News of the King's
Imprisonment; the Tumult, the Shepherds, their Original, their Disorders, and
Defeat. St. Lewis after his deliverance performs his Articles with great
Justice* The Admirals fail on their part. The Original of the Hospital of the
Fifteen Score. The Council debates the matter of the King's return. The Reasons
on the one side and the other. It is at last concluded for his stay in
Palestine. Four Famous embassages to St. Lewis; from Pope Innocent, from the
Sultan of Damascus, from the Ancient of the Mountain, and from the Emperor
Frederick. The Death of that Emperor, and the different Opinions thereupon. An
Error of St. Lewis, who loses a fair opportunity of making use of one Party of
the Sarasins, to ruin the other. The Election of a Mamaluke Sultan. The gallant
Actions of St. Lewis in Palestine. The Death of Queen Blanch, and the return of
the King into France. The Rupture and War between the Venetians and Genoese
occasions the loss of the Holy Land. The Conquests of Haulon, Brother to the
great Cham, stops the Progress of the Sarasins. The Relation of the Mamaluke
Sultans. They vanquish the Tartars which ravage Palestine. The Character of
Sultan Bendocdar, the great Enemy of the Christians. His Conquests upon them.
His Cruelty, and the Glorious Martyrdom of the Soldiers of the Garrison of
Sephet, and of two Cordeliers, and a Commander of the Temple. The taking and
Destruction of Antioch by this Sultan. The quarrels between the Popes and the
Princes of the House of Suabia, obstruct the Succors of the West. The
Histories of Pope Innocent, and the Emperor Conrade; of Pope Alexander and
Mainfrey, against whom he vainly publishes Crusades. The History of Charles d'
Anjou, to whom Pope Urban, the Successor of Alexander, and Pope Clement the
Fourth, give the Realms of Naples and Sicily, as Fieffs escheated to the Church
by Felony. His Exploits, his Battles, and his Victories over Mainfrey and
Conradin. The deplorable Death of that young Prince. The Victories of Charles,
cause the Pope and St. Lewis to entertain a Design for a new Crusade. An
Assembly at Paris about that Affair, where the King, the Princes, and Lords,
take upon them the Cross. All other Nations decline the Crusade. The Collusion
of the Emperor Michael Paleologus. The Condition of the King's Army. The
Resolution taken to Attack Tunis, and the Reasons wherefore. The Description of
Tunis and Carthage. The taking of the Port, the Tower, and the Castle of
Carthage. The Malady makes great Destruction in the King's Army. His Death,
Elogy and Character. The Arrival of Charles, King of Sicily. The Exploits of
the Army. The Treaty of Peace with the King of Tunis, who becomes Tributary to
Charles. The return of the two Kings; their Fleet is horribly beaten by a
Tempest. Prince Edward of England saved, his Vow to go to the Holy Land. His
Voyage, his Exploits, and his return. The vain endeavors of Pope Gregory the
Tenth, for a new Crusade. The second Council of Lions. The last causes of the
loss of the Holy Land. The quarrel among the Christian Princes for the
Succession to the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Death of Bendocdar. The defeat of
his Successor by the Tartars. The hopes of the recovery of all Palestine, by
the Arms of King Charles of Anjon, ruined by the sad accident of the Sicilian
Vespers. The new division among the Princes, and the Progress of the Mamaluke
Sultans. The Relation of the lamentable Siege, and the taking of Acre by these
Barbarians. All the other places are lost, and the Christians of the West
wholly driven out of Palestine and Syria. The vain and fruitless attempts which
have since been made to renew the Crusades.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS of the First Book.
The greatness of the Subject of the ensuing History. The newness, and
advantage of it. The Original of the Turks, and their Conquest in Asia from the
Sarasens. The Conference of Peter the Hermit with the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
The Description of the Hermit. His Negotiation with Pope Urban the Second, and
his Preaching the Crusade. The Relation of the Council of Placentia, that of
the Council of Clermond. The horrible Disorders occasioned by the little Wars
between private Persons which were tolerated in those times, and which were
regulated by the Canon of the Peace and the Truce. Aymar de Monteil Bishop of
Pavia, Legate of the Pope for the Crusade. The prodigious number of those who
took upon them the Cross, and the Disorders that insued. The Names of the
Princes of the Crusade. An account of Duke Godfrey, and his Character. He sends
Peter the Hermit before him. A Description of the Conduct and manner of living
of this Solitary. He divides his Army into two Bodies. The Disorder and Ruin of
the first under Gautier Monyless. The greater Disorder and ill Fortune of the
second commanded by Peter himself. The Defeat of two other Armies of Crusades
conducted by a Priest Godescalc and Count Emico, their overthrow by the
Hungarians. The Conference of Peter the Hermit with the Emperor Alexis. The
Character, Conduct, and secret designs of that Prince, and the reasons of his
perfidiousness. The passage of the Hermites Army into Asia, and the continuance
of their disorders. The Italians and Germans separate from the French. The
first overthrown by young Soliman Sultan of Nice. The first Battle of Nice
where the other part are overthrown also by Soliman. The Voyage of Godfrey of
Bullen, and the Princes that accompanied him. The Voyage of Hugh the Great, and
the Princes that followed him. his Character, Conduct, and Imprisonment by the
Greek Emperor. The War of Godfrey against Alexis. The Extremity to which the
Emperor is reduced, and the Treaty concluded between him and the Princes. The
Relation of the Conquests and Settlement of the Normans in Italy. The Voyage of
Bohemond Prince of Tarentum, and the Princes that went along with him. The
Voyage of Raymond de Tholose, of Aymar de Monteil Bishop of Pavia, and the
other Princes and Lords which accompanied them. The Character of that Earl, his
Conference with the Emperor, and the Treachery of that Prince. The Voyage of
Robert Duke of Normandy, his Character, and Treaty with the Emperor.

IF ever any Undertaking were capable of possessing the Historian with a just
fear of defeating the mighty Expectation of his Reader, most assuredly it may
be apprehended in attempting the Design of relating the ensuing History of the
Crusade.

And indeed amidst all the most extraordinary Revolutions which may be found
either in the Establishment of New, or the Ruin of the Ancient Monarchies, one
shall difficultly meet with any thing more memorable; and whether we consider
the Vastness and Importance of this Famous Enterprise of the Crusado's, or the
Quality of the Persons who have fortunately executed, or unsuccessfully
attempted this great Design; whether we compute the number or variety of those
extraordinary Events which were accompanied with such diversity of Fortune; or,
in short, if we take a Survey of those Heroic Actions which were then
performed, one shall find them such, as not scarcely to be outdone even by the
Romantic Achievements of the Fabulous Ages.

One shall there see the Holy Wars, which the Christians have undertaken either
to reconquer or preserve a Country wherein all the glorious Mysteries of the
Redemption of Mankind were accomplished; and which the Worshippers of the
Eternal Son of God Jesus Christ did believe that they could not, without infamy
and betraying the Interest of their Religion, permit to remain under the
Tyrannick Dominion of Barbarous Infidels.

On the one Part, three of the greatest Kings of France: as many Emperors, the
Kings of England, Denmark, Hungary, Navar and Cyprus; the Dukes of Lorrain,
Normandy, Austria and Suabia, and most of the Princes of Europe appeared at the
head of their Troops, being followed by whatever was brave or gallant
throughout all the Western Monarchies: on the other side the Sultans of Egypt,
of Babylon and Damascus, with all the celebrated Princes of the Turks and
Sarasens, who have rendered their names so famous by the greatness of their
Actions, are the Hero's who must tread the stage of this History, persons so
considerable, that singly they might furnish a very fair Volume. All that is
surprising in unexpected successes, all that is so admirably represented in
Fiction, or wonderful in the most Heroic Enterprises, will be found in the
following Account, and to render it yet more valuable will be accompanied with
that solid foundation of Truth, which will distinguish it from those ingenious
Fictions which have been invented with so much pain, to produce some pleasure
to the Readers.

That I may therefore endeavor that this History may in some sort appear new,
and with all its natural Ornaments, at least that it may not want that little
beauty which even the most indifferent Relations seem to challenge; it is to be
considered that though these matters have been often heretofore related, either
in some parts by particular Authors, or in the general Histories of such
Natures as have had more or less concern in this affair of the Crusade, yet the
World has not hitherto seen them wrought together into one Regular composure,
with all the dependencies, consequencies and connexions, nor with that
continued Chain of Causes and Effects, and such Circumstances as might render
the work so accomplished and delicate as it ought to be; and in which the
charming secret which does so insensibly allure and please, consists; and which
is indeed the soul and spirit of History, and ought to be the End of every just
Historian.

Moreover, as the Subject is so Noble and agreeable, so neither is it less
advantageous then delightful; For here one shall find the great Concerns of the
Church, of two mighty Empires, and the Principal Estates of Europe and Asia:
there shall one discover the causes which occasioned that glorious design so
often to fall, and yet afterward to rise again: there may we see that Zeal of
our Ancestors which seems to reproach our slow imitation; Especially at a time
when the Forces of one single Monarch, could he but remain assured of his
Neighbors, are sufficient to ruin the Tyranny of those Infidels, whose power
consists chiefly in those fatal divisions among Christians, which hitherto have
prevented their employing their Arms to their destruction. However the hope
that my endeavors will not be unprofitable, and that God Almighty whose help I
implore will assist me with his Grace, and bestow that happy success, which is
not to be expected from me, have given me encouragement to pursue this
difficult task which I have undertaken.

Arabian Sarasens under their Caliphs the successors of Mahomet having made
themselves Masters of all the upper Asia and Egypt, did also possess the Holy
Land, after which time the Turks siezing upon it did by their revolt establish
a new Empire over Asia, these People are originally descended from that part of
the Asiatique Sarmatia which lies between Mount Caucasus and the River Tanais,
the Lake of Meotis and the Caspian Sea. And whether it were, that they were
dissatisfied with their present Habitations, or that they were forced from them
by some new Intruders, most certain it is, that having divided themselves to
search for new Regions, one part of them marching Westward, advanced by degrees
as far as the banks of the Danubius; and the other far more numerous, moving
toward the East, passed the River Volga, and settled in the Northern Climates
bordering upon the Caspian Sea, formerly the habitation of the Scythians and
Massagetes, and which at this day retains the name of Turquestan by them
imposed upon it, lying all along the River Jaxartes; and not long after passing
that River they extended their Consines as far as Maurenthor betwixt that River
and the Oxus, or as the Greeks called it the River Araxis; Mauritius, by the
way of the Caspian Sea they transported themselves into Persia where they made
great depredations and ravaged whole Provinces. Heraclius in the War which he
made against Cosroes. But when about the year 640 Omar one of the Successors of
Mahomet had reduced all Persia under the Empire of the Sarasens, the Turks to
whom he allotted certain Countries, entered into his pay and served him in his
Wars against the Greek Emperors for almost 400 years; till such times as the
Sarasens being mightily broken by their Intestine Divisions, and the Turks on
the other hand wonderfully augmented both in number and Strength, they embodied
themselves under a Prince of their own, choosing one of the Descendants of
Salgue or Sadock, a Person to whom the People paid a singular Veneration; And
in conclusion having vanquished the Sarasens in three general Battles, they
rendered themselves Masters of all Persia about the year 1042 and afterward of
Mesopotamia, Palestine, and Syria, changing their Religion also about the same
time with their Fortune, and being converted from Paganism to the Superstition
of Mahomet that great Impostor.

This Victorious Prince whom the Arabians call Abutalip, the Greeks
Sangrolipax, and William of Tire, Belphet or Belphetoc, after he had spent
above thirty years in the Establishment of this mighty new Monarchy in the
Upper Asia; entered also the Lesser Asia with a most numerous Army, where in a
set Battle he defeated and took Prisoner Diogenes, the Roman Emperor. Turks
under the Conduct of Cuthume and his Son Solomon, near Relations to the Sultan,
seized upon the Realm of Pontus since called Turcomania, the Provinces of
Lycaonia, and Bithynia, and about the Year 1081. during the Divisions of the
Greeks, and the sluggish Emperors Michel Ducas, and Nicephorus Botoniatus who
was deposed by Alexis Comnenius, Solomon placed the Seat of his Empire at Nice
the Capital City of that Country.

It was then under the Tyranny of these Turkish Princes, that all Asia, Syria,
and Palestine, and the City of Jerusalem lay groaning and in Servitude, when it
pleased God to inflame the hearts of the Christian Princes with a Noble Zeal to
undertake the Conquest and Deliverance of the Holy Land, which they
accomplished in that wonderful manner, which I am now about to relate.

Europe to visit the Holy Places of Palestine, a Frenchman of Amiens in
Picardie, a Solitary by Profession, whose name was Peter the Hermit, about the
Year 1093. took a Voyage to Jerusalem to satisfy his Devotion toward the
Sacred Monuments of the Redemption of mankind. Being arrived there, he
understood from his Host the miserable condition to which the Christians were
reduced; and having taken a view himself of the piteous estate of that desolate
City, he resolved to confer with the Patriarch Simeon, not only to receive a
more perfect Information of the truth of those Particulars, but also to
deliberate with him, concerning some means of delivering the People of God from
their cruel Servitude. The Patriarch who quickly perceived the virtuous
inclinations and brisk temper of the Hermit, opened to him his very Soul, he
recounted to him in most passionate Language the innumerable and horrible
Sacriledges, which were by the Infidels daily committed within the most Holy
Places, and the insupportable miseries which not only the poor Christians, but
the Patriarchs themselves who were treated like Slaves, had been forced to
endure under their tyrannous and barbarous Lords, by the space of five hundred
years. After which with many bitter Sighs he gave him to understand, that
considering the lamentable estate of the Eastern Empire, the Evils which they
suffered were not only insupportable, but without all expectation of Redress,
unless they might hope for Assistance from the West. Peter, who was most
sensibly touched with the Discourse of the Patriarch, Palestine could depend;
and for his own particular he very courageously offered to carry those Lords
throughout the West, and to do all the Good Offices he was capable of toward
the exciting of the Christian Princes to undertake an Enterprise so glorious,
so necessary for the Honor, and the Common Interest and good of all Christendom.

Simeon surprised with the Resolution and Courage of the Hermit, which he
observed to be accompanied also with so much Wisdom, was struck with a strong
Impulse, that God Almighty was resolved to deliver his People in such a manner
as should redound most to his own Glory, since the Instrument which he made use
of for the accomplishment of such a mavelous Work, carried such a
disproportion to the Greatness of so high and so hardy an Enterprise; for in
Truth Peter carried nothing promising in his Person, which might make it be
believed that he was like to be a proper Negotiator of an Affair of that
Importance; for he was small of Stature, and not well proportioned neither, his
Aspect was by no means agreeable, and he was far from sweetning by Art those
ruder Lineaments of his Visage, insomuch that by the little care he took, in
which others bestow so much pains, to make himself appear tolerable, he rather
resembled some savage Creature, his hair disordered, his Beard long and long
neglected; and considering the Austerity of his Life, his ill shape and the
meanness of his Habit, those who were not accustomed to make very curious and
penetrating discoveries, could not but make a very disadvantagious Judgment of
him; But coming more narrowly to consider him, it was easy to discover, that
as he had been very studious in all sorts of Learning, so he had made very
great Improvements in his Mind, and that together with a solid Judgment he had
a great Mind, an admirable Resolution to attempt, and a mavelous Vivacity in
the ready Execution of what he had resolved; that he was Master of a Natural
Eloquence, capable of persuading what he pleased without Artifice; and, in
short, there appeared in his Eyes a fire so quick and sparkling, and something
so Noble in his Air and Mine, as was sufficient to convince one that there
dwelt a great Soul in that little Body.

Pope and the Christian Princes of the West. The Natural Generosity of a Person
of Courage who had voluntarily engaged himself in an Enterprise so great and
difficult, was sufficient of it self to remove all the fear which might be
apprehended in the Execution; but however he was strongly persuaded, that since
Providence seemed so extraordinarily engaged, nothing was able to surmount the
Divine Power, and that therefore he might be confident of a happy and
successful Conclusion of this Affair. Peter now resolved to put in Execution
what he had promised the Patriarch Simeon, the Evening before his departure
shut himself up in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, there to pass the night in
Prayer, with all his Soul to implore the Succor of Almighty God upon such an
important occasion; and after his Devotions falling asleep, whether it were
that his imagination violently prepossessed with his intended Enterprise, acted
upon his Soul more vigorously during his sleep than while he was awake, or that
God was pleased to make use of a Dream to reveal his pleasure to him as
formerly he had to the Holy Prophets, in his sleep there seemed to appear to
him Jesus Christ in such a Condition as he was when he arose from the
Sepulcher, who coming toward him and softly jogging him, said, Arise Peter and
immediately go about the Charge Imposed on thee, I will be ever with thee; It
is high time that the Sanctity of these places Consecrated by my Presence
should cease to be profaned, and that I should deliver my People from the Cruel
Servitude under which they have for so many Ages groaned. The Hermit presently
thereupon awaking, felt, or at least believed he felt upon his Soul the Effects
of an Impression, far different from what Common Dreams are wont to leave upon
the Mind, and therefore doubted not but Jesus Christ had thus appeared to him
to give him an immediate Commission from his own Mouth. This Belief which did
so firmly Establish it self in his Soul, would permit him no longer to doubt
the Truth of it was such a new Confirmation of the Truth of the Heavenly
Vision, Bari, from whence he proceeded to the Court of the Pope.

The Pope then being was Urban the Second, a Frenchman by Nation, of the
Diocese of Rheims, who after he had with great applause and for the advantage
of the Church managed his Legation into Germany, was created Cardinal of Ostia;
and Six Years after he was chosen Pope at Terracina whither the Sacred College
was retired, whilst Guibert the Antipope assisted by the Arms of the
Schismatique Emperor Henry the Fourth possessed the City of Rome; but Germany
and Italy declaring against the Emperor, and the Antipope being forced to
retire to Verona where Henry had shut himself up, Urban who was unwilling to
employ Force, which he could have done, to re-enter Rome, returned thither
peaceably and was received by the City, although the Schismatiques kept still
the Castle of St. Angelo. Here it was that the Hermit addressed himself to the
Pope, and having delivered to him the Letters of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, he
gave him a full account of his Commission. He had all the Success he could hope
or desire to find from this Pope, in whose Soul he found all the Inclination he
could wish to favor so fair an Enterprise. For this Pope Urban, who had not
only a great Mind, but a large Fond of Piety and Religion, but had also been
the great Confident of Gregory the Seventh, Pope about twenty years before had
laid a Design for the Uniting of all the Christian Kingdoms in a Holy War
against the Infidels, who having ravaged all Asia were advanced within sight of
the Walls of Constantinople, which they also threatened to attack. He was
resolved himself in Person to march at the Head of the Christians, of whom
above fifty thousand had listed themselves, and were ready to march under his
Conduct; but the jealousy which he had of the ill Designs of the Emperor who
refused to join with him in this Sacred Expedition, obliged him to break those
Measures, and to apply himself to the defense of the Church which was in
Extreme Hazard of being oppressed by the Avarice and Violence of that Prince.
But Urban who had as much Courage and better Fortune than Gregory, the Obstacle
of the Schism being now removed, resolved strongly to undertake an Enterprise
so illustrious, so advantageous to the Glory of God, so necessary to the good
of all Christendom, and which would render his name venerable, and his
Pontificate Memorable to all Posterity.

He therefore gave the Hermit a favorable Reception, and granted him long
Audiences, the better to inform himself of the Exact Posture of the Eastern
Affairs, and the Forces of the Turks and Sarasens which he was to oppose. And
as he quickly discovered the great Qualities of this little man whose
Appearance made yet smaller promises, perceiving also his Address, good Sense,
and the Conduct he had to manage this great Affair, together with the Courage
and Resolution with which he Espoused the Design, he was not long before he
determined, to make use of him alone for the carrying on what ever was
necessary for the Design till it was fit for him publicly to appear in it. And
therefore sending for the Hermit, he opened his very heart to him, in such
terms as made it evident that he had as violent a Passion for the deliverance
of Jerusalem from the Infidels, as the Patriarch himself who had employed him
in that Negotiation. He promised him that he would employ all the Interest he
had in Heaven and Earth, his Forces, his Revenue, his Reputation, and all his
Pontifical Authority to form a Holy League of all the Western Princes, to
oppose the Infidels who so cruelly tyrannized over the Christians in the East.
But withal he informed him, that before he proceeded any further, it was
convenient that he who had begun this great Affair, should endeavor to dispose
the Minds of the People in all the Countries both on this and the other side of
the Alps, by publishing to them those things which he had with so much Zeal
and Passion related to him.

There are few Examples to be produced comparable to this, which makes it
appear how one single Person was able to move the whole Earth by his Constancy,
Conduct and Resolution in pursuing a Holy Enterprise which he had formed with
so much Generosity, Zeal and Courage: and whether it were the Extreme Passion
which the Hermit had to see the Design succeed and prosper, that rendered his
Arguments persuasive beyond the Power of his own Genius though Naturally
Eloquent; or whether the Splendour of so great a Design dazzled his Fears, and
transported his Mind with a Passion for such a Novelty as carried all the
Charms of Honorable and Excellent; or rather that God who had chosen this
Instrument to manifest his Power and his Glory acted by him more Efficaciously
upon the Hearts of men which are in his Hands to dispose of as he pleases,
most certain it is, that never any single and so inconsiderable a Cause
produced such sudden surprising, and wonderful Effects: for in less than one
Year in which the Hermit by the Popes Command applied himself to this Affair,
he traveled over the greatest part of Europe, treated in particular with most
of the Princes, embraced the Design with an Equal Ardor, testifying a mighty
impatience for the happy moment which should consummate this Holy League,
wherein they were to be engaged in this Religious War.

Lombardy where the Schismatics had committed the greatest disorders, seemed
to expect it.

Urban took this occasion to summon the Council of Placentia, that so the
Church might triumph over her Enemies in the same place where they had
exercised their most insolent Tyrannies. During which time he was extremely
solicited by Lies from Alexis Comnenius the Greek Emperor, to procure for him
powerful Succors, to assist him against the Turks and Sarasens, who made
continual Inroads even as far as the City of Constantinople. The Pope believed
that an Embassage from this Prince Appearing to this great Assembly would
extremely advance his Design, by giving him a fair occasion to excite the
Christians to take up Arms, and by this means insensibly to engage them in this
Holy War, which was the most probable way to empeach the Progress of the
Infidels, who by pushing on their Conquests seemed even to menace the Western
Empire; he therefore advertized that Emperor, that it would conduce much to the
advantage of his Interest, to send his Ambassadors to Placentia where the
Council was to be held in the beginning of March in the Year 1095. and where
the Pope to take the advantage of so fair an opportunity was present with one
of the first in order to preside over the Council in Person.

There never was a more numerous Assembly in the Church than appeared at this
Council, the Church beginning now to enjoy that Liberty which the Emperors had
endeavored by Arms to deprive her of, the Confluence from all places was
incredible of such as desired to partake of the Glory, or to have the pleasure
to contribute in any sort to this triumph of the Church. For it is certain that
from all the Provinces of Italy, France and Germany, there came to this
Assembly above four Thousand Ecclesiastics, and more than thirty Thousand
Laics, all of them possessed with an Extreme Passion to know what would be the
Event of this Council. Insomuch that the Pope to satisfy the General and
Ardent Expectation of so great an Assembly, during the Seven^^ Sessions of that
Council would have the first and third of them kept in the open Field, therein
imitating the Example of Jesus Christ who taught the Multitudes that followed
him, in the vast and capacious plains and deserts.

It was in one of these Sessions that the Ambassadors of Alexis received their
Audience: There it was that they declared to the Assembly in the most moving
manner imaginable, the extreme Danger which the piteous Remains of the Eastern
Empire were in, to fall under the prevailing Arms of the mortal Enemies of the
Christian Name, unless the People of the West would undertake, by a potent and
present Succor, to rescue their distressed Brethren from that inevitable
Ruin. Urban who was determined to advance his own Design by this Embassage,
seconded these Desires of the Ambassadors with a Discourse so persuasive, that
addressing himself to that innumerable Multitude of all sorts of People, who
encircled the Council, before the end of the Sessions, the greatest part of
those who were able to hear him, obliged themselves by a solemn Oath, to serve
Christendom in this pressing Necessity. And the Heat passing from one to
another, and spreading it self from Rank to Rank, one might in an instant hear
from all parts of that vast Assembly, an agreeable Confusion, composed of the
Exclamations of an infinite number of Persons, who unanimously by their Voice
and Gestures, protested that they were resolved to have their share in the
Glory of an Enterprise, where Death it self would be as Valuable and
Advantageous as Victory, by bestowing even upon the Vanquished a Crown of
Martyrdom. Such a Power has Religion upon the Minds of Men, especially when it
is accompanied, as it was upon this Occasion, with the exterior Ornaments of
that August and Sacred Majesty, which through the Senses surprises the Soul,
and without which all other Impressions are feeble and languishing.

Berengarius, and that of the new Nicholaitans, who favored the Incontinence
of the Ecclesiastics: There the Abuses which had slipped into the Church during
the Schism, were reformed, and particularly that abominable Simony, which in
that time had been frequent in the Church: And to take away all Pretenses,
which for the future might shelter that execrable Commerce of Merchandising
sacred Things, it was expressly prohibited to take Money for Baptism, or Burials
of the Dead, under which false Colors Avarice had found such plausible Reasons
to shelter and disguise herself. For those reverend Fathers were persuaded that
it was altogether contrary to the Liberty of the Children of God, and even to
common Humanity, to charge a Rate upon Christians, either entering into that
Religion, or going out of the World.

Lombardy, according to the Decrees of the Council. Afterward in the end of
July he Imbarqued, and coasting the River of Genoa, and the Shore of Provence,
he went to keep the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady at Pavia in Velay,
where he convoked the Council of Clermont in Avergne, to meet in the Octaves of
St. Martin: Thither came from the Provinces of France, Spain, and Italy
fourteen Archbishops, two hundred twenty five Bishops, above eighty Abbots,
with an infinite number of Doctors and other Ecclesiastics, who assisted at
that Assembly, over which the Pope presided in Person, accompanied with a great
many Cardinals who attended him in his Voyages. There was confirmed the Decrees
of the Councils of Placentia, and Troyes, which were held under this same Pope,
for Reformation of the Disorders which had been introduced by the Schism:
There new Canons were made to restore Liberty to the Church formerly oppressed,
and to restore to the Ecclesiastics the Possession of their Benefices,
Churches, Tithes, and Offerings, which had been kept from them by the Laics,
from the time of Charles Martel, by the Grants of the Kings, and by the
Consent, or at least, Connivance of the Bishops.

After which, Urban judging that all Matters were fairly disposed toward the
Success of his great Design of promoting the Holy War, he thought it convenient
to propose it to the Council; which he also did in the great Square of the
City,

If in this Universal Joy which guilds the Face of this great and Illustrious
Assembly there appear in mine all the Marks of a most profound Sadness, my
venerable Brethren and Dear Children in Christ Jesus, you will find no Cause of
wonder, when with me you shall have considered, that notwithstanding all that
we have hitherto done for the Remedy of our pressing Evils, we have neglected
to apply any Effectual Redress to those which are the greatest. We have indeed
humbled the Power of the Schism, we have disarmed the Heresy, reformed abuses,
and have reinstated the Church in the possession of those Rights which had been
suffered to be lost. But alas! what pleasure can we reap from all these
glorious acquisitions, whilst the pittiless Enemies of the Christian Name,
continue to dishonor it and to commit the most violent Outrages and Tyrannies,
and are permitted to tear the better part of us in pieces? Yes, my Brethren,
the Holy Land, the City of God, the Inheritance of Christ Jesus which he has
bestowed upon his Children, having taken it out of the Hands of Jews and
Pagans, that admirable Spot of Ground where the Savior of the World wrought
all the stupendous Mysteries of the Salvation of Mankind, the very Heart of
Christendom, as I may term it, has for many Ages been usurped by the Infidels,
by the Turks and Saracens; and we permit them insolently to triumph even over
Jesus Christ himself, if I may so say, whom they seem to have chased out of the
Capital City of his Empire, whilst they establish their cruel Tyranny, upon
the Ruins of so many Sacred Monuments of his miraculous Conquests. What Tongue
is able to express the fearful Prophanations which are daily committed in those
Holy Places which the Actions, the Miracles, the Blood and Sufferings of the
Savior of the world have Consecrated, and made Venerable to all Christians,
who from every quarter of the Earth resort thither to pay their Religious
Devotions, as if Christ Jesus himself were there personally present. And if
amidsts the horrible marks of their Impiety, the overthrowing our Temples and
our Altars, these Insidels have spared the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, we are
obliged for that good Office to the Avarice of these Inhumane Robbers, who have
imposed an Excessive Rate upon the Devotion of the Faithful Christians, whom
though they cannot rob of their Faith, they despoil of their Goods, and many
times by insufferable torments take away their Lives. And all this time the
Christians of the West, of whom one single Nation were sufficientlyable to
Infranchise the East from this unworthy Servitude, Coldly and without being
moved behold the Oppression of their Brethren; as if they had no manner of
share in the Injury which these Barbarians do to Jesus Christ, whilst they
invade that Inheritance which solely appertains to Christians who are his
Children, we suffer them peaceably to enjoy a Conquest so shameful to all
Christendom whilst we lie buried in unimployed Laziness without a single
thought of running to our Arms. Without running to Arms did I say, Alas! one
shall see nothing now adays throughout all Europe, but Christians running into
Arms one against another for their mutual Ruin and Destruction! those Arms
which ought to be employed to Exterminate the Enemies of Christ Jesus, are
turned against him in his Members, when they shed the Blood of their Brethren
his Children: Insomuch that one would think they acted by Confederacy with the
Infidels for the Ruin of Christianity, whilst that at the same time that those
Barbarians bend all their Forces, their Malice and their Cruelty to destroy it
in the East, these no less Barbarous Christians infeeble the West by their
Wars, their Quarrels and Contentions; by so many Slaughters daily diminishing
the Number of those who might root out these Cruel Enemies of the Christian
Name, whose Strength consists chiefly in the advantages which they make of our
unfortunate Divisions. One of our Realms might with ease triumph over these
Barbarians, if it were not either wholly employed to defend it self, or attack
another; And what then might they not all do, if it should please the Spirit of
God to unite them in the Prosecution of so glorious an Undertaking? It is for
this Reason, my Dear Children, that I am now come into this most Christian
Kingdom, with a design to oblige the French Nation whose Ancestors have been so
celebrated for Zeal to Religion, to follow their Example, and give one to the
rest of Europe to follow. The Arms of France which have formerly been so
successful against the African Moors, the Arabians and Huns, under the Conduct
of Charles Martel, and the most August Charlemain, cannot be less victorious
under the Conduct of the Great God of Hosts, who Exhorts you to follow him and
reconquer the Inheritance of his Son, by chasing out the Infidels who daily
dishonor and profane it by a Thousand abominable Sacriledges. Follow, Generous
Frenchmen, Follow your Invisible Chei^^ain in this glorious Enterprise to which
you are called by your Honor, your Interest, your Religion, by all the
oppressed Christians of the East, by me the Vicar of Christ Jesus upon Earth,
nay by Jesus Christ himself.

Represent to your selves that your blessed Savior, who from his Holy
Sepulcher, now captive in the hands of the Saracens, triumphed over the World,
Death and Hell, presents unto you his Cross. It is the Cross which he displays
as his Standard to all the Christians of the West, under which Ensign it is
impossible for you not to be Victorious; here shall you acquire Immortal Glory,
whether you return from this Holy War laden with the Trophies and Spoils of
these Infidels, or whether in emptying your Veins by a glorious Death for the
Love of God, he shall bestow upon you the Crown of Martyrdom. Mean time if the
Church. --

And here, as he was about to pursue his Discourse, he was Interrupted by the
Exclamations and Cries of an infinite number of People, who with Tears in their
Eyes, beating their Breasts with their Hands, and with their Eyes lift up to
Heaven, cried out from all parts of the Assembly unanimously, as it were by a
common Consent, It is the Will of God, It is the Will of God. The Pope, who
resolved to make Advantage of this generous Heat, rising from his Throne, and
after a long time having obtained the Silence, which by his Gesture he
Commanded: He protested, That there could not be a more manifest Testimony of
the Pleasure of Heaven, than this Exclamation, which proceeding from so many
Mouths, could not be supposed to speak the same Language, without being
animated by the Spirit of God: That for his part he received it as an Oracle,
which promised all happy Success to this Holy War. He also added, That he
thought it sit that a Word of so happy a Presage should be the Motto which
should be wrought in the Colors and Standards of the Army, and that it should
be the Word the Soldiers and Captains should make use of in their Combats, to
animate each other to perform valiantly, and to give thereby a Promise of
assured Victory. And in short, that those who would follow Christ Jesus in
taking up the Cross in this Holy Expedition, and Inrol themselves in this
devout Militia, should wear a Red Cross upon their right Shoulder, as a Mark of
Distinction, to show that they had the Honor to serve under him who had
overcome all Enemies by the Cross.

After this, in the other Sessions, several new Decrees were made in Favor of
the Crusades, and upon the whole matter of the Peace and Truce, against those
horrible Disorders which in this time had wasted the Church, which indeed were
so great, that it is with great Injustice that some Persons do so violently
prefer the past Ages before the present. For so little regard had Men then to
Laws, and so Powerless was Justice, that every particular Person took the
Liberty to do what he pleased, by force of Arms, and to usurp that
incommunicable Right of Sovereigns; insomuch that most of the Realms of Europe
were miserably Ruined by the particular Animosities of private Persons, every
one to revenge the Injuries which he believed he had received, having an
immediate recourse to right himself by Arms, and to those extremities of
Violence, that they spared not with Fire and Sword to manifest their
Resentments against the Houses, Lands, and Persons of their Enemies. Now to
apply some kind of Remedy to these horrible Mischiefs, which it was impossible
totally to repress in an instant; the Bishops and Barons of France did first,
and after their Example, those of other Realms made a Decree, by which,
Churches, the Clergy, Monasteries, and the Religious Orders, Women, Merchants,
Laborers, and Mills, were absolutely protected from these Violences; and this
was called the Peace. And for other matters, it was absolutely prohibited to
commit any of these Disorders from Wednesday Eve, till Monday Morning; and this
was out of the particular Respect which was thought due to those Days which
Christ Jesus had Consecrated by the last Mysteries of his Life, and this was
called the Truce; and the Violators of either of these Decrees were publicly
pronounced Excommunicate, and condemned either to Banishment or Death, in
proportion to the Quality of the Violences they were guilty of. This Decree was
afterward Confirmed by four Councils, which made some further Addition in
favor of the Peace and Truce, as may be seen under those Titles in the
Decretals; so that if one did but religiously observe the Truce as to the Days
enjoined, this brutish War amongst private Persons, was so far Tolerated, that
it passed for Just and Legitimate, provided any Person sent his Enemy a
Challenge in a regular way: and this continued in France for above two hundred
Years, till such time as, after Lewis the Saint had to little Purpose attempted
to remedy it, Philip the Fourth put a Period to this Mischief by the Edict of
Toulouse, in the Year 1303.

Now as these Disorders were at this time thus Tolerated, in regard it was
probable they would prove a mighty Hindrance to this Holy Voyage, because Men's
Estates during their Absence, would be exposed to the Injuries of their
Enemies, therefore the Council in the first place, Confirmed the Decree of the
Peace and Truce, with respect to all sorts of Persons, and that by little and
little these Abuses of the Wars between private Persons might be taken away,
which by reason of their long Continuance could not possibly be effected at
once, this Council prolonged the time of the Truce, adding to those four days
of the Week formerly decreed, all the time of the Advent, till the Octaves of
Epiphany, and between Septuagesima Sunday till the Octaves of Easter, and from
the Rogation Week till the Octaves of Whit-Sunday. But for the Crusades, they
were under Protection during the whole time of their Service, so that their
Persons and Estates were privileged till their return from the Holy Land.

The Pope also granted his Indulgences, and the Remission of all those
Penalties which had been incurred by the Breach of the Canons. And in
Conclusion, he declared Aymar of Monteil Bishop of Pavia, his Apostolic Legate,
during this Expedition: This Aymar was a Prelate of extraordinary Prudence, and
a most heroic Courage, and one who had rendered his Zeal most Conspicuous, by
being the first in full Council, who had from the Pope begged Permission to take
the Cross, and devote himself to the Service of Christendom in this Voyage.
Urban having exhorted all the Bishops personally to publish, and in their
Sermons to preach up the Crusade, throughout their respective Diocesses,
terminated the Council the 29th day of November,

A Writer of that time, who was at the Council, and afterward in the Holy
Land, assures us, that having strictly observed the time, and examined the
matter, he was informed from many Persons of different Places, that the very
same day wherein the Pope published the Crusade, the News was known in the
remotest places both of the East and West; which made such a strange Impression
upon Men's Spirits, who either were, or believed they were supernaturally
pressed to engage themselves in this heroic Enterprise, that when the Bishops
came to preach up the Cross, and to excite the People to take it up, they found
them so predisposed, that an infinite number of Persons of all Ranks, Qualities
and Conditions throughout Europe, but especially France, immediately entered
into it; and such was the Fervor with which the Design was embraced, that no
sort of Considerations of worldly Honor, Interest, or Pleasure, no Delicacy of
Education, nor Bonds of Friendship were able to retard Men, but they generously
broke all those little Chains, to enter into the more glorious Bonds of the
Solemn Vow of the Crusade. Here might you see Friends encouraging one another,
and entering into this new Amity, making mutual Promises never to abandon each
other; there Enemies Embracing and Religiously Swearing most inviolably to
maintain the Truce; nay even the weeping Ladys, who saw themselves ready to be
Divorced from their Beloved Husbands and dearest Children, yet did not cease to
encourage them to pursue this glorious Enterprise, and many of them had the
Courage to take a share with them, and resolved to follow them notwithstanding
all the fearful Dangers, and insinite Hazards and Hardships which were to be
expected from so long and painful a Voyage.

Most certain it is, that as there is nothing so Perfect or Holy, which is not
subject to be abused either by the Weakness or Mischievousness of Human Nature,
so in the beginning of this Holy War, there happened so many strange Disorders,
as might well have rendered the Event of this Enterprise most disastrous, if
God Almighty himself had not appeared Engaged in it, to that degree, as even
against all Appearance, by a kind of Miracle, to bring it to that glorious
Issue, which was not reasonably to be expected from any inferior Power. For an
innumerable company of Peasants, with their Wives and Children, which they
carried in their Carts, abandoning their laborious Tillage, would also have a
part in this Voyage, which was commonly called Gods Voyage; so that all the
Mobile of the Realm, who upon this occasion entertained a Hope of bettering
their Fortunes, mingling with those who had undertaken the Cross, served to no
other purpose but to put all into Disorder and Confusion; Nor was it possible
to give Bounds to this tumultuary Rabble, who to authorize their Actions, had
so fair a Color and Pretext of Piety. So that the smallest Number were those
whom the Consideration of the Glory of the Christian Name, or the Service of
God obliged to follow this Design; but too many Engaged themselves in it, some
out of Vanity and Affectation, others out of a lightness of Spirit; these for
the Pleasure they proposed in the Voyage, those to accompany their Friends and
Acquaintance, and many to free themselves from the Importunity of their
Creditors, or to enjoy the benefit of the Truce. Great Numbers also of Monks
and other Religious Persons, weary of their Profession and Solitude, abandoned
their Cloisters and their Cells, and out of the Love of Liberty, took up the
Cross in a different manner than that which they had obliged themselves to by
their Vow, and made use of the false Pretense of Zeal to Religion, to violate
one Vow by entering into another, which they had no Power to do; so that the
Abbots to prevent a greater Mischief, were obliged to permit the Monks to
follow the Army of the Crusade, since they were not able to hinder them who had
gotten such a specious Pretense, as was the Satisfaction of their ardent Desire
which they seemed to have, to take their Part in the Deliverance of the Holy
Sepulcher.

Nor were the Women wanting in their little Cheats; for they, to make it be
believed that they were by extraordinary Ways called by God to this Voyage,
invented those glittering Illusions which some believe have been renounced in
our time upon other Occasions; for having found a way by the Juice of Herbs, to
form certain little Crosses upon their Bodies, resembling those which the
Crusades wore upon their Habits, with an impudent Malice they showed them to
every body, as if they had been the miraculous Impressions of the Divine Power.
There were others, who with no less Hypocrisy, whether by an Excess of ill
governed Devotion, or by an indiscreet Fervor to gain a foolish Glory by a
vain Ostentation of their Zeal, burnt Crosses upon their Bodies with red hot
Irons, which they showed with more affectation and seeming Pleasure, than those
who wore them upon their Habits, Embroidered in Gold and Silver, could show
theirs. So that Illusion, Hypocrisy, Vain Glory, and Indiscretion, the Pests of
Virtue and true Piety, corrupted and profaned those Actions, which otherwise
might have been esteemed the most Religious and Heroic.

But that which prevented these Disorders from being so Mischievous as
otherways they might have been, was the great number of great Captains,
Gentlemen, Lords and Bishops of France, who followed the Princes who were of
the Crusade, and were joint Commanders in this famous Enterprise, yet without
pretending to have any Superiority of Power one over the other, which made it
apparent that God only was their Conductor and General.

The Princes then, whose Names shall be eternally Reverenced by Posterity, and
who have acquired immortal Glory in all History, were Hugh the great Earl of
Vermandois, and Brother to Philip the first of France, Robert Duke of Normandy,
Robert Earl of Flanders, Raymond Earl of Toulouse and St. Giles, Godfrey of
Bullen Duke of Lorrain, with his Brothers Baldwin and Eustace, Stephen Earl of
Chartres and Blois, Hugh Earl of St. Paul, with a very great number of other
Lords of the first Quality, who shall hereafter more commodiously be made
known, when Occasion shall present their noble Actions, and when I come to
describe, as I am about to do, the Voyage which they made by three several
Ways, according as before they had agreed in the Winter, in order to their
Rendevouzing at Constantinople, as they did the following Year. I am however to
inform the Reader, that the Respect which I have for him, not permitting me to
present him with any thing but what has the Warranty of Historical Reputation,
or Authentic Acts, I shall not mention any Names but what I find Recorded in
the Historians of those times; and if any Persons of Quality who pretend that
some of their Ancestors had a share in this Holy War, will do me the Favor to
send me Authentic Memoires thereof, I will not fail in a new Edition of this
Work to do Justice to the Merits of those Illustrious deceased, and with
Satisfaction to render what is due to their Memories, and their Descendants.

Constantinople, was the famous Godfrey of Bullen, who although he had not the
absolute Command of the whole Army of the Crusades, yet without Contradiction,
he had the greatest share both in the Trouble and Glory of this first Crusade.
He took the same way which Charlemain in his Conquest had trod before him
through Germany all along by the Danubius, to the Confines of Thracia. This
Prince was the Son of Eustace the second Earl of Bullen, and Ida the Sister of
Godfrey of Bossu Earl of Ardenna, Bullen and Verdun, and Duke of the lower
Lorrain or Brabant, to distinguish it from the higher Lorrain, Mosellane, and
which at that time was under the Jurisdiction of Theodorick the Valiant, the
Son of Gerard of Alsatia and Duke of high Lorrain: And from him in a lineal
Descent, to this present time, are derived all the Princes of that fair Duchy,
which not long after his time lost its ancient Name of the Mosellane, retaining
only that of Lorrain, as it does to this day. But whether Godfrey Duke Bossu
having no Children, adopted his Nephew who was of his own Name, and made him
his Heir, giving him the Earldom of Bullen, which belonged formerly to the
House of Ardenna; or that it came by Ida upon her Marriage with the Earl of
Bullen, it is most certain the Surname of Bullen, which was given to this young
Prince, has by him, and his Heroic Actions been rendered one of the most
Celebrated in the World. It is this Glorious Name which in the last Age was so
happily Reunited with that of the Tour of Avergne, which by a Marriage has
received that of Bullen to restore it to its ancient Luster, as we have seen it
by the Virtues, the Dignities, the great Employments, and fair Actions of the
Princes of that Noble House. As for Prince Godfrey, it was impossible for
Nature to bestow a more happy Inclination to all sorts of Virtues, than which
she had given him, nor was any thing wanting in his Education which might
Contribute to the improvement of that Stock; such was the exact Care of his
Father, who was a most Wise and Virtuous Prince, and more especially of his
Mother, a Lady of a most extraordinary Merit, and an Excellent Spirit,

It is said also that by the Assistance of Divine Illumination, she did predict
the future Greatness of her three Sons, Eustace, Godfrey, and Baldwin. For one
Day as the Earl her Husband demanded of her what she had hid in her Lap, she
being playing with the Children, she very seriously answered, that she had
there three great Princes, one Duke, one King, and one Earl, which was
afterward Verisied in the admirable Fortunes of these three Princes. For
Godfrey was Duke of Lorrain, and King of Jerusalem; Baldwin was King of the
same Realm, and Prince of Edessa; and Eustace, whom some will have to be the
eldest Brother, was Earl of Bullen after the Death of his Father. It is also
added that she had a strange Dream before the Birth of Prince Godfrey, for the
Sun seemed to descend from his Heavenly Orb and to fall into her Lap, and that
she saw her little Son Enthroned in the midst of that Glorious Luminary; but it
is the Humor of some Writers to render the Nativities of great Men more
Illustrious, at least as they think, by Prodigies and Revelations, which after,
wards the Noble Actions of these Hero's make easily to pass for real Truths
especially with Persons who love to divert themselves with matters very
Extraordinary and Surprising.

But this is most certain, which the Countess herself with a great deal of
Pleasure was used to relate, after the glorious Success which her Sons had in
the Holy War, that long before there was the least Discourse of the Crusade,
Prince Godfrey was used to say, that he would one day take a Voyage to
Jerusalem, but not as the poor Pilgrims did, only to satisfy his Devotion, but
as a Captain and a Conqueror, at the head of a Puissant Army to Chase the
wicked Insidels from that Holy Place. Which must needs proceed singly from the
impetuosity of his Courage, and which considering the Condition of his Fortune,
very unfit to execute so great a Design, may very well pass for a Prophetic
Motion, and looks like a Presage of that Glory and good Fortune which God had
allotted for him, and in order to which he seemed beforehand to prepare him by
a thousand Beautiful Actions wherein he acquired a most Illustrious Reputation
throughout all Europe.

After the Death of the Duke his Uncle, the Emperor Henry the Fourth who
pretended that the Duchy of the Lower Lorrain for want of Heirs Male of the
House of Ardenna was devolved to him, conferred it upon his Son Conrade,
leaving nothing to Godfrey besides the Marquisate of Antwerp. And on the other
side Albert Earl of Namur his Kinsman, and Thiery the Bishop of Verdun,
attempted to take from him Bullen and Verdun: So that this Prince who was not
yet Seventeen years of Age, was compelled to have recourse to an early Valor
for the Recovery of one part and the Defense of the other part, of his
Inheritance. And therefore putting himself into the Castle of Bullen, which
Albert assisted by the Forces of the Bishop of Verdun had besieged, he so
vigorously repulsed his Enemies in all their attacks, that he forced them to a
dishonorable Retreat after they had lost the better part of their Army; and in
the same quarrel he undertook a single Combat against the said Earl, in the
presence of the Emperor and his whole Court; during the Combat he had the
Misfortune in making a notable Blow at the Head of his Enemy, to break his
Sword short within half a foot of the Hilt; but notwithstanding this Disaster,
it was impossible to persuade him to determine the difference upon such terms
of accommodation as upon this occasion were tendered to him, but pursuing his
point he fought with redoubled Ardor, till at length having tumbled down his
Enemy with a mighty Blow which he gave him with the Pommel of his Sword upon
his head; being now a Conqueror he accepted that Agreement which before he had
generously refused, whilst being disarmed he ran the utmost hazard of being
Vanquished. And afterward surmounting those just resentments which he might
well have entertained against the Emperor who had so Injuriously deprived him
of his Duchy, he nevertheless followed him in those Wars which he made in
Germany and Italy, whereupon all occasions he rendered him very signal Services:
and it is reported that he himself took the Imperial Eagle in the Famous Battle
against the Saxons who had declared for Emperor Rodolph of Suabia, when Victory
beginning to declare herself for that Prince, he ravished it from him, together
with his Life, by giving him a mortal Wound with the very Cornet which he had
newly taken: And afterward when the Emperor took the City of Rome from Pope
Gregory the Seventh, he was the first man that possessed himself of the breach
and thereby Entered the Town. They further add, that after this falling into a
most violent distemper which reduced him to the utmost Extremity of Danger, he
made a Vow to undertake an Expedition to the Holy Land, as not long after did
many Princes and Bishops according to the Devotion so much in Vogue at that
time, and that God Almighty was pleased to manifest that this Vow was
acceptable to him by restoring him to his Health beyond all Expectation, and
without the application of any of the usual Remedies. Be it how it will,
neither this Vow nor this Miracle, nor this entering the breach at Rome are such
matters as have any certain foundation in the Historians who were his
Contemporaries; but this is most certain, that, whether it were that he was
sensibly touched with the extraordinary Merit of this Prince, and the
considerable Services which he had received from him, or that he therein
gratified the displeasure he had taken against Conrade who now began to
relinquish his Interests, the Emperor put Godfrey into the Possession of the
Duchy of the Lower Lorrain the Inheritance of his Mother, which he had
detained from him Thirteen Years: And that he might yet link him more closely
than by the mere Obligation of Duty, he was resolved to have him his Brother in
Law, and gave him his Sister Adelaida in Marriage. After which Godfrey seeing
himself in a Condition capable of recovering the Earldom of Verdun which
Theoderic the Bishop and Earl Albert at present detained from him, that Affair
was quickly determined; for the Bishop and Earl besieging Stenay where Godfrey
had built a very strong Castle, just upon the Frontiers of Verdun, that from
thence he might more easily assail his Enemies, this Fortunate Prince, though
then very much indisposed in Health, yet combated them with so much Conduct and
Valor, that he relieved the Place; and in a little time after being reinforced
with the Troops which Eustace and Baldwin his Brothers brought to his
assistance, he obliged them to raise their Siege, and in Conclusion they were
forced by the Determination of the Bishop of Liege who was made Arbiter of the
Difference, to restore the Earldom of Verdun unto Godfrey.

In this flourishing Posture were the Affairs of Duke Godfroy when the Crusade
for the Deliverance of the Holy Land was proclaimed; and he was in the Number
of the foremost to take the Cross, which he did with that Ardency, that to give
Example to other Princes to sacrifice all to the Glory of Jesus Christ, and to
satisfy that importunate Desire which he had so long since cherished for this
Glorious Conquest, he generously despoiled himself of almost his whole
Inheritance, thereby to enable himself to raise the more and the better Troops;
And for this purpose he either morgaged or sold the Earldom of Bullen and
Ardenna to Albert Bishop of Liege, whose Successors are possessed of it to this
very day, Richerius Bishop of Verdun, also laid hold of this opportunity to
purchase the Town and Castle of Stenay with its Dependancies, and the rest of
the Earldom of Prince Baldwin upon whom his Brother Godfrey had lately bestowed
it. Insomuch that by a pretty odd adventure the secular Princes impoverished
themselves to serve Christ Jesus, and the Ecclesiastics enriched themselves
with the Spoils of these Temporal Princes, whose Examples ought rather to have
incited them to the like Devotion; but they chose rather to make use of that
Money, which like them they should have employed to so pious a Work as the
Deliverance of the Holy Sepulcher, to advance their present Fortunes, which
they saw these Princes so generously abandon for the Love of God. But if
History ought to praise the Generosity of such as sold their Inheritances upon
this Glorious Occalion, yet it has no Authority to condemn the Intentions of
those who purchased them; Since their Design was for the better Accommodation
of those Churches of which they were the Pastors and the Fathers.

Godfrey by these ways having put himself into a Capacity to raise Soldiers and
furnish an Equipage, was in a short time accompanied with a great Number of
such as had taken upon them the Cross, besides many Princes and Gentlemen his
Friends who served as Volunteers. But the fair Reputation which he had acquired
throughout all Europe, and those admirable Qualities for which he was so justly
valued, brought him in far greater Numbers than his Pay; for Military Men came
slocking to him from all parts, especially the Eastern parts of France, the Low
Countries, the two Lorains and the Provinces of Germany, every one passionately
coveting to serve in this Expedition under his auspicious Conduct. One shall
rarely meet in History any who ever exceeded this brave Prince either in those
obliging Charms which attract men's Hearts, or were more able to manage that
absolute Empire over those Spirits which had so voluntarily submitted to them:
nor did he stand in need of any other Authority to govern them than what he was
obliged to for his Virtue and those admirable Graces, whith which Nature had
even to Prosusion adorned him. He was in the Vigor and the very Flower of his
Age, having lived about thirty sive years, his Complexion was Sanguine his
Temper Robust, and yet such as showed the fresh Sweetness and Beauty of Youth
in his mature and many Age: his Shape was admirable, his Body straight, and his
Stature though something advanced above the common, yet carried a Proportion in
all parts so regular, as made him only appear so tall as to approach to the
pitch of Heroic; his Port was extreme Majestic, his Behavior grave and
serious; his Color delicate and lively, his Cheeks wore the Livery of
Vermilion, and his Eyes siery and sparkling, but withal sweet and attracting,
the turn of his face was most perfectly exact, his Hair light and fair, his
Speech sweet, and the Sound of his Voice admirably pleasing; and with all these
Ornaments of Nature, he had a Demeanor so charming and modest, that one who
accompanied him in this Expedition to the Holy Land assures us, that his
Conversation seemed to have more of the meekness of a Recluse than the
fierceness of a Soldier; notwithstanding which upon the approach of an Enemy,
when he was going to the Combat, he seemed in an instant metamorphosed into
another quite different Person; he looked like a generous Lion, so much
Resolution, Heat, and Fierceness appeared in his Eyes, his Voice, his Gestures
and his Gate; and by how much greater the Danger was, so much was his Courage
redoubled, that it had not the least acquaintance with Fear; and that Soul
which Nature had planted in so fair a Body was animated with that prodigious
force, that there are few examples that can come in competition with him; for
neither Casque, nor Curiass, nor Shield where he bestowed his mighty Blows were
any proof against his Invincible Arm, or could defend those who wore them from
a certain Death: and besides all this, he was a perfect Master at all sorts of
Weapons, and intimately acquainted with every secret of the military Art,
insomuch that even Envy it self must be constrained to give place to the
Judgment of the whole Earth, it being impossible to dispute these advantages
with him, which yet were more mavelous in him who possessed them, in that
they were accompanied with all the Virtues of a mighty Mind; for it is most
unexceptionably true, that no Person ever better adjusted the Exercises of a
military Employ, with those of an honest man and an admirable Christian; He was
kind, affable, respectful affectionate, tender, and a most excellent Friend; he
would caress the meanest Soldiers, and comfort them in their Hardships with
the care and kindness of a Father; he was firm and immovable in his Resolves,
and one who ever kept his Word Inviolable, a great Lover of Justice, never
failing to render to every Person according to his Merits; he was obliging,
liberal and magnificent in every thing except what related to his own Person,
which he neglected in such a manner as was well enough becoming the Person of a
Soldier, though a Prince, and which rather showed a generous disdain of Pride
and Luxury, than any Inclinations to what was mean or sordid. He was most
curiously diligent in matters of the greatest moment, and especially how he
might best please Almighty God, to whom by a kind of Miracle in a man of the
Sword, he had the greatest and most constant care to unite himself by the
Exercises of Devotion, even amidst the greatest crowd of his most Important
Affairs, and particularly by an Assiduity in his daily making most fervent
Prayers to the Divine Omnipotence. And his Piety was so far from diminishing
his Native Vigor, that it added new Forces to it, and enlightened his
understanding in such an extraordinary Measure, as enabled him to act even
beyond admiration both as a Captain and a Soldier.

Being such as I have endeavored to represent him from the Description of the
Historians his Contemporaries, or such as lived nearest to those times, it will
now be no matter of astonishment, that the greatest Number of those who devoted
themselves to this Holy War, came to offer their Service to this gallant man,
or if at that instant he used a certain politic Dexterity whereupon the
Success of the Enterprise seemed in so great a measure to depend. For Peter the
Hermit particularly having addressed himself to him, this Prince immediately
perceiving he should be clogged by having this multitude of unprofitable People
upon his hands who blindly followed the Hermit, he concluded that to prevent
the disorders which they might occasion in his Army, where they were more
likely to destroy him by Famine than help him by the Sword, he contrived to
send those People before under the Conduct of their own Director, who without
scruple presently accepted of the Command; and indeed he thought he should have
a Sovereign Power over those Person who were used to render him such
Extraordinary Honors, even to downright Superstition, so prepossessed were
they with the opinion of his Sanctity, and as it were charmed with his very
looks and enchanted with his words. And certainly, all his actions and the
manner of his living, were wonderful proper to draw the applause and admiration
of the Populace, who suffer themselves easily to be affected with outward
appearances, especially such as are odd and surprising; for his under Garment
was of simple Woolen without any dye or color, with a great Hood the point
whereof reached down to his very heels, and over all a Hermits Mantle about his
Neck which came to his knees: he went barefooted; his abstinence was
extraordinary, he never eat either Bread or Flesh, but contented himself with
Lentils, Fish, and a very little Wine, with which he sustained himself in the
greatest Fatigues: he never kept any Money, but disposed of those vast Sums
which were bestowed upon him, by distributing them among the poorer sort of the
Crusades, or employed them to maintain the Soldiers, or such Persons as by his
preaching were reclaimed from their vicious courses, and to marry such young
women as by reason of their Poverty had taken up the Infamous Trade of sinning:
He composed all differences with a mavelous Authority, and made Peace
wherever he came; and, in short, he did so many good things and gained so
high a Reputation, that several witnesses of admirable Credit, who saw him
preach the Crusade in France do aver, that the people followed him as if he had
been a man sent from Heaven, and treated him with more Honor and Reverence
than any of their Prelates, and that never any man passed more generally for a
Saint or for a Prophet: that whatever he either said or did, was received as an
immediate Command from Heaven, and that the Common People who canonized him for
a Living Saint, went so far, as to get the very hairs of his Mule, which they
laid up as Relics; thus it is, that after these feeble Spirits have according
to their way made a Saint of a man upon whom they dote, there is no sort of
Illusion, Caprice, disorder or abuse which they will not mistake for a Divine
Inspiration, nor any thing tho never so fantastical or extravagant which they
will not be ready to precipitate themselves into.

In reality I cannot think that Peter did in the least contribute to this
Superstition of the blind and injudicious Populace, but on the other hand I
cannot believe, that he was at all afflicted to see himself followed by such
Multitudes of People which he thought were entirely at his Devotion, and of
whom he persuaded himself he should always be able to retain the Command. And
that being a Gentleman who before his retirement had born Arms, the desire of
Glory and some little remainders of the Spirit of a Soldier which still dwelt
about his heart, might give him no sort of Repugnance to see himself at the
head of a great Army; and the Nature of the War which was to be undertaken,
might easily induce him to believe, that he might lawfully undertake such a
military Command without affronting his Orders of Priesthood, or embracing the
World which he had renounced. But it was not long before he found by woeful
Experience, that he who transgresses the Bounds of his Profession, does not
prosper long; for he must needs want the Blessing of God, whose pleasure is
that all persons should keep their Order and Station in the World, and not dare
to undertake the Charge or Function which belongs not to them. All this time
Duke Godfrey whose principal aim was to disincumber himself of this confused
Rabble who from all parts were rolled together, and which he was in no sort of
Condition to accommodate with subsistence, was not in the least averse to
follow the inclinations of Peter; and therefore he declared him Captain General
of this first Army of the Crusades, which was ordered to advance first toward
Constantinople. The Hermit who would needs imitate the Duke, that he might
avoid Confusion divided his Troops into two Bodies; the first, which was
composed of about the third part of his foot, he put under the Command of a
French Gentleman, one of his friends, whose name was Gautier, a very brave man
and a good Captain, but who had no other Fortune besides his Sword, and who for
that reason was usually called Captain Have-little, or Monyless. This Gentleman
who had no more than eight Horsemen to guard such a numerous Infantry, began
his March the eighteenth day of March, and after having with a great deal of
trouble passed through Germany all along the Danubius he entered into Hungary;
that Country was then governed by King Carloman, the youngest Son of King Bela,
whose Grandfather was Uncle to St. Stephen the Son of Geiza, the first
Christian King of Hungary. This Prince very frankly permitted them the Liberty
of passage, they paying for what they had; but this could not prevent the
Hungarians from very ill treating this straggling People: for being arrived upon
the Frontier of Bulgaria, where they were refused the accommodations of
Provisions, the Troops were permitted to live at discretion, to plunder the
Country and take what they could find for their subsistence; this so incensed
the Inhabitants of those Countries, that they presently took Arms, and
assembling to the number of one hundred forty thousand men, they fell upon the
Crusades so briskly, that they had much to do, in great Confusion, to save
themselves among the Woods, after having left a great part of their Companions
to the mercy of the Enemies; and Gautier with the remainder were in no small
danger of perishing, being for eight days constrained to endure the utmost
Extremities in passing through those vast and desolate Forests, till in
conclusion, arriving at a great Town in Mysia, the Prince of Bulgaria
compassionating their Miseries, did not only supply them with plenty of
Provisions, but furnished them with able Guides, who carried them the best way
toward Constantinople, where the Emperor disposed them in an Encampment to
attend the rest of the Army, which was conducted by Peter himself.

But the Voyage of the poor Hermit was yet more Unfortunate than that of his
Precursor: He had about forty thousand Foot indifferently well armed, and a
good number of Horse, of whom the Principal were Renard of Breis, Gautier de
Breteuil, Foucher of Orleans, and Godsrey Burel of Estampes, besides an
insinite Number of unnecessary People, Women, Old Men and Children, who
followed the Army, some on Foot, and some in Carriages. But in truth he now
quickly found how great a difference there was between Preaching up the Cross
to an unarmed Audience who run to hear the Novelty, and the Conducting
according to the regular Discipline of War, and Commanding those who now had
Swords in their Hands. For as he Marched through Hungary, King Carloman having
granted him free Passage, provided his People committed no Disorders, he
undertook to signalize himself with an Action which neither comported with his
being a Hermit, nor a Christian, and which both the Laws of Honor and of
Prudence might justly have prohibited him to do: For under pretense of
Revenging the Injury which some Soldiers of the first Army had received at
Malleville, a good Town upon the Frontier of Hungary and Bulgaria, he attaqued
the Place by Force, and contrary to his Faith given to Carloman, he took it by
Storm, putting to the Sword above four thousand Hungarians; after which Action
he retained no manner of Authority, nor was in any sort master of those People:
For whether they thought themselves by the Example of their General, Authorized
to take the Liberty of measuring out their own Revenge, or whether it were the
desire of Booty, the Pleasure of which they now began to taste in the Saccage of
this miserable Town; or whether seeing the Hermit in a Condition so different
from that wherein they had Reverenced him as a Saint, they retained nothing of
the former Idea of him, and they neither considered him as Peter, nor as the
General of the Army, although he affected both the one and the other. However it
were, it is certain, that there was no manner of Excess, no sort of Crimes,
Persidiousness, Cruelty, Robberies, Murder, Fire, or any kind of Violence,
which these brutish Dreggs of the People of France, Lorrain, and Germany, did
not commit; they neither knew Discipline, or any fear of God or Man; but
notwithstanding all that the Hermit could with his utmost Power do, to oppose
them, they abandoned themselves to the Commission of the most horrible Ravages,
all along their March through Hungary and the Confines of Bulgaria. But as one
of the Writers of that time observes, who does not dissemble the Truth, as does
William of Tire, who writ a long time after; When once a Body, otherwise of an
ill Composure, comes to have a weak and languishing Head, it becomes every day
worse and worse, and cannot in Conclusion, possibly avoid a necessary Ruin. And
so it happened here, for the Bulgarians and Hungarians, justly exasperated
against these persidious Wretches, took all Occasions to fall upon them; and
finding them in a disorderly March, they slew above ten thousand of them upon
the place, took all their Baggage and their Provisions, their Wives, Children,
and the old Men who could not slye, together with two thousand Wagons, amongst
which were those which carried the Treasure of Peter the Hermit. Nor was it
without great Difficulty that he rallied the rest of his Troops, who saved
themselves in the Woods and Mountains, and that in Conclusion, in extreme want
of all things, the first day of August he joined Gautier the Monyless, who
waited for his coming, little expecting to sind him reduced to such a piteous
Condition as he himself was in, being obliged to live upon the Charity and Alms
of the Emperor.

Now these ill Examples being extremely Contagious, it happened that in a
little time after two other Armies of these counterfeit Crusades, who abused so
Religious an Enterprise, following the same Methods, and rather surpassing the
Disorders of the first, did also by the most just Judgment of God, perish in a
most deplorable manner. For a German Priest of the Palatinate, one Godescale,
who had conferred with Peter in his Travails, was resolved to imitate him; and
therefore he did with such vehemence preach up the Crusade, that he assembled
about fifteen thousand Soldiers, Germans and Lorrainers, at the Head of whom he
put himself, and very peaceably, and with out any Disorder, paying exactly for
whatever they took, he marched as far as Hungary: But finding there an
excessive Plenty of all things, the Year having been the most Fruitful that had
been known, they fell to Debauchery; so that being almost continually drunk,
there was no sort of Insolence, injastice, or Cruelty, which with a horrible
Brutality they did not commit against those who had so courteously Entertained
them. Whereupon all Hungary by the Command of the King was immediately in Arms,
in order to exterminate these perfidious Villains, so that besieging them in
their Camp, they were, in short, compelled to surrender their Arms and
themselves to Discretion to the Officers of the King, they giving them an
assurance of their Lives; but the Hungarians furiously Incensed against them,
thinking it very lawful to revenge Persidiousness by Treachery, no sooner saw
them disarmed but they fell upon them and put them all to the Sword, except a
very few who escaped the Massacre to carry the woeful News into their own
Country to the other Crusades, who yet by their Misfortune grew never the Wiser
or more Considerate.

For in the beginning of the Summer of this same Year, a prodigious Multitude
of People, gathered from diverse parts of France, England, the low Countries,
Lorrain, and that part of Germany which lies upon the Rhine, drawing along with
them an infinite of Women and People of the lewdest Condition in the World,
assembled themselves near Collen, where they passed the Rhine in order to join
with Count Emico, who attended them with a great number of Crusades of the
higher Germany, of the same dissolute Complexion with themselves. These People
to Signalize their false Zeal by covering a most barbarous Action with the
specious pretense of Piety, most inhumanly Massacred all the Jews whom they
found at Collen and Mayence, where they forced the Archbishops Palace, where
Rothard the Archbishop had secured a hundred of these poor Creatures, as in a
Sanctuary. But it proved no Protection against the Fury of those Barbarians,
who Butchered them in a most savage manner, cutting their Throats like Sheep,
sparing neither the Women for their Sex, nor the Children for their innocent
Age, nor indeed was there any Sanctuary to be found against this horrible
Barbarism which was inspired by Avarice, and promoted by an insatiable
Covetousness of the Riches of the Jews. Insomuch that the remainders of them
being reduced to the utmost Despair, chose rather to repeat the doleful Example
of Saguntum and Capua, and with their own Hand to commit the bloody Execution;
so that barricadoing themselves within their Houses, the pityless Mothers like
Furies cut the Throats of their sucking Babes, the Husbands their Wives and
Daughters, and the Fathers their Sons, and the Servants chose rather to
dispatch each other, than to fall into the Hands of those incompassionate
Monsters, who profaned the Character, and rendered the Name of Christian, of
which they were unworthy, most Infamous and Detestable.

But it was not long before God Almighty, by the remarkable Vengeance which he
executed upon these wicked People, manifested the Abhorrence which he had of
their Crimes, and that he had no Intention to make use of their Service, in
reconquering the Inheritance of his Son, by the profane Hands of those who had
declared themselves his Enemies, by such Impieties, as even the Infidels
themselves would have blushed to commit. For this huge Army of Bedlams, which
consisted of above two hundred thousand Men, of whom there were not above three
thousand Horse, laying Siege to Mesbourg, a strong place upon the Danubius in
Hungary, where they were denied Passage, and when they were just upon the point
of gaining it, was in an instant struck with such a Pannick Fear, that they
fled with so much Precipitation, Blindness, and Disorder, and all perished
there except a very few of the Horse, who being well mounted saved themselves
by Flight: For the greatest part of them were Smothered whilst they
endeavored to pass the Morass with which the Town is Environed, others were
slain by the Garrison, who upon this occasion sallying out, followed them with
Death closely at the Heels; many were cut off by the Peasants who ran from all
parts to take Vengeance of these Robbers, and a multitude of them were drowned,
whilst endeavoring to pass the Danube they tumbled headlong one upon another,
so that the Shore of that great River was for some time covered with their dead
Bodies; insomuch that this prodigious multitude of distracted People, who
pretended with impunity to commit the most execrable Crimes in the World,
causing a Shee-Goat to be worshipped, which was carried at the Head of the Army
as their conducting Divinity, vanished in a moment, by a terrible Blow of the
Divine Justice, which would not endure to be affronted by their pretended
Piety, and making Religion only a Cover for those abominable Wickednesses
wherewith they daily dishonored God.

Peter the Hermit did not meet with a Fortune much more advantageous: It was
now become very numerous by the Conjunction of an infinite number of Lombards,
Genoese, Piemontanes, and other People of Italy, who having taken upon them the
Cross with the earliest, even presently after the Council of Clermont, came in
several Troops by themselves without any Leaders, and being joined with those
Forces of Gautier near Constantinople, they were commanded there to attend the
Arrival of the Hermit by the Emperors Order, who now began to entertain some
suspicious Jealousies of this great Army of Franks, who were to be followed by
others as numerous as they. So soon as Peter was arrived, the Emperor who had
an extreme desire to see him, sent for him to the Palace, where the Hermit,
who by the Voyage he had made into the Levant, was well skilled in the
Language, and as Eloquent an Orator as a great Captain, made him a Discourse in
public upon the Subject of this Expedition and the Holy War, of the Forces,
and Qualities of the Princes which were expected; with which the Emperor
appeared so well satisfied, that he made the Hermit very fair Presents, and
bestowed upon him a round Sum of Money to buy Provisions for his Troops. After
which he sent him back to the Camp, Exhorting him by no means to precipitate
this great Affair, and especially not to attempt the passing of the Straits
till the Arrival of the Princes; nor to expose his harrassed Troops against
those of the Turks, which were far stronger than his, and against which his
tired and feeble Men would be able to make no tolerable Resistance. The truth
is, the greatest part of our Historians represent this Prince as the most
perfidious and disloyal of Mankind; one who under the fine appearance of a
feigned Friendship, covered that horrible Treason which he had contrived
against the Latins, which was by a thousand unworthy Artifices to bring them to
Destruction, as well as by the Arms of the Turkish Infidels; on the other side,
the Greek Writers, when they mention this Emperor and this War, speak nothing
like it; and the Princess Anna his Daughter, who has written the History of
her Father, in a Style Florid and Beautiful, after the Genius of her Sex, in
her Alexiada, paints him directly contrary, and has dressed him up like a
Hero, a Wise and Politic Prince, who upon this Occurrence performed the most
admirable things in the World. But to deal sincerely and without Prejudice, the
best way in my Opinion is to avoid both these Extremes, to the end thereby, if
possible, to find out Truth in the middle Way.

But this is most certain, that this Alexis Comnenius was no other than an
Usurper of the Empire of his Master and his Benefactor, who had given him the
Command of General of all his Forces: He was a Prince who was dexterously
Cunning, and a witty Dissembler, Covetous and Cruel, and one who easily made
the Laws of Honor, Conscience, and Justice, comply with humane Policy, and
whatever seemed to be his present Interest: And therefore it is most probable,
in my Judgment, that he having so earnestly requested of the Pope, to procure
him the Assistance of the Latins against the Turks, who were now become Masters
of the lesser Asia, and threatened the Imperial City, that it was his real
Design to receive the Crusades, and to join his Forces with them, to Defeat
those incroaching and dangerous Neighbors, and to recover those Provinces
which his Predecessors had lost; and that for this Reason he advised Peter, by
no means to pass into Asia with those raw and undisciplined Men. But in making
my Observations out of some of our own Authors, I find there were two things
which made him change this Opinion, and take Measures quite different from his
former Resolution. The first was that great, and indeed, prodigious Number of
the Crusades, and those valiant Men who were expected under the Conduct of the
Princes of France, of whose Courage and Ambition he was not too well assured.
For in truth, the Pope believing it would be joyful and welcome News to him,
had given him an account by Letters some time after the Council of Clermont,
that in a small time he should have on Foot an Army of three hundred thousand
Crusades, under the Command of those brave Princes, whose Names and Qualities
he therein recounted to him, and that by the Noise which this Design made
throughout all the West, he believed the Number would be augmented every day.
But that which gave him the greatest Disturbance of all, was, that some time
after he received Intelligence, that the famous Bohemond, Prince of Tarentum,
the Son of Robert Guischard, who even in Greece had made War with him so much
to his Glory and Advantage, was to make one of the Party; then immediately the
Devil of State-Jealousy entered into, and possessed his Soul, that this brave
Norman Prince might possibly have preingaged all those other Princes, and
formed such a powerful League amongst them, under the Color of a War against
the Infidels, to turn all those Arms against himself, and following the Traces
of his Fathers Design, endeavor to deprive him of the Constantinopolitan
Empire.

The second, was the insupportable Insolence of this Army of Peasants and
Vagabonds, which Peter the Hermit and Gautier, after a miserable Fashion
seemed to Command, who indeed were under no manner of Obedience; the Emperor
Alexis had given them Liberty to Encamp without the Suburbs of Constantinople,
and to Traffic with his People for all kind of Necessaries at the Price
Current; but these Brutes, who laughed at the Orders of their Superiors, took
what Liberty they thought fit, and committed the very same Disorders which had
been so fatal to them before in Hungary, for in five days space they made such
a Desolation in the Suburbs of that City, and the places adjacent, that even
the Turks and Saracens themselves could not have done more; they Plundered all
the beautiful Houses of Pleasure, and the magnificent Palaces which were
without the City, and afterward burnt them; they Sacrilegiously Robbed the
Churches, stripping them even of the very Coverings of the Lead, which they
sold to the Greeks: These fearful and excessive Brutalities, did so fortify the
Jealousies of Alexis, and so exasperated him against the Latins, that without
considering that these were only the Scum and Sink of the common People, as he
very well understood himself; he resolved to do all that possibly he could,
utterly to destroy them, and yet so far to dissemble with the Princes, as to
draw to himself all the Advantages he could from their Conquests. And
therefore, whereas formerly he had Counseled the Hermit to expect the coming
up of the rest of the Forces, and not to expose himself with those pitiful
Troops, he was now for having him immediately to pass forwards to the Straits
through Bithynia: This they did, all the way commiting the same Disorder, till
they came to Nicomedia, Plundering, Ravaging, and Desolating the Lands, Houses,
and the Churches of the Christians, against whom these Libertines seemed to
make that War, which they had vowed to make against the Infidels, neither the
Fear of God, nor the Authority of their Hermit General being in the least
available to stop the Torrent of their Fury.

But God Almighty to vindicate the Honor of his Justice, in a little time took
Vengeance on them, and punished their innumerable Crimes, making to perish by
the Hands of the Turks, those who had so unworthily profaned the Cross, which
they had undertaken against them: For as Peace and Unity cannot long be
preserved among wicked Men who are always restless, so here it happened: For
the Spirit of Division falling upon this unruly Army; the Italians and Germans
separated themselves from the French, whose Humor they were not able to
support, and who in reality treated them with more Arrogance and Contempt, and
as our own Historians affirm, in terms far worse than I relate it, therefore
abandoning Peter the Hermit, they chose for their Captain one Renaud; as
appeared by his future Conduct, one of the loosest and most Wicked of the whole
Crew. He being employed in the mountainous Country near Nice, took there first
a small Village, and presently after seized on another large Town, which he
found forsaken of all its Inhabitants, but replenished with abundance of all
sorts of Provisions: And whilst he there amused himself and his whole Army
with Feasting and Jollity, the young Soliman Sultan of Nice, who upon the Alarm
of the coming of the Western Christians, had raised a formidable Army, composed
of the most valiant Turks of all Asia, came to Invest him; the better part of
his Army being before defeated upon Michaelmas day, whilst going out under his
ill Conduct, to surprise the Sultan by an Ambuscade, they themselves fell into
an Ambuscade of the Turks, by whom they were surprised. After this the Siege
was of no long continuance, for the Lewd and Cowardly Renaud, unable to endure
the Extremity of Thirst, to which Soliman had reduced the Place by cutting off
their Water, pretending to go out upon a Parley, went and rendered himself with
his Followers to the Enemies, and turned Turk; after which the others were
forced to Surrender themselves upon Discretion: And that which is the most
deplorable, and remarkable piece of Divine Vengeance, is, that those Persons
who had by their enormous Crimes, rendered themselves unworthy of the Grace of
God, generally imitating their wicked Captain, renounced their Faith to save
their Lives; There were diverse nevertheless upon whom God had so much
Compassion, who abhorring that detestable Apostasy, chose to obliterate the
shame of their former wicked Lives, by a glorious Death, to which they
generously offered themselves for the sake of Christ Jesus; some of which lost
their Lives by diverse kinds of Torments, and others by a lingering Martyrdom,
changing their Freedom into a most cruel Slavery.

The lot of the French, from whom the other Nations had separated themselves,
was not much more Fortunate; they were Encamped near Helenopolis and Cybotus,
which our Writers call Civitot, which are two Villages situate in the Gulf of
Nicomedia, and nearest to the City of Nice, from whence they sent out great
Parties to destroy the Forage about that City. But the Disorders among them
were still as great, or greater than before, so that Peter himself unable
longer to endure their Insolence, abandoned them, leaving the whole Command to
Gautier, and retiring to Constantinople under pretense of procuring Provision
for the Army. Soliman who was a great Captain, and kept good Intelligence, and
who knew how to use his Victory, resolved now to attempt a second, by attacking
these People who had neither Discipline, Order, nor Head, whom therefore he
purposed to surprise in their Camp. But by a strange Adventure it happened that
these who had just now received the sad News of the Defeat of their Companions,
forced their Captains, contrary to their Inclinations, to draw out and March
toward Nice, with a Resolution to fall unexpectedly upon Soliman, and surprise
him whilst he was enjoying the Pleasures of his last Victory; they therefore
decamped with twenty five thousand Men, divided into six Batallions under so
many Standards, and with about five hundred Curiassiers on Horseback: There lay
between the French Camp and the City of Nice several high Mountains covered
with Woods, from whence there is a Descent into a fair Plain, where this great
Town is situated. As the French passed these Mountains and Forests in
Disorder, according to their Custom, making a mighty Noise, Soliman who was
advanced so far on his way from Nice, with a design to attack them, little
imagining they were coming to meet him, being thereof informed by his Scouts,
who without being discovered by the French, gave him this Advertisement; he
immediately retreated into the Plain, where he drew up his Army in Battalia.
The French who were strangely disappointed to find those so near them, and in
so good Order, whom they thought to have surprised, nevertheless stood not to
consider whether they should fight or not, but gave a furious Charge with two
of their Batallions and their little body of Cavalry, upon the main Body of the
Turks; but they who were far more in number than the French, extending their
Wings to the right and left, encompassed them, and cutting off the Reserves
which were to follow, they poured in a shower of Arrows from all parts upon
them, and charged them with so much Fury, that not being able to rally, they
were in conclusion cut all in pieces.

The brave Gautier Hievelittle who combated that day like a man, who since he
could not hope to conquer, was resolved to fall nobly, being shot through with
seven Arrows dyed; Renaud of Breis and Foucher of Orleans also perished with
all the Cavalry, selling their lives to the Infidels at an excessive rate:
Gautier of Breteuil and Godfrey Burel Colonel of Foot, who was the Person that
contrary to the Opinion of the wiser Captains drew the Army into this
misfortune, saved themselves among the Rocks and Bushes, retiring to those who
were not yet drawn out from the Woods, but they seeing all lost dreamt of
nothing but how to save themselves. But the Turks who followed them close at
the Heels, pursued them with so much heat that they entered their Camp with the
Fugitives, where they made a most horrible slaughter among the Women, Children,
Sick People, Old Men, Priests and Monks which were lest there with a very
slender Guard of Soldiers, and were generally either asleep, or, which was
worse, making debauches: those who were able to save themselves from such a
wosul Massacre, retired some of them into the Mountains where they miscrably
perished; others to Civitot, where the Town being presently after taken by the
Turks they were all made slaves. Insomuch that of this innumerable Multitude of
Crusades of so many different Nations which Peter had led as far as the
Bosphorus, there did not remain above three thousand men, who saved themselves
in a little Ruinous Village upon the Propontis, which they defended for several
days by mere desperation, and from whence they were at length drawn off and
brought to Constantinople by the Emperors Fleet, disarmed and almost naked, the
Emperor being scarce able to dissemble his malicious joy for this defeat of
the Christians. This was the Event of the Expedition of the Hermit, who after
he had done such notable things when he acted in his own Sphere as a Hermit, a
Priest, and a Preacher of the Cross to excite-men to this Holy War, came off so
poorly, when he acted contrary to his Profession, and exchanged his Pilgrims
Staff for a Sword, appearing at the head of an Army with a Helmet upon his gray
head, and under that the Monks Cowl, which did so ill accord with the Equipage
and the Quality of a General. This may inform us in a Lesson which cannot be
too often repeated, That as the natural frame of the Universe is conserved by
the Different actions of the Elements, which whilst they act in their proper
places produces the most admirable Concord, but ruin and confound all when once
they depart from those regular Movements; so neither can the civil World
subsist longer than whilst the different functions of men retain a conformity
suitable to their Condition, and that generally all is spoiled when these are
confounded.

But the unfortunate beginning of this Holy War, was but only a kind discharge
of those corrupted Humors, which otherwise might have endangered the sounder
Body of the whole Christian Army; and which enabled it to act after a far
different manner, than it could possibly have done with the Conjunction of
those irregular People. For in the same time whilst these matters passed in
this manner in Asia in the Months of August, September and October, Godfrey of
Bullen began his, March the fifteenth day of August with a puissant Army of ten
thousand Horse, and seventy thousand foot, well appointed, and for the most
part chosen out of the Noble Families of France, and Germany, who seemed
transported with joy to sight under the Conduct of such a noble General. He had
also in his Company his Brother Baldwin, and among other Princes and Lords of
the first Quality Baldwin de Bourg his Cousin Earl of Retel, the Counts Hugh de
St. Paul, with his Son Engelram, Renald de Toul with Peter his Brother, Baldwin
de Mons Cousin to the Earl of Flanders, Garnier de Grezi Kinsman to Duke
Godfrey, Conon de Mountaigu, Dudon de Conty, Henry and Godfrey de Hasche; all
which were sollowed by the Choicest Gentlemen and the brave Spirits of their
Estates. When this Army was arrived in Austria in the Month of September, it
was obliged to halt upon the Frontier of Hungary, to treat with King Carloman
concerning their passage: For in Truth he had sufficient reason to be
distrustful of this Army of the Crusades, after the horrible injuries which he
had received from those of Peter, Godescalc and Emico. The Treaty was however
quickly concluded by the open and plain dealing between the King and the Duke,
who had an Interview upon a certain Bridge. The King demanded as Hostages
Prince Baldwin and the Princess his Lady; and coasting all along with the Army
of Godfrey, ordered the Magazines to furnish them with Provisions at a
reasonable price, till such time as the greatest part of the Troops were passed
over the Savus, where he returned the Hostages with a thousand Protestations of
Amity to the Duke, whose Conduct and Fidelity he had in extraordinary
admiration. With the same order Godfrey caused his Army to pass over the vast
Countries of Bulgaria and the Territories of the Greek Emperor, according as
he had promised his Ambassadors who were sent to him by Alexis, whilst he was
upon his March, until at length he arrived at Philipopolis in Thracia, where he
received Intelligence of the detention of Hugh the Great.

This young Prince who was Brother to Philip the first King of France, had not,
to speak Truth, either so much Experience, or so much Ability as the other
Princes of the Crusade who were possessed of very fair Estates; but however he
was a person admirably well composed, full of Honor Virtue and Goodness,
extreme Brave, and of an Humor sweet and indearing: the advantage which he had
by his Illustrious Birth, above the rest gave him a title to a greater Respect,
and he was therefore treated with so much Honor and Duty by all, that though
diverse others had in reality a greater Command and Interest in the Army, yet
nevertheless his Name was more Celebrated among strangers and especially the
Greeks. The Princes which accompanied him in this Voyage were Robert Duke of
Normandy Son to William the Conqueror, with the Noble Troops of English,
Normans and Britains; Stephen Earl of Chartres and Blois, whose power was so
great that it was commonly said, that he was owner of more Places and Castles
then there were days in the year; Prince Eustace of Bullen Brother to Duke
Godfrey; and Robert Earl of Flanders, who following the example of the Duke of
Lorrain sold his Estate to furnish the Charges of this War. These Princes who
together composed a most puissant and numerous Army, having stated their
measures and conferred a long time at Paris with Hugh the great in the presence
of the King his Brother, put themselves upon their Way in the Month of
September, and having traversed France and Italy and received the Benediction
of the Pope whom they found at Leuca, and also having visited Rome and the Holy
Places to implore the Divine Assistance, the Winter being too far advanced for
them commodiously to pass into Epirus, they were obliged to distribute their
Army about Bari, Brindes and Otranto, there to attend the coming of the Spring
and the convenience of imbarquing their Forces. But Hugh suffering himself to
be transported by the heat of his Conrage, and the Impatience natural to Young
Persons, and above all others, those of the French Nation, was not able to
support this delay, but exposed himself too rashly to the Faith of the Greeks,
imbarking at Bari to pass to Duras, as he did very slenderly accompanied, and
in a condition in no sort suitable to his Quality and the Majestic Name of
France which he was to sustain during this War. But the Governor of that
place, whether it were that he had secret Orders to secure such of the Crusade
as he could surprise, or that he believed he should do his Master the Emperor a
considerable Service by putting into his hands so great a Prince, who might
serve for a Hostage to secure him against the Latins; immediately upon his
arrival seized him, and sent him under a strong Guard through By-ways to
Constantinople where the Emperor detained him Prisoner.

Godfrey who presently after this adventure arrived at Philipopolis where he
received an account of it, sent immediately to the Emperor to demand the
Liberty of this Prince and those who accompanied him, and in the mean time
advanced with his Army as far as Adrianople. But perceiving by the Answer which
he received from Alexis what he was to Expect, he acted like an open Enemy, and
for eight days wasting the Country all along as he went he marched directly to
Constantinople, where he raised such a consternation, that Alexis sent to him
to his Camp to desire a Peace, making him all the Promises of receiving a just
satisfaction. In short, Godfrey still advancing encamped two days before
Christmas within view of this great City, when with joy he received Hugh the
Great to whom the Emperor had now given his Liberty, and who came to pay his
thanks to his Deliverer and Benefactor, accompanied with Drogon de Neele,
Clerembaud de Vendeuile and William Viscount of Melun commonly called the
Carpenter, either because he was so notable an Artist in framing of Engines of
War, or that according to the mode of Expression in those times, he used so
terribly to hack and hew his Enemies, that neither Cask, Shield nor Curiass,
was able to resist the Force of his blows. But this Peace by reason of the
perfidiousness of Alexis lasted not long, for perceiving that after he had
given orders privately to prohibit the furnishing them with provisions, the
Army began to live at Discretion, he had recourse to Artifice, and desired
Godfrey to take up his Quarters in the fair Houses, Palaces, Hamblets and
Villages which lay all along the Bosphorus to the Euxine Sea, pretending the
Rigor of the season was too extreme to permit them to continue in their Camp,
but the truth is with a design to lock up this great Army in the little space
which is between the Strait and the River which discharges it self into the
Port, that there he might more easily destroy them. He had also a design to
surprise the Duke, inviting him to come to the Palace to confer with him about
the War; but finding that the Duke would not be decoyed, and that he did with
good reason distrust him, he endeavored again to famish the Army, prohibiting
the furnishing them with any kind of provisions; he also attacked them both by
Sea and Land, for he commanded out his Cavalry against those who were sent to
forage, and caused many Vessels manned with Archers to fall down the River,
who incessantly discharged upon such of the Soldiers as appeared. But his
Enterprise prospered accordingly, for Godfrey with ease defeating the Greek
Cavalry, made himself Master of the Bridge of Blakerness, in despite of all
that the Emperors People endeavored to do to oppose him, and having without
danger repassed the Main of his Army, who set sire at their parting to the
Houses and Palaces where they had lain, he went and encamped in the plain of
Blakerness. In the night he was attacked by all the Emperors Forces, but he
repulsed them immediately, and drive them into the Town though with little
loss, by reason that they made more have to retire than they had done to assail
him. After which having for five or six days wasted all about Constantinople in
revenge of the detestable infidelity of the Emperor, Alexis was compelled to
desire a new accommodation: He voluntarily offered his Son John Porphirogenitus
for a Hostage to oblige the Duke to come to his Palace, there to confer about
the Articles of the Treaty.

Godfrey who desired nothing but the means to execute his principal Design, and
to pass with safety into Asia, accepted the condition; and having sent his
Cousin Baldwin, du Bourg and Conon Earl of Mountaigu to receive the Prince, he
made the Army retreat to their former Port upon the Bosphorus, where leaving
Baldwin to command them, he with Hugh and the other Princes went up the River
to Constantinople. The Emperor received them there with much magnificence, and
according to the custom observed by the Greek Emperors, as a sign of amity and
entire confidence, when they are minded to do a singular honor to any Prince,
he would needs adopt him for his Son. After which the Emperor proposed the
Conditions of the Treaty, which were reduced to these two Articles; First
Alexis promised upon his Oath to aid these Princes with all his Power both by
Sea and by Land, that he would join his Forces with theirs and lead them in his
own Person, that he would with his Fleet continually supply the Army with
Provisions, and do no sort of Injury to those who served in this War. The
second was, that these Princes should reciprocally engage to do nothing
contrary to his Interests; that they should restore to him such places of
Importance as they should recover in Asta, do homage for others, and take an
Oath of fealty to him as his Subjects for such Lands which they should hold of
the Emperor. This last which was a very nice point was a long time contested by
the Princes, who thought it would be very dishonorable to them to declare
themselves Vassals of the Greek Emperor, but after mature consideration, that
without stocking the Authority of their own Sovereigns they might become
Feudaries to another lefter Prince, and swear fealty to him for such lands as
they held of him; and that it was impossible their enterprise should succeed
well if they should have the Emperor always opposite to them, they resolved to
give him that which he desired, and to give him their Oaths and do that Homage,
but with this Limitation, That they should be no longer obliged then whilst he
punctually performed his Part of the Agreement. After which the Emperor, who
was magnificent even to Profusion, striving to purchase a Reputation of being
liberal to strangers though at the rates of Avarice and Cruelty, impoverishing
his Subjects by unsupportable Exactions, loaded these Princes with Honors, and
made them excessive rich Presents. And for the subsistence of the Dukes Army,
he ordered every week so much money as he desired to be paid him, which
nevertheless he was afterards obliged to return by the way of Spain: For this
Prince who was most sordidly covetous, being Master of all the Commodities of
his Empire, there was not a Merchant but who was a kind of Custom-house Officer
to him, and obliged to give him an exact account of whatever was either
imported or exported throughout his Dominions. Miserable is the condition of
those Subjects who live under such Princes who will allow them no manner of
Property in their Goods, or rather, most unfortunate are those Princes who in
reality have none but Slaves and Beggars for their Subjects.

In the mean time the Emperor who was informed that the other Princes were upon
their March with puissant Armies, desired Duke Godfrey about the beginning of
Lent to pass with his Army toward Bithynia and to encamp near Calcedon,
alleging that he could no longer sind subsistence for his Troops in the place
where they lay; but this was in reality only a politic stratagem, to avoid the
assembling so near him so many Guests who were very much suspected by him; and
above all others he was possessed with an extreme apprehension of Bohemond
Prince of Tarentum, who presently after Easter arrived with the choicest
Italians and Normans, who had made themselves Masters of the extreme part of
Italy, by an adventure which because it redounds to the glory of our Nation, I
shall think it no trouble in a few words to give an account of it.

Norman Gentlemen returning from a Voyage to Jerusalem where they had visited
the Holy Places, arrived by Sea at Salernum, in the very time when the City was
extremely pressed by the Saracens who besieged it by Land. These Pilgrims who
were brave men, tall of stature, and of a good Mind, had a great desire to
signalize their Zeal upon so fair an occasion; having therefore easily obtained
of Gaimar Prince of Salernum Horses and Arms, and the liberty which they
desired to make a Sally up on the Enemies, they issued out to so good purpose,
and fought with so much Conduct and bravery in the view of the whole Town which
ran to the Walls to behold them, that having filled the whole Camp of the
Saracens with confusion, blood and slaughter, and burnt their Engines of War,
they obliged them to raise their Siege by one of the most memorable actions
that is extant upon historical Record, Gaimar did what possibly he could to
stay these brave men with him, and offered them most magnificent recompenses
for the Service they had done; but they generously refusing assured him they
expected nothing but the Reward of God Almighty for whose Glory they had
combated against his Enemies of his Holy Name; and that having performed their
Vows, they were under undispensible obligations of returning into their own
Country. However this Prince willing by some way or other, to draw to himself
some of so valiant and generous a Nation, requested them to take along with
them his Ambassadors, which being agreed, the Ambassadors carried with them
some of the most delicious Fruits of Champain, Italy, Pavia and Calabria, and
particularly Citrons, Lemons and Oranges, which the Ancients called Golden
Apples, none of which grew in Normandy. They managed their affairs there with
so much dexterity that many Gentlemen allured with the Pleasure of those
beautiful Fruits, but much more with the Fruits of Glory, which they hoped to
gain by making War against the Saracens, followed the Ambassadors. These
Gentlemen did there such memorable Actions whilst they served the Italian
Princes, and the Emperor St. Henry, against the Infidels, and against the
Greeks, whose Yoke they could no longer bear, as rendered their Names most
Celebrated throughout all Italy; but being of an Humor not to forget themselves
whilst they served others so advantageously, they took occasion to be their
own Paymasters, by making themselves Masters of certain Places in Pavia, where
they afterward became very Powerful by the Accession of diverse of their
Countrymen who flocked thither to them, upon the Encouragement of their good
Fortune and Renown.

The most considerable of these was a Person of Quality, one Tancred Lord of
Hauteville, who of twelve Sons which he had, not at all inferior to their
Father in Courage, sent eleven of them into Italy. They were so fortunate, that
in a little time a fair Occasion presented itself to them, to establish their
Dominion in Italy: For Baldwin Lieutenant to the Greek Governor, being ill
treated by him, craving Aid of these Normans, broak out into Terms of Defiance
with him. These Eleven Brothers, the most renowned of their Nation, and to whom
all the rest yielded Obedience, carried themselves with such Conduct and
admirable good Fortune, that after having entirely defeated the Greeks in three
Battles, they chaced them out of almost all their Dependancies in Italy,
dividing the Conquests among themselves. But still they acknowledged for their
Captain and Chief, the eldest Brother William, Surnamed for his Valor
Iron-Arme, who was the first Earl of Pavia; his two next Brothers Drogon and
Humphry succeeded him, and after them the Third, which was the famous Robert
Guischard. This Prince who certainly was one of the greatest Men of his Age,
not contented with Pavia, by the force of his Arms, extended his Dominion into
Calabria, and Conquered the greatest part of that Country, which is now called
the Kingdom of Naples, and took upon himself the Title of Duke of Pavia and
Calabria, for which he did Homage to Pope Nicholas the Second, restoring to him
such Lands as had been usurped from the Church. He had afterward great
Differences with Gregory the Seventh, who Excommunicated him; but in the end
being Reconciled, he received Absolution, and became his great Protector; and
at the earnest entreaty of that Pope, it was, that he with his Son Bohemond
passed the Sea to make War with Alexis Commenius, the Usurper of the Imperial
Throne, out of which his Predecessor Nicephorus Botaniatos had expelled the
Emperor Michel Parapinacius, who was come to Rome to Implore the Succor of the
Pope and the Normans. There can be nothing more Glorious than that which upon
this Occasion was performed by this admirable Prince; for he overran all
Greece, and with no more than fifteen thousand Men, defeated Alexis in a set
Battle, who Encountered him upon the Frontier of Thrace with an Army of one
hundred and seventy thousand Combatants. Then leaving Bohemond in Thrace, who
successfully pusht on the War, often beating Alexis, as the Princess Ann his
Sister Confesses, he hasted to the Succor of the Pope, who was closely Besieged
by the Imperialists and Romans in the Castle of St. Angelo; he constrained
Henry the Emperor to depart from Italy; Retook Rome from the Schismatics;
conducted the Pope to Salernum; returned to the East; in his Passage defeated
the Fleet of Alexis; and having Rejoyned with Bohemond, not long after he died
full of Glory, leaving his Estate to his Son Roger, who after an unkind and
unlucky War, at last came to an Agreement with his Brother Prince Bohemond,
giving him for his Share the Principality of Tarentum.

Roger Earl of Sicily at the Siege of Amalphi, when the French Princes passed
through Italy for the Levant; So soon as he understood the Subject of their
Voyage, he declared publicly that he would be one with them; either out of his
great Zeal for the Glory of God, or that he believed this might afford a fair
Opportunity for him to Recommence the War with Alexis, and by Possessing some
part of the Empire, establish himself in the East; for he sent some of his
People immediately to Duke Godfrey to obstruct the Peace between him and
Alexis: Be it as it will, for it is no part of my Province to enter into Men's
Intentions, after the spiteful manner of most People, and above all others,
Historians, who to make themselves thought Able and Understanding, too
frequently fall into this piece of Malice: It is most undoubted that Bohemond
showed such a mighty Ardor for this Holy Expedition, that having in the Field
torn a silken Cloak which he wore, into Crosses, he took the first himself, and
afterward presented the rest to the principal Officers of his Army, which were
received with such an universal Applause, that all the Soldiers protested they
would follow him, insomuch that passing quite through the quarter of Bohemond,
Earl Roger was in a manner wholly deserted and forced to retire.

Bohemond overjoyed at this Adventure, applied himself with incredible
Diligence to make Preparation for this Enterprise, and in a short time passed
the Sea after Hugh the Great, but with another manner of Equipage than that
Prince had done; for he had in his Army ten thousand Horse, and above so many
Foot, together with the greatest part of the Gentry of Sicily, Calabria, and
Pavia, and the Princes and Norman Lords, the principal whereof were the brave
Tancred his Nephew, his Sisters Son; the Earls Richard and Ranulph his Cousins,
the Sons of William Iron-Arme his Uncle, Richard the Son of Earl Ranulph,
Herman de Canni, Humphrey the Son of Raould, and Robert de Sourdevall. The Army
passed through Epirus and Macedon, where the Greek Imperialists who had their
Winter Quarters there, drawing together attended their Motions, intending, if
possible, to surprise them; and at a certain Pass upon a River, when one half
of the Army was marched over they fell in upon the Rere; But Tancred
immediately Repassing, followed by two thousand Horse, charged them so home,
that having cut the forwardest of them in pieces, the rest consulted their
Safety with their Heels: He took also many Prisoners, whom he sent to Bohemond,
who reproaching them for this unworthy Action, they assured him that what they
had done, was by particular Order from the Emperor, notwithstanding, that that
perfidious Prince had wrote Letters full of Complements and Civility to
Bohemond, by that Artifice, it seems, thinking to amuse him and make him less
Careful or Suspicious. However this Blow so astonished Alexis, that to avoid a
greater he sent an Excuse to Bohemond, and commanded his Officers to furnish
his Army with Provisions; he also requested Duke Godfrey with the principal
Lords of his Army, to meet this Prince and mediate a Reconciliation; and the
Duke knew so well how to soften that great Spirit, that notwithstanding all the
reason he had for his Distrusts, he brought him along with him to pay his Duty
to the Emperor, and to take the same Oath with the rest of the Princes, which
he did with the same Intention, lest it should procrastinate that great Design
for which they had taken Arms. The Emperor received him with all the Marks of
Esteem and Kindness, and believing he knew his blind side, which he thought was
Ambition, he promised him that Conditionally that he would take the Oath which
was required of him, he would establish this Prince in the greatest part of
those Provinces which lie between Constantinople and Antioch, which he thought
was an irresistible Argument to work upon his Temper. But Tancred, whether it
were that he had secret Orders from Bohemond, or that he could not dispose
himself to Digest an Oath which he did not approve, drew his Troops to this
side of the Strait, without seeing the Emperor at all, who was forced to
dissemble this Affront which was put upon him. The Earl of Flanders, who came
up a few Days after, went to wait upon the Emperor with a slender Retinue, and
without Difficulty took the same Oath, as the others had done. After which
these Forces also passed the Bosphorus to encamp near Calcedon with the rest.
But the Arival of Count Raymond brought such new Difficulties, as were not
without great Trouble to be Surmounted.

This Lord had taken the Cross the first of all others, at that same time when
the Greek Ambassadors came to Pope Urban after his departure from Clermont; and
his Example was so prevalent that he was followed by above one hundred thousand
Men out of Avergne, Gascoine, Languedoc, and Provence, who put themselves under
his Conduct.

He was a Prince of a majestic Aspect, and being somewhat advanced in Years,
his gray Hairs rendered him still more Venerable, but he was only so old as to
have his Experience increased and his Judgment more strong, without any
diminution to the strength of his Body, which was every way Robust and capable
of enduring all the Fatigues of War: He had acquired a very noble Reputation,
especially in Spain, in the Wars against the Moors for Alphonsus the great,
King of Castile, who gave him his Daughter Elvira in Marriage, as a Recompense
of his Valor, the glorious Marks whereof he carried in his Face, having lost
one of his Eyes by the shot of an Arrow; which was so far from being a Blemish,
that together with his goodly Presence, it inhanced his Esteem and Reputation
among the Soldiers, who had him in mighty Veneration. He possessed moreover all
the good Qualities which were requisite to render him a great Prince and an
honest Man; above all things a lover of Honor, Justice, and Integrity; an
inviolable Master of his Word, Vigilant, Wise, and of a great Foresight;
Magnificent, Prudent in his Counsels, firm and unalterable in his Resolutions:
But after all this it must be acknowledged, that notwithstanding his Age and
all his Prudence, he retained too much of the Genius and the Temper of his
Country; for he was a mighty Opiniatre, and not able to bear Injuries, or to
suffer his own Sentiments or his Will to be Opposed. The Countess his Lady, who
had the Heart of a Heroine, generously followed her Husband in this Voyage, as
did also his Son Bertrand, whom he was resolved to educate in this fair School
of Virtue, both by his Instructions and his Example. Many great Persons
accompanied him, of whom the principal were Aimar Bishop of Pavia the Popes
Legate, William Bishop of Orange, Currard Earl of Rousillon, William Earl of
Montpellier, Gaston de Bearn, William de Forest, Raiband of Orange, Raimond
the first Viscount of Turenne, and several Spanish Lords, together with Bernard
Archbishop of Toledo, and all the brave Lords and Gentlemen of Avergn, Gascony,
Languedoc, and Provence.

This brave Earl having passed the Alps, and taken his way by Lombardy and
Friul, Marched quite through Dalmatia, being forced continually to stand upon
his Guard to defend himself from the ancient Sclavonians, a Barbaroas People
who then Inhabited that Country, and who never failed upon any Advantage to
assail him, and lay Ambuscades for him all the Way till he came to Duras; from
thence he entered into Epirus, and traversed all Macedon and Thracia, till he
came to a Town upon the Hellespont, within four days March of Constantinople,
having been forced to sight his Passage all the way against the Greeks and
Bulgarians, which the perfidious Alexis, contrary to all his fair Protestations
of Friendship, had caused to arm against him. However for the present he
dissembled the Injury, and tho not without a great deal of Repugnance, leaving
his Army Encamped near that City, he advanced with a small Train to
Constantinople, there to treat with the Emperor, according to the earnest
Desires of the Princes who had already passed the Strait, who now desired
nothing more than to come to a Conjunction of their Forces, in order to their
entering upon Action. The Emperor after a magnificent Reception, pressed him
also to the point of Homage, as the other Princes had agreed: The Earl smartly
replied, That he would never do it, and that he was not come so far as the
Levant to find a Master, nor did he intend to become a Vassal to any other
besides Christ Jesus: But that nevertheless, if his Imperial Majesty would join
his Forces with theirs, and put himself at the Head of the Army, he would
without trouble acknowledge him for his General, and in that Quality oney him as
well as any of the rest. Alexis netled at this Denial, however stilled his ill
Humor, and amuling the Earl with a pretense of treating with him further
concerning the Common Interests, the Imperial Troops who were Quartered in
Thracia, receiving secret Orders to that purpose, sell unexpectedly in the
Night upon his Camp, who believing themselves in great Security in the Country
of their Friends, kept no manner of strict Guard; this Surprise brought a
strange Confusion upon the Camp, and many Soldiers were killed before they
could be awakned; but after a little time these cowardly Assailants were
repulsed with a very great Slaughter: The Disorder however was never the less,
for the Soldiers who before had suffered so much in their march, began to
mutiny, and believing that they were betrayed by their Officers who had brought
them thither to be butchered, nothing would satisfy them but to return into
their own Country. But the Earl who could by no means endure to think of
retreating, appeased them by changing their despair into a desire of Revenge,
he therefore sent openly to reproach the Emperor with this infamous treachery,
and to solicit the rest of the Princes to join with him, and at once to
deliver themselves from this persidious Greek by razing his Imperial Throne.
But the Princes, at the earnest prayer of Alexis who absolutely disavowed the
action, and offered to make any kind of satisfaction to the Earl, made such
powerful Remonstrances to Raimond, that in conclusion they not only appeased
him but also obliged him for fear of losing more time to the prejudice of their
great design, to take the Oath which was desired, which accordingly he did, but
in these terms, That he promised to enterprise nothing contrary to the honor or
the life of Alexis, provided that Prince should inviolably observe all that he
had promised. But when the Homage came under debate he constantly protested
that he would die before he would do it, and that the Emperor and the Princes
ought to be abundantly satisfied with the Oath which he had taken. From whence
they might have learned that the same Resolution in the rest might have proved
no less advantageous to them, then their politic Condescension, for assuredly
what color soever may be put upon this Action, it can never redound much to
their Honor in the History of their lives. But so it commonly happens, that it
is the Destiny of humane Prudence to be most grossly mistaken when for its
security it makes choice of Profitable rather than Honest.

This dangerous quarrel being in this manner appeased, the Princes after having
resolved at a great Council of War immediately to besiege the City of Nice,
repaired to Calcedon whither also the Army of Raimond marched up to join with
the rest. Raimond himself and Prince Bohemond of whom the jealous Emperor was
extremely suspicious, staying still at Constantinople to solicit Alexis to
send the Provisions for the Army, and according to his promise to go and take
upon him the Command of the Army, which they the more pressed that thereby they
might be the better assured of him; but he still excused himself from the
apprehensions which he had of the Bulgarians who might draw dangerous
advantages from his absence. Whereupon Bohemond and the Earl presently after
him having given order for the Provisions, passed the strait and followed the
rest of the Princes toward Nice; and in the mean time Robert Duke of Normandy,
Stephen Earl of Blois, and Prince Eustace who were yet expected with
impatience, after having passed the Winte and Lent in Pavia and Calabria,
Embarquing after Easter the fifteenth of April, toward the latter end of May,
came up with the Christian Army and encamped near that City.

Robert Duke of Normandy was the Son of that famous William who effaced the
first infamous Surname of the Bastard by that of the Conqueror, which he
acquired by his Merits in the Conquests of the Kingdom of England. This Prince
was low of Stature but of a lofty Mind and a large heart, valiant and fearless
upon occasion of honorable engagements, of great sincerity and integrity,
magnificent in his Expenses, and liberal even to prodigality; but withal he was
extreme voluptuous, and naturally averse to trouble and business, a Lover of
disorderly pleasures, and especially of eating and drinking very plentifully
which made him something Corpulent and unwieldy; and by these irregularities he
lost the Realm of England in which his younger Brother established himself,
whilst he instead of making Preparation for War, diverted himself, with making
provision only for his pleasures: and this also lost him the love of the
Normans, whom he oppressed with excessive Impositions and exactions, to furnish
himself wherewithal to support his Luxury. However he recovered that Duchy,
and resolving in some measure to imitate the Piety of his Grandfather Robert
the eighth Duke of Normandy, who by an uncommon Devotion for so great a Prince
went on Pilgrimage barefooted to Jerusalem, he was one of the first in taking
upon him the Cross, thereby to atone God Almighty for the viciousness of his
former life: he therefore generously engaged his Duchy to his two Brothers for
fifteen thousand Marks in silver to enable him to undertake this Voyage wherein
he suffered much in a toilsome march, and performed more when once he came to
enter into the War.

All matters having thus passed at Constantinople between the Emperor and the
Princes, there remained only Earl Stephen and Prince Eustace, who with the Earl
of Tholose were still to perform what the rest of the Princes had already done,
they therefore repaired to Constantinople to pay their Homage to the Emperor
who received them with all manner of honor, sparing, no charges in treating
them most Royally, and in making them Presents, which in beauty, richness and
magnificence surpassed all that he had bestowed upon the other Princes. After
which this perfidious man under pretense of furnishing them with an able
Conductor and some Troops of his own, promising that so soon as his affairs
would permit, he would follow them in Person with all his Forces, gave them one
Tatin a wicked fellow of his Court, whose nose having been cut off carried in
his Face the ugly Witness of his horrid Crimes. It was to this infamous wretch
that he trusted the great secret of his intended treachery against the Princes
of the Crusade. He it was who was to give him an exact account of all
occurrences, and upon occasion to put his orders in Execution for their Ruin;
whilst the poor Princes who thought they had reason to be extremely well
satisfied with his proceedings passed the Bosphorus, and by great marches
rejoyned the Gross of the Army which had now begun the Siege of Nice.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book.
The Description of the City of Nice in Blthynia, and the Siege thereof by the
Princes of the Crusade. The second and third Battle of Nice, where the young
Solomon was beaten. The taking of that City, and the Treachery of the Greek
Emperor. The March of the Christian Army. One part thereof surprised by
Soliman. The Battle of the Gorgonian Valley. The Progress of the Christian Army
in the lesser Asia. The great danger of Duke Godfrey and his Combat with a
monstrous Bear. The difference and little Civil Dissension between Baldwin and
Tancred. Baldwin makes himself Master of the Principality of Edessa. The
Entrance of the Christian Army into Syria. The Description of the famous City
of Antioch. It is besieged by the Princes. The Relation of this famous Siege.
The Combat at the Bridge of Antioch. The mavelous Actions of Duke Godfrey.
The Approach of Corbagath with a prodigious Army to relieve the City. The
Relation of the taking of Antioch by Bohemond by Intelligence in the City with
one Pyrrhus. The Christian Army at the same time besieged by Corbagath. A
Relation of the discovery of the top of a Spear, which was believed to be that
which pierced our Saviors side. The memorable Battle of Antioch, where the
whole power of the Turks and Sarasens in Asia was defeated by the Christians.
The death of Aymar de Monteil Bishop of Pavia. The quarrel between Count
Raymond and the Prince of Tarrentum. The taking of Marra. A strange Relation of
the gratitude of a Lion. The Siege of Arcas. The odd Story of Anselme de
Ribemond Earl of Bouchain, and the deceased Engelram Son to the Earl of St.
Paul. The taking of Torlosa by a stratagem by the Vicount de Turenne. The
Sultan of Egypt takes Jerusalem from the Turks, breaks his League with the
Princes of the Crusade. The Ambassadors of Alexis slighted. The advantageous
composition with the Emir of Tripolis. The March of the Christian Army to
Jerusalem. Lidda, Rama, Nicopolis and Bethlehem taken by the Christians. The
extraordinary expressions of their Devotion upon the first discovery of the
Holy City.

AFter the Arrival of these Princes at Constantinople, Duke Godfrey and Tancred
being advanced as far as Nicomedia, and having levelled the ways over the
Mountains from that Town to the City of Nice, they invested that place the
sixteenth day of May. They staid some time for the coming of the other Princes,
and of Peter the Hermit, who was gone into Asia to recollect some of those
unfortunate Relics of his Forces which had saved themselves in the Woods. And
then it was resolved without staying for the Troops of Raymond Earl of Tholose,
and those of the Duke of Normandy and the Earl of Blois, which were not yet
come up, that they should begin to form the Siege of Nice.

Nice the Capital City of Bythinia, and which is famous to this day for the
first and seventh Ecumenical Councils, which were held there against the
Heresies of the Arians and the Iconoclasts, was at this time a fair and spaious
City, liyng about fifteen or sixteen Leagues from Nicomedia, in the middle of a
most fertile and pleasant Valley, on all sides encompassed with high Mountains,
except on the Western Quarter, where the great Lake of Ascanius, which by small
Vessels furnishes it plentifully with all the Commodities of the Country,
serves instead of a natural Fortification, rendering it wholly inaccessible on
that side. It was encompassed with double Walls of an extraordinary thickness,
and flanked with very fair and lofty Towers, strongly built and placed at
convenient distance to defend each other, and that part of the Curtain which
was between them. It was also strengthened without the Counterscarp with a
great retrenchment, admirably Palisadoed, and which was extreme difficult of
access, by reason of the great number of Springs and Rivulets, which falling
from the Mountains and being stopped by the Fortifications, drowned all the
adjacent fields to what degrees the defendants pleased. Old Soliman who after
the Turks had entered the lesser Asia pushed his Conquests by a continual
succession of Victories as far as the Propontis, had taken extraordinary pains
in the fortifying of this City, where he established the Seat of his Empire,
that he might be so much the nearer Constantinople, and upon occasion one day
pass over more commodiously into Europe. The young Soliman who about ten years
after succeeded him, usually kept a very strong Garrison there, but upon the
noise which the Enterprise of the Christians of the West were about to make, he
reinforced it with the choicest of his Troops; for he did not doubt but in
order to their opening a passage to Jerusalem, this place would be the first
that would be attacked. He himself was gone into Persia, Christian Army, not
suspecting that such a terrible Enemy was so near, began the Siege.

However the Christians applied themselves to a formal Siege, distributing
their several Quarters in his open view, their Army being far more numerous
then his, and consisting in above four hundred thousand Combatants. Bohemond,
after he had taken care for Provisions for the Army in a very plentiful manner,
returning to the Camp, posted himself on the Northwest quarter of the City,
with his Nephew Tancred who extended his quarter on the right hand even to the
Lake. Godfrey of Bullen with Baldwin took the Right Hand over against the
Principal Gate of the City, taking up all that space between the North and the
East upon that side where the City was most strongly fortified. After them upon
the South East quarter encamped Hugh the Great in the same place, where after
their arrival the Duke of Normandy and Count Stephen were to make their attack
so soon as they should come up. All the South side was reserved for Count
Raymond who was upon his way in Bythinia and not far distant from the Camp.
That part toward the West South-West which lay upon the Lake, could not be
blocked up so close but that the Enemies had that way the convenience of
furnishing themselves with Provisions.

The Town being in this manner begirt quite round, the besiegers began briskly
with a General Assault, which upon the fourteenth day of May was given at the
same time upon all the several Quarters, with all kind of military Engines. The
Combat was maintained all that day till the darkness of the Night obliged them
to discontinue it, and was again renewed in the Morning with extraordinary
fury, though without Effect. For the besieged were not only gallant men, but
every minute in expectation of being relieved by Soliman, to whom they had
dispatched an Express both to inform him of their Condition, and to advertise
him that he might easily do it by forcing the Christian Camp on that part which
lay to the Southward, which was but as yet very slenderly guarded; but it so
fell out, that the Letters of the Sultan were intercepted that very day as they
were going to the Town to assure the besieged that he would not fail the next
morning according to their advice to attack that part of the Camp. Notice
thereupon was immediately given to Prince Raymond who was not far off, who
marched with such diligence, that by good Fortune the next morning very early
he arrived in the Camp.

He was no sooner begun to make his Lodgement, but the Turks descended from the
Mountain and divided themselves into two great Bodies to attack the Christian
Camp in two quarters. One party of them marched to the right, toward the
South, believing according to the advice which they had received from the
besieged, that the passage there was free, whilst the other advanced to the
Quarter of Duke Godfrey which lay next the Earl, to prevent his sending any
succors from that part, and thereby to be the better able to put his designed
relief into the City. Raymond whom the Turks little expected to have found
there, received them in so good a posture, and charged their Troops, who looked
for nothing less than such opposition, with so much fury, that he presently put
them into disorder, and having routed them and cut the best part of them in
pieces, the rest were forced to betake themselves to a hasty slight, pursuing
them to the very foot of the Mountains, whilst Godfrey in his quarter dealt in
the same manner with those who made the false attack upon his Post.
Nevertheless the besieged failed not at all in their Courage, but made a very
obstinate defense, under the Protection of their Walls, whose strength was so
great as bid defiance to all the Engines which were made use of against them;
nor were they out of hopes but that still they should receive the Relief which
they had sent to desire of Soliman, by the way of the Lake which still was open.

Whilst matters stood in this posture, the Duke of Normandy and the Earl of
Blois, arrived with their Army in the beginning of June, and took up their
Posts in the Quarter assigned them at the beginning of the Siege. This was the
first time that the Christian Princes had seen all their Forces together, and
taking a review of the Army, they found it to be the most gallant and numerous,
that ever had been seen in any Age. For without computing the Priests, Monks,
Women, Children and Servants of which the number was infinite, those who were
present at this general muster assure us, that there were no fewer than six
hundred thousand Combatants, of which there were at the least a Hundred
thousand Horse bravely armed; moreover the Venetians, Genoese, and those of
Pisa who were Masters of the Sea, assisted them with a mighty Fleet, and
supplied this vast Army continually with store of Arms, Engines of War and all
manner of Provisions. But that which was most admirable, was, that these Noble
Princes, to avoid the displeasure of Almighty God, which for their horrible
disorders had ruined the former Crusades under the Hermit Peter, Godescale and
Count Emico, did by their Authority and Example, and by the powerful
Exhortations which the Bishops continually made to the Soldiers, so admirably
regulate them, and maintained so good and severe a Discipline, that all sorts
of Vices and Debauches, were banished from the Camp.

During this, Soliman who was resolved to try the last of his skill for the
Relief of the Town, upon a sudden made a descent from the Mountains, and made a
second attack upon the Quarter of Raymond, with a Body of sixty thousand men
sustained by the Gross of his whole Army: but the Count, and the rest of the
Princes who were advertised of this Design of the Enemies, getting betwixt this
advanced body and the rest of the Sultans Army, put them into such a
consternation that they immediately fled leaving four thousand of their
companions dead upon the spot, whose heads the victorious Christians cutting
off, with their Engines threw them over the Walls, thereby to strike the
greater Terror into the Hearts of the besieged. But notwithstanding all that,

This valiant man who by reason of his huge Bulk, extraordinary Strength, and
the Fierceness of his barbarous and menacing Air, seemed much to resemble a
Giant, defended one of the strong Towers which were assaulted by Count Raymond;
he had been often repulsed, but yet repeated the surious Attack, when this
monstrous Turk coming to the Platform, made a terrible havoc among the
Assailants, tumbling down with a mighty impetuosity such as had mounted the
scaling Ladders, wounding them with such vast Arrows as no Shield nor Curiass
was able to resist. And not herewith contented, he insulted most intollerably
over the Christians who sell under his Arms, with all the bitter and bloody
ralleries imaginable; for being attacked on all hands he could not forbear
calling them feeble and effeminate Cowards, who were sitter for the Distaff
than the Lance; and finding that his Bow and Arrows were not sufficient to
drive off the Assailants, who pressed hard to the foot of the Wall, he threw
away his Buckler and his Arms, and exposing himself naked to an infinite number
of Arrows which were shot at him, he with both his hands fell to throwing down
stones of a prodigious bigness upon those who were attempting to undermine the
Wall; and which is almost incredible, if we were not assured from those who
were Eye witnesses of the Spectacle, though he had above twenty Arrows sticking
in him that his Breast looked as if it were bristled with them, yet he did not
cease to throw down stones upon the Assailants, nor to bestow his reproachful
language upon them, till Duke Godfrey who was come thither from his own
quarter, not able to endure this insolence of a Barbarian, with a well placed
Arrow shot him through the very heart, and tumbled him dead into the Ditch.
Thus the bravest man of the Turks seemed to stay to receive an honorable Death
from the hand of the gallantest of the Christians. Hitherto the besieged being
not out of hope defended the place with resolution enough^; but when they saw
that the Christians by the help of certain little Vessels of War which the
Emperor had sent from Civitot, were now become absolute Masters of the Lake,
and that Count Raimond had by undermining overthrown the great Tower which he
had been so long attacking, and that the Wife of Soliman as she was
endeavoring to make her escape was taken prisoner with her two Sons, Alexis,
yet they did not in the least oppose the Rendition of the place unto him; so
after a Siege of seven weeks the Town was surrendered upon Articles to the
Emperor; and he to gain the good opinion of the Infidels if they should one day
attempt to reconquer it, causing the Wife and two sons of Soliman, and the
whole Turkish Garrison to be transported to Constantinople, gave them all the
kind Treatment imaginable, endeavoring thereby to draw them to his Service.
During which time, that he might the better conceal his cowardly Treachery
under the fairest shows, he made most magnificent Presents to all the principal
Commanders, and bestowed good Largesses upon the poor Soldiers, that he might
after a fashion make them some Satisfaction for the loss of the Spoils of the
Vanquished, which he had promised them before the taking of the City. But this
persidious Prince was resolved to perform nothing of what he had promised to
the Franks, and having drawn all the Advantages he possibly could from them, at
the last to work their Ruin and Destruction; which without doubt he had
effected, if his former Treacheries had not been too frequent and apparent to
doubt of his Intentions, and the Distrust which the Princes and whole Army had
of this wicked Man, was the reason that they were always upon their Guard
against him; and the Soldiers who were not given much to Dissimulation in the
case, charged him openly every Day with whole Vollies of Curses and thousands
of Execrations.

After the Reduction of Nice, the Princes that they might not lose that
commodious Season of the Year, marched immediately toward Syria, and the third
day after, for the convenience of Forage and Subsistence; they separated into
two Bodies, Bohemond with the Duke of Normandy and the Earl of Blois, taking
the left hand, and Godfrey with the other Princes, the right, but yet without
distancing the Armies above two Miles asunder. And certainly it appeared
quickly that this last Precaution was not without great Prudence as well as
Necessity; for three days after this Separation, as Bohemond was got into a
large Valley, called the Gorgonian Plain, where he encamped in the Night, upon
the Brink of the Rivulet which runs through it, he was advertised by his
Scouts, that he was like to have the whole Army of the Sultan upon his Hands;
for Soliman after his Repulse at Nice, being reinforced with new Troops,
coasted along the Coverture of the Mountains, on the left hand of the
Christians with three hundred and sixty thousand Turks and Persians, all Horse,
with an insinite number also of Arabians, who were also Cavalry; and having by
his Espials understood that Bohemond, who had the least part of the Christian
Army, was engaged in that Valley, he doubted not but so to surround him, as to
cut them all in pieces, without their being able to defend themselves; and
therefore in the Night he secretly passed the Valley, intending to surprise the
Christians early the next Morning upon their decamping;

And no sooner was Bohemond advertised hereof by his Scouts, but he also
discovered the huge Clouds of Dust which rose from the Mountains, and heard the
horrible Cries of this vast Multitude of Barbarians, who made the Valley
resound with their dreadful Shouts, thereby to terrify and surprise the
Christians; and within two Moments after he perceived Soliman himself advancing
at the head of his best Troops, followed with one hundred and fifty thousand
Horse, who whilst the other made a halt upon the Hills, came pouring down into
the Valley, to Charge the Christians, whom he expected to find half Vanquished
by their own Fear and Disorder. But Bohemond, whose Soul was not to be shaken,
and who by a long Experience in War, had a mighty presence of Mind in the most
dangerous Occasions; did, without the least mark of Astonishment, perform
whatsoever was necessary, either to avoid or to defer the Misfortune which in
this Extremity seemed Inevitable. He immediately dispatched some Cavaliers to
advertise Duke Godfrey of the Danger which threatened him, and gave Command to
the Infantry instantly to remove the Camp into a place between the Rivulet, and
a great Morrass all covered with Reeds, and to make a Palisade of the Stakes
which served them in setting up their Tents, and to fortify that with a second
Circumference of the Wagons and Carriages: After which, having placed himself
at the Head of the Cavalry with the Duke of Normandy and the Earl of Blois,
they encouraged the Soldiers by their Looks, Gesture and Voice, exhorting them
courageously to Encounter those Enemies, whom they might more justly despise
than fear, having twice before seen them turn their Backs; and assuring them
that they should immediately receive Assistance from their Companions, and that
they could not possibly however but upon this Occasion obtain immortal Glory,
either by Death or Conquest. And thereupon with an invincible Fierceness they
led them to the Charge; but the Turks at the same Instant, by the Command of
Soliman made a Halt, till such time as the Christians who came to the Charge
with their Lances in the Rest, were within Bow-shot, and then the Turks poured
upon them a whole shower of Arrows, and immediately wheeled off, yet all the
time that they seemed to slye they ceased not to shoot their Arrows against
those that pursued them, and ever as the Christians retreated to the gross
Body, facing about and charging them as before; this new sort of Combat did
extremely incommode the Christians, who could not come to Blows with the Enemy,
and yet lost abundance of their Horse which were wounded with the Arrows: In
the mean time the other part of the Turks Army having forced the Camp, made
there most terrible Havoc, plundring and killing without Mercy the Women,
Children, and Ecclesiastics, and other defenseless People.

The Soldiers oppressed by the multitude of their Enemies, were at their last,
and all was in a manner lost when Bohemond, Soliman who saw his Design thrive
so well, charged so furiously upon the Christians, that after a long Resistance
they began to give ground; but the brave Duke of Normandy snatching a white
Cornet embroidered with Gold, from the hands of him that carried it, and who
was carried away with the Crowd of those that fled, he cried aloud, It is the
Will of God, and at the same time he threw himself into the thickest of the
Enemies, followed by a small number of brave Men who accompanied him; this
brave Action raised so much Shame and Courage among the rest, that as if they
had all on the sudden been inspired with new Vigor, they spurred up at full
speed after him into the thickest Squadrons of the Saracens, overturning all on
every side that opposed their Passage: This Heat was much more increased by the
return of Bohemond, who having Repulsed the Arabs who came with no other Design
but that of Plundring, were not able to sustain the first Shock of his Cavalry,
who threw himself like a Lion into the throng of his Enemies to rejoyn the Duke
of Normandy, who after he had renewed the Combat seemed to sustain his People
more by his Courage and Example than by the strength of their Arms; for what
with Weariness, the heat of the Sun, and intolerable Thirst, their Force was so
abated, that they had much to do to sustain the Combat.

It is true, that even the Women upon this Occasion signalized their Courage,
in the midst of a thousand Darts and Arrows carrying them Water from the
Rivulet to refresh them, but alas this small Succor was too little to balance
the greatness of their Distress, for being oppressed by the infinite number of
their Enemies, who enlarged their Squadrons to the right and left, with a
design to encompass them, having lost a great many brave Men, and among the
rest Prince William the Brother of Tancred, they were obliged to give way and
retire, all the way of the Retreat facing their Enemies, till they came to the
Camp, where they hoped by the favor of the Retrenchments to secure themselves
from the danger of being enclosed by their Enemies. But now the Arabs had also
renewed their Attack, perceiving that the Christians were repulsed, and they
pursued their Point so home, that the Army was reduced to the utmost Extremity,
and in all appearance, could not possibly long resist the Force of so many
Enemies, when the first Squadrons of Duke Godfrey's Army, who hasted to their
Succor began to appear. For so soon as he understood the Danger in which the
Army of Bohemond was, he with the Earl of Vermandois ran with all speed, being
followed by all the Cavalry, consisting in sixty thousand Men, to their
Assistance; whilst the Earl of Tholose, and the Bishop of Pavia, according as
it was agreed, brought up the Infantry to the Combat.

These Succors appearing upon the Mountains, being at the same time discovered
both by the Christians and the Infidels, made in an instant a strange
alteration in the face of the Battle, Christians reassumed their Courage, when
they saw Godfrey with fifty Horse join the three Princes, to communicate to
them the Design which he had formed with the Earl of Tholose. And Soliman who
was afraid so much to his Disadvantage to engage with the whole Christian Army
in the Plain, retreated toward the Hills from whence he came in the Morning,
not imagining that the Christians would there dare to attack him. But he
quickly found he had deluded himself; for no sooner were the Earls of
Vermandois and Tholose come up, but the whole Army was put in order of Battle,
just about Noon, without giving so much as time for those who had been engaged
already, to take their repast, except whilst they were drawing up into their
Order. The Norman Princes, that is, Duke Robert, Bohemond, Tancred, and Richard
Prince of Salernum his Cousin, had the left Battalion upon that side toward the
Entrance into the Valley, Duke Godfrey with his two Brothers, and the Earls of
Vermandois and Flanders were upon the right, Count Raymond led the main Body
betwixt those two, inclining a little to the left, that way where the access to
the Mountain was less Difficult, the Horse were disposed upon the Wings and in
the Intervals of the Battle, and the two Points, to the intent they might the
better sustain the Infantry upon all occasions.

The Princes in drawing up the Squadrons, animated the Soldiers by the sight of
the Cross which they carried in the Colors, and upon their Coats, thereby to
remind them of their Vow which they had made, to vanquish or to dye for the
Glory of him, who for their Salvation died upon the Cross; they remonstrated to
some of them, That the Enemies they were to Combat, were those whom they had
two several times before Vanquished at Nice; that they were for the most part
cowardly Arabians, accustomed rather to steal than fight, and who were not used
to set upon their Enemies but like Thieves to robb them by Surprise, as they
did now upon the Army after it was divided: But now that they saw them
conjoined, they showed plainly by the little assurance of their Countenances,
and their sudden Retreat, that the very sight of their Vanquishers had taken
away their Courage and their Judgment, and that they ought to be looked upon as
half beaten before the Engagement: They told others, That in fighting valiantly
as the Soldiers of Christ Jesus, and under his Conduct, they went to a most
assured Happiness, either in Heaven by the glorious Crown of Martyrdom, if they
died in this Battle, or if they survived it, they might expect on Earth the
Riches and the Spoils of all Asia, as the product of their Victory. And that
they might be understood by all, and speak all in one Word, they cried with a
loud Voice, and with all their Force, as they passed from Rank to Rank, lifting
up one Hand to Heaven, and with the other drawing their Swords, It is the Will
of God, It is the Will of God. Whereupon the whole Army repeated the same
Words, with such a terrible Harmony, that the Hills, the Valleys, the Rocks,
and Mountains shook with the dreadful Echo, which repeated a million of times,
It is the Will of God, It is the Will of God. After which Prayers being made,
and the Bishops having given them their Benediction, the whole Army moved
gently in a most beautiful Order toward the Enemy, who all this time stood
firm without the least Motion, in his Post, that he might thereby secure the
Advantage he had taken.

After the Christians covered with their Bucklers, had sustained the first
discharge of the Saracens, who darkened the very Sky with the infinite
multitude of their Arrows, Count Raymond without giving them leisure to make a
second Charge, ran at full speed, with Lance in Rest, upon their Squadrons,
with the whole Body of his Cavalry, and they being unable to sustain so rude a
Shock as was given them by the European Lancers, to which they had neither
Shields nor Brest-plates to oppose, were overthrown and tumbled down Horse and
Man.

The Infantry which followed them close, then entering, as at a Breach, with
their Swords in their Hands, without ever regarding the Enemies Arrows, made an
extraordinary Carnage, both amongst the Men and Horses; whilst in the mean
time Godfrey and Bohemond, who had extended their Squadrons to hinder the
Enemies Wings from encompassing them, charged them in the Flank, and fought
with good Success; but that which completed the Ruin of the Infidels, was,
that the Bishop of Pavia, who according as was agreed among the Princes, having
marched his Body behind the Mountain upon the left hand, immediately fell upon
their Rere, which he assailed most vigorously, and with mighty Shoots, thereby
the more to terrify and astonish them. For immediately the Arabs, who were not
acquainted with sighting hand to hand, and who feared to be surrounded between
the two Armies, began to betake themselves to their Heels, and in conclusion,
the Fear and the Disorder which dispersed itself over the whole Army, put them
in a moment to a general Rout; the greatest part of them saving themselves by
the swiftness of their Horses, which it was in vain to hope to overtake by the
heavy Cavalry of the Christians: However they pursued them till Night, killing
many who in their Flight encumbered one another, so as they could not make that
have which their Fear and Danger required from them. Their Camp immediately
fell into the hands of the Christians, wherein the Soldiers according as the
Generals had promised them, enriched themselves with a prodigious quantity of
Booty and Plunder which they found there. The Christians in these two Combats
lost not above four thousand Men, among which, only three Persons of Quality
who were slain in the first Attaque, William the Brother of Tancred, Geoffrey
of Aigremont, and the most valiant William of Paris. The Infidels left there
upon the place, besides a prodigious number of the Arabs and their other
ordinary Soldiers, above three thousand of the principal persons of Quality
among the Turks, being those who of all the Infidels fought the most valiantly
in that Battle.

The Victorious Army after having refreshed themselves two days in this Valley,
Syria, all the way following the Track of the flying Sultan; and this Prince
having after the Battle met with ten thousand fresh Arabians, which came to
Reinforce him, and upon the Road having called the scattered Fugitives, he
applied himself to lay all the Country wast through which the Christian Army
was to march; this reduced them to extreme Want, especially in their Passage
over the Mountains and the Deserts; so that the defect of Provisions, and the
Thirst, occasioned by the excessive Heats, reduced them to those Extremities,
that five hundred Persons died in one day, and almost all the Horses perished.
But at last, having gotten out of those Straits, they arrived about Antioch in
Pisidia, which surrendered to them without Resistance, as did most of the other
Cities in their Passage through Lycaonia, Cappadocia, and Armenia. For the
generality of the Inhabitants being Christians, and the Turks not daring to
appear in the Field, being baffled in all the Rencounters upon the Way, and
therefore unable to protect them, those places sent to the Princes to render
themselves to their Protection; they received the Princes with all sort of
Submission, and by a thousand Testimonies of Rejoicing, made it appear with
what infinite Pleasure they saw themselves delivered from the insupportable
Yoke of Slavery, which had been imposed upon them by the Infidels. And
therefore seizing upon Iconium, Cesaria in Cappadocia, sometimes a famous City,
though now almost wholly Ruinous, Heraclia upon the Frontier of Cilicia, the
Princes placed Governors in them, retaining them under their own Jurisdiction.
For they thought themselves wholly disengaged from the Oath which they had made
to the perfidious Alexis, who had not observed in any sort the Agreement which
he had sworn to them. Thus it must happen to such cowardly Princes, who not
believing themselves obliged to submit to the Laws which they themselves have
made, and to which they have given their most solemn Faith, they gain nothing,
in conclusion, by their Dissimulation, but the Disappointment of their
Expectations, and the unprofitable Shame, by breaking their Word, of being
esteemed dishonest and unworthy Men.

Whilst the Army refreshed themselves in Pisidia, after such Toyls and
Hardships, Prince Godfrey had like to have been lost by a strange Accident,
which however redounded in conclusion much to the Honor of this Prince,
advancing his Reputation, Courage, and Nobleness, which appeared even to
Admiration upon this dangerous Occasion. For one day entering alone upon
Horseback into a Wood, where he hoped to have the Pleasure of entertaining
himself some Moments in Solitude, he heard the Voice of a Man who cried out for
Help with all his Power, and advancing to the place from whence the Noise came,
he presently understood the Cause; for he perceived it was a poor Soldier, who
coming to cut Wood, was running quite almost out of Breath, round about a great
Tree, to save himself from the merciless Jaws of a monstrous and furious Bear,
Godfrey did not long deliberate what he was to do, but transported with his
Courage and his Charity, to see the Danger of one of his Soldiers, he spurred on
his Horse with his Sword in his hand, toward the cruel Beast, who abandoning
her first Prey, with her Eyes inflamed and her gaping Jaws, and the terrible
Claws of her two fore Paws, advanced toward him, and raising herself upon her
hinder Feet to throw herself upon the Horse, but being affrighted with the
glittering Sword, to avoid the Blow she fell sidelong, yet so that Horse and
Man came over her, she catched hold of the Dukes Coat to draw him toward her,
but Godfrey nimbly recovering his Fall, and seizing upon her left Paw, which
she had thrust out to lay hold upon him, he plunged his Sword up to the very
Hilt, in the Belly of this monstrous Enemy, when at the same time one of his
Gentlemen named Husequin, who was following the Hounds, came running in at the
horrible Cries of the Bear and the Soldier, and put an end to the Life of the
Beast, already overthrown by the terrible Blow which she had received; but the
Duke having in drawing his Sword after his Fall, from between his Legs, given
himself a cruel Wound in his Thigh, which during the heat of the Combat he
never perceived, he had lost so much Blood, that after the heat of his Spirits
which kept him up, began to remit, he immediately sunk down in a Swoon. This
Accident, tho in consequence not Dangerous, yet spread a mighty Consternation
throughout the Army, as if all had been lost: For although he had not the absolute
Command of a General, there being so many Princes, and the Sons of two Kings,
so that all things were done by Consent and an equality of Power, yet
nevertheless he had so much Authority, and so much Deference was given to his
Judgment, that one shall not need to make any Scruple in saying he was the
Chief, especially since the Battle of the Gorgonian Valley, where by his Valor
he not only faved the Army of Bohemond, but gained the Christians a most
glorious Victory, by snatching it out of the hands of the Infidels when they
were just upon the point of consummating it.

But not long after, it so happened, that Ambition, Jealousy, and the desire
of Revenge, three Passions far more dangerous than the most furious Beasts,
produced Effects more deplorable to the Christian Army, than what had like to
have befallen them by this monstrous Bear, who failed in his Attempt against
the Duke, who was the Soul and Spirit of the Army. For while they lay in
Pisidia refreshing themselves, waiting the Recovery of the Duke, his Brother
Baldwin and Tancred, two young Princes, whom the love of Glory had already
rendered Rivals, entered into Cilicia by two different Ways, with two little
Armies, to make themselves Masters of such Places as they could Conquer, which
by the Consent of the other Princes they were to hold, and establish there
their little Principalities. Tancred who took the more easy way, all along the
Sea Coast, came first before Tarsus, the Capital City of that Province, and
having beaten the Turkish Garrison who came out to sight him, the Inhabitants
who were for the most part Christians, submitted to him, and planted his
Ensigns upon one of the principal Towers of the City. Baldwin who followed by
the long and difficult way of the Mountains, came in just as these matters had
passed, and was taken by Tancred for some Turkish Officer who was come to
relieve the Garrison, as also by a mutual Mistake, Baldwin discovering
Tancred's Forces with Sword in Hand, marching up toward him, concluded him to
be the Governor of the Garrison of Tarsus, who was come out to oppose his
Passage; but discovering their Error, they Embraced each other as if they had
been very well satisfied; but within a few Moments Baldwin being unable to
endure that his Rival should have the Glory to have prevented him in the easy
Conquest of so fair a City, and finding himself stronger in Number, he would
needs have recourse to Arms to oblige Tancred to yield to him half the
Conquest. Tancred who was every whit as Brave and as Valiant as Baldwin, and
without doubt far more Moderate, dissembling this Affront for the present,
generously resigned it entirely to him, and being unwilling to be reduced to
the miserable Necessity of drawing his Sword against Christians and
Confederates, he thought of seeking new Conquests, and among other places he
went to attacque Mamistra,

Prince Baldwin happened by an odd Adventure to be reinforced by a Fleet of
Dutch and Flemish Pirates Commanded by a Bullener, one Vinomare, who had been a
Domestic formerly to his Father Count Eustace. This Captain by pure Accident
was come to an Anchor before Tarsus at the same time when Baldwin had taken the
Town, and being Ravished to meet there the Son of his old Master, and so fair
an Occasion to change his Employ, by taking up Arms among so many famous
Christian Princes, in so glorious a Cause, he immediately joined Prince
Baldwin, who placed one part of his Men in Garrison at Tarsus, and desired him
to stay with the remainder in the Road there, till he should send him further
Orders. After which, this Prince having assured his new Conquest, marched to
make others, and came one Evening to Encamp before Mamistra, where Tancred, who
had just taken the Place, was busy in giving the necessary Orders for the
Fortification of it, to render it stronger than before. There is nothing more
easy than to revive the remembrance and sense of an Injury in a Heart already
grieved to have received it, and ashamed not to have revenged it, especially
being excited thereunto by the appearance of new Affronts and Outrages. Richard
Earl of Salernum his Cousin, thinking that this Action of Bohemond was a second
Injury which he came to offer, blew up the Flames of Dissension between them,
accosting Tancred in these Terms. Ha! what now Tancred (said he) where is thy
Honor? Thou has formerly been taken for Valor it self, will thou now disabuse
the World, and reverse that fair Opinion, by making it evident that thou art
the greatest Coward of Mankind? What! Can thou suffer Baldwin, after having
constrained thee in the most fierce and insolent manner in the World, to quit
thy Pretensions to Tarsus, to come and Reproach thee with the Injury he has
done thee, and which thou have tamely born; and it may be to command thee to
relinquish Manistra too, whilst he assures himself thereof, by that which thou
art pleased to call Moderation, but he believes to be pure Cowardice? Go, go
then, if thou have not quite lost thy Heart, but go as thou ought, at the
head of so many brave Men, who are resolved to perish, rather than not be
revenged of the insufferable Affront which is done not only to Tancred, but to
all the generous Normans, who have not conquered Calabria, Pavia, and Sicily,
Vanquished the Grecian Emperor, and followed the Invincible Bohemond through
all Asia, there to become Slaves to one Bullener.

This did not fail to raise the Courage of Tancred, and to rouse up that Anger,
which he had not been able without extreme Violence to smother at Tarsus, and
Shame having removed all the Obstacles which Virtue opposed, his Choler
breaking out like a River swollen with a mighty Inundation, was now become
furious; and amidst the Noise which this turbulent Passion raised in his Soul,
he was no longer in a condition to give Attention either to Conscience, Reason,
or the Interest of Jesus Christ, for whose only Sake he had taken Arms; but
that he hastily snatched them up to employ them against his Brethren; so that
taking five hundred chosen Horse, and two hundred Archers, he put himself at
the head of them, and advanced to attack Prince Baldwin: and he seeing them
coming in this manner, put himself immediately into a posture to receive them.
The Combat was rough and bloody, in regard that both the one and the other
fought rather by the Dictates of Fury than the Rules of Art, and that the
Combatants were all in the rank of the most valiant Men of the World. It
happened however in conclusion, that Tancred quitted the Field, and retired
before Baldwin, who outnumbred him in Cavalry. Baldwin pursued his Advantage
briskly till they came to the passage of a little Bridge, where Richard Prince
of Salernum, and Robert de Anse, were taken Prisoners. Gilbert of Clermont who
was engaged too eagerly in the Pursuit, had the same Fortune to be taken by
Tancred; and many gallant Men lost their Lives on both sides in this
unfortunate Day. But it happened that the two Captains,

After this happy Peace, Tancred having joined to his Troops the remainder of
the Forces of the Pirates, easily conquered the rest of Cilicia even to
Alexandretta, whilst Baldwin having made a great Progress in Armenia, whither
he was gone to join the gross of the Army, was called to the Principality of
Edessa, where he established himself by that Adventure, which I am now about to
relate.

Edessa an ancient and famous City of Mesopotamia, known in the sacred History
by the Name of Rages, which it afterward changed into that of Rohais, and
which at this day is called Orfa, was in times past under the Power of the
ancient Greeks, who governed it under the Emperor of Constantinople, and after
that the Turks had taken from him this Province, yet it was still maintained as
a little Principality, paying a certain Tribute to these Infidels, who
nevertheless ceased not to Tyrannize over this poor City, now hopeless of all
Succors. The Inhabitants, who were all Christians, having heard of the famous
Actions of Prince Baldwin, who pushed on his Conquests as far as Euphrates,
defeating the Turks in all Encounters, obliged their Prince to send to him, to
desire his Assistance, and to offer him the honorable Terms of being his
adopted Son, and declared Successor. Baldwin did not refuse so fair an
Occasion, which his good Fortune seemed to offer him, by possessing him of so
considerable an Estate in Asia. He adventured therefore to pass the Euphrates,
being followed by not above one hundred Horse, which were all he could spare
from the keeping such important Places which he had Conquered; nevertheless
with this little Troop he bassled the Turks, who either openly opposed his
Passage, or laid Ambuscades in his Way to surprise him; and entering Edessa, he
was received with such extraordinary Acclamations and Honors, that the good old
Man who had adopted him, conceived such a Jealousy of him, that repenting of
what he had done, he resolved in short, to get quit of him, and send him back
at any rate. But Baldwin, after he had in two or three Rencounters with the
Turks who possessed all the Country about Edessa, given a Taste of his Courage
and Conduct; the whole Populace, who were ripe for such a Revolution, and
wanted only an Occasion to revenge themselves of a thousand Evils which they
had suffered under the Government of this Covetous old Man, ran immediately to
their Arms, and besieged the Castle; and notwithstanding all the Prayers and
Opposition which Baldwin made against their Intentions, they cut this miserable
Man in pieces, whilst he endeavored to escape by throwing himself from a
Window opposite to that Quarter which was assaulted. After which,
notwithstanding all the Repugnance which Baldwin either had, or feigned to
have, thereby to show that he had no share in so horrid an Action, he was
constrained the next Morning to permit himself to be solemnly proclaimed Prince
of Edessa, and to be put in Possession of the Treasure of the deceased Prince,
which according to the Destiny of Covetous Men, he had scraped together for
another, who knew how to employ it better than himself. For with one part of it
he bought the strong Town of Samosata upon the Euphrates, he who held it,
thinking it better Husbandry prudently to sell it at a good Rate, than to
expose himself to the danger of losing it for nothing: and with another part he
levied good Troops, with which he took all the places which were capable of
incommoding Edessa: and in short, in a small time he established a most
powerful Estate, extending it on both sides both toward the South from
Euphrates as far as Selencia upon the Tygris and toward the North as far as
the strong places upon Mount Taurus. He had also the dexterity and good Fortune
to unite to his Principality a great part of Armenia by an alliance with one of
his Princes whose Neice he married, after the death of the generous Gundechilda
his Lady, who having followed him, died at Maresia during the March of the Army
of the Confederate Princes.

Whilst Prince Baldwin made such a mavelous Progress on this side of the
Euphrates, the Christian Army having reduced all the lesser Armenia, took the
Road through Comagena toward Syria, and drew within fifteen miles of Antioch,
after having taken the City of Artesia, the Inhabitants whereof having cut the
throats of the Turkish Garrison, had opened their Gates to the Earl of
Flanders, who was advanced with a thousand choice horse to receive it. He there
made a defense for diverse days with a great deal of Courage and glory against
twenty thousand Turks, who came from Antioch to retake it, and who after a
terrible Assault which they maintained for one whole day, were constrained to
retire upon the Approach of the Christian Army, to defend the pass of a Bridge
upon the Orontes about two or three Leagues from Antioch. Tancred and the rest
of the Lords except Count Baldwin, came to rejoyn the Army, it was resolved
notwithstanding the Season was now far advanced to besiege this great City, in
regard the Reputation of the Christian Arms, and the happy Success of their
great design seemed absolutely to depend upon the taking of Antioch which
covered the Country of Palestine. This resolution was no sooner taken, but it
was put in immediate Execution: for the next morning Robert Duke of Normandy,
who led the Vanguard of the Army, fell smartly upon the Bridge, which the Turks
who never behaved themselves better than upon this occasion as vigorously
maintained; but the Bishop of Pavia coming up to reinforce them, did so animate
the Normans and the English, that some of them having forced the Barricadoes,
and the two Towers which commanded the Bridge, whilst others passing over the
Shallows, and some throwing themselves into the River swam over, they put the
Turks to slight and opened the passage for the whole Army. That Night they
encamped near the River, and the next day which was Wednesday the twenty first
of October, putting themselves in order of Battle, and adorning themselves in
their fairest Arms, with Trumpets founding and Colors flying, the whole Army
marched as it were in a terrible Triumph and encamped within a mile of Antioch.

Antioch so renowned in the Greek and Latin Histories, and which at present
consists only of some part of the beautiful Ruins where sometime that noble
City stood, was at that time one of the fairest and largest Cities in the
World, giving place to none for the strength which both Art and Nature had
bestowed upon it. It was situated in a most fertile and delicious Plain between
the Mountains Amanus and Orontes, upon the River of that name, whose Stream
flowed along by the Walls on the Western side, being within four or five
leagues of its mouth: The Town was in length from the East to the West above a
league, without comprehending the Suburbs which were very large. There were two
Mountains between the South and East separated by a narrow Valley through which
a little River slid along into the Orontes, all the way of its passage watring
the inward part of the City; for these two mountains and two other lesser Hills
were all within the Circumference of the Walls, which were of an extraordinary
height and thickness, and defended by above four hundred fair Towers, a mighty
deep Ditch, and a Counter-Scarp well fortified with Palisado's, and environed
with a Morass and Pools of water in those parts where by reason of their lying
upon the plain the Avenues to the City lay more easy of access. And besides
all this there was a powerful Army of Turks within the place for its defense,
as also two Castles upon the Mountain, in one of which was the Palace of Sultan
Accien, who reigned in Antioch fourteen years after the Turks had taken it from
the Sarasens; and as he had a long time to foresee that the Army of the
Christians must come upon him in their passage into Palestine, he had used all
imaginable diligence to furnish himself which all things necessary to sustain a
long Siege; hoping in that time to receive great succors from the Turkish
Princes, and especially the Sultan of Persia who had promised not to fail him,
and whom Soliman was gone to solicit in the common Cause.

The Christian Army consisted not now in above three hundred thousand men, the
Sieges, the Battles, the Diseases and Disertions, and other losses which they
had sustained in their Passage over the Mountains and Deserts, together with
the Garrisons which they were obliged to put in the conquered Places, had
reduced them to one half; but nevertheless the Princes according to the
resolution which they had taken, did not cease to form the Siege in this
following manner: All the South side was left open, by reason that it was
impossible to attack the City on that side, in regard of the Rock and Mountains
which rendered the Passage inaccessible: So that they were contented to environ
it on the side of the Plain, beginning at the foot of the Mountain on the East,
and so drawing by the North toward the West between the Town and the River,
which in that part for about a mile came so near the Western part, that it
served for a Ditch upon that Quarter. Prince Bohemond and Tancred took their
Post over against the Eastern Gate called St. Paul's Gate through which they go
to the famous and delightful Suburb of Daphne, sometimes so celebrated for the
Temple and Oracle of Apollo, and afterward much more for the Tomb of that
illustrious Martyr Babylas, who silenced the Devil for ever giving any more
doubtful Answers to the foolish Inquirers. Hugh the Great, the Duke of
Normandy, the Earl of Blois and the Earl of Flanders, were posted at the Right,
drawing more toward the North to the Port commonly called the Dogs Gate. The
Earl of Tholose, with the Bishop of Pavia, were encamped before that Gate, and
possessed all the space between that and the third Gate, which afterward was
called the Dukes Gate, by reason that Duke Godfrey with his Lorrainers and
Germans was posted there, his Quarters being extended to that place where the
Orontes beginning to turn from the North to the West, slides down by the Walls
of Antioch; so that the greatest part of the Army was encamped between the Town
and the River, which was there passed by a large stone Bridge just over against
the fourth Gate of the Town, which was therefore called the Bridge Gate. This
Gate was also open to the besieged as well as that of St. Georges upon the
West, by reason that the River was between these two Gates and the Besiegers,
who by an Error not easily to be excused, did not at first raise good Forts
against these two Gates, as afterward something with the latest they were
constrained to do.

But this Failure was nothing in comparison of another far greater, and which
cost the whole Army very dear. For the besieged making no manner of Sallies to
hinder their Approaches, and seeming to be buried in a profound Quiet, not so
much as bringing one Engine to the Walls for their Defense, they in appearance
looked as if they had lost all their Courage and their Hope, so that it was the
Common Imagination that the Christians could not fail presently to make
themselves Masters of the Town: So that hereupon they took the Liberty to
ramble up and down the Country, Godfrey and Prince Raymond were fallen sick,
which had like to have entirely ruined their Affairs.

Alberon Archdeacon of Mets, a young Prince of the Blood Imperial miserably
perished; for as he was walking with a Lady of great Quality in one of these
Gardens he was surprised by the Infidels, who cut off his head, and carried the
Lady Prisoner into the City, where after the barbarous Villains had committed
all the Outrages imaginable against her Honor, they cut off her head also and
threw them into Godfrey's Camp. After which the Besiegers ashamed to be so
affronted by the mistake of the Courage of their Enemies, began now to act
after new Measures, and recalling their Ancient Virtue, to think of taking the
City in good Earnest.

They therefore began to attack it by main Force with all sorts of Engines, and
gave a general Assault with all the Vigor imaginable; but as the strongest
Engines were too feeble against those Massy Walls, and that the unshaken Towers
were defended by an Army which might in the open field have given Battle to the
Crusades; it was resolved to attempt it by a long Siege, and the Regular way of
Art; for this purpose they laid a Bridge of Boats over the Orontes, to repulse
those who had the Liberty to pass by the Bridge Gate; they built Forts to block
up the besieged, and to empeach their frequent Sallies; and, in short, nothing
was omitted that might straiten them of Provision, and at last oblige them by
Famine to surrender the Town. But the Consumption of Provisions which so great
an Army occasioned, the continual Excursions of the Turkish Garrisons who were
about Antioch, who wasted all the Country, the frequent loss of Convoys, and
the Rigor of the following Winter almost famisht the Besiegers, so that at
Christmas the Army had neither Forage nor Provisions; It is true that Bohemond
and the Earl of Flanders who were almost continually on horseback, did what was
possible to get subsistence, oftentimes beating the Enemy who attempted to
hinder them. But as there was a general Desolation in the Country, and that
there came nothing by Sea in that tempestuous and rough Season; so though for
the most part they returned laden with glory for having beaten the Turks, yet
they brought but a light stock of Provision for so great a multitude, which was
not easily satisfied.

This great evil so terrible of it self and which increased daily, was also
accompanied with so many others as must in conclusion have reduced the Army to
despair; the continual Rains had so dammaged the Tents that the Soldiers lay
almost quite exposed; most of the Horses died, so that there were not many
above a thousand left in the whole Army. At the same time arrived the
deplorable account of the Misfortune of Swenon the Son of the King of Denmark,
who coming to the Siege with fifteen hundred fresh Cavaliers all brave and
choice men, was by Solomon surprised in a Valley and cut in pieces. Many daily
deserted, following the example of the Traitor Talin the Emperors Lieutenant,
who pretending to go to solicit his Master for succor, abandoned the Army;
many also of the principal Officers of the Army withdrew, and among the rest
the stout William the Carpenter Vicount of Melun. And which is most surprising,
even Peter the Hermit, he who was the forwardest of all others to take up the
Cross, was also one of the first who deserted it, and this great Faster, who by
his voluntary austerity by which he had gained so high a Reputation of
Sanctimony making Profession to eat neither bread nor flesh, was not able to
resist the Severity of this constrained Abstinence, which not only the
Soldiers, Peter drew upon himself by so cowardly an Action was sufficient to
cure him of that distemper. For Tancred who foresaw the dangerous consequence
of this pernicious flight, persued these two Deserters, and brought them back
to the Tent of his Uncle Bohemond, who there in the presence of all the Princes
severely reproached them with their base Cowardice; but at the Importunate
entreaties of Hugh the Great, whose Kinsman the Carpenter had the honor to be,
they were pardoned, though with this condition, that they should publicly make
Oath that they would accomplish their Vow, and not abandon this Enterprise,
till they had delivered the Holy Sepulcher.

In short, every day produced new misfortunes, and now the Pestilence which is
the usual Attendant of Famine began to make a terrible Destruction in the Army:
Whereupon the Bishops had recourse to extraordinary Prayers, and admirable
Regulations were made, and severe Orders given out against the Vices and
Disorders which had slipped into the Camp, and which with good reason it was
apprehended were the Causes of God's displeasure against them; nor was it long
before the Supernatural Efficacy of this procedure became most visible, for
from that time the Plague began to decrease, and Duke Godfrey whose distemper
seemed to be communicated to the whole Army beginning also to recover his
Health, he by his presence inspired new life, Health, Vigor and Courage into
the Soldiers. A great Succor of twenty eight thousand Horse who attempted to
force the quarter of Bohemond, were defeated by this brave Prince and the Earl
of Tholose; and, which is the Miracle, they had only Seven hundred Horse
divided into six squadrons, with which they engaged and vanquished this great
number of Enemies upon the Nineteenth day of February between the River and the
Lake, where they had put themselves in Battle that they might not be
surrounded. After which they returned to the Camp laden with the spoils of
their Enemies, and that which they most wanted, a great number of Horses. And
as a Trophee of their Victory, they threw over the Walls a hundred of the Heads
of the principal Turks, thereby also to punish the Insolence of the Besieged,
who insulted over the Christians a little before, by showing them upon the
Walls, one of the Standards which they had taken in a Sally wherein was painted
the Image of the Blessed Virgin.

About the same time the Ambassadors of the Sultan of Egypt arrived in the
Camp to treat of an Alliance with the Princes, to whom he promised to join his
Forces against their Common Enemies; and not long after two Fleets from Genoa
and Pisa arrived very Fortunately at the Port of St. Simeon, with all sorts of
Provisions which were very welcome after a five-month-Siege; but this Arrival
was the occasion of a great Mischief as well as of a great advantage. For so
soon as the Arrival of these two Fleets was known in the Camp, the Soldiers
ran thither in Shoals, every one with Precipitation, resolving to purvey for
themselves such things as they wanted. There was reason to fear that the Enemy
would lay hold of this Opportunity and Disorder, and therefore Bohemond and the
Earl of Tholose who were to conduct the Egyptian Ambassadors to the Port in
order to their imbarquing, hasted with their Troops to convoy in their return,
this great multitude of Soldiers, who were gone without any order, and without
their Arms. And that which they apprehended fell out accordingly; for they fell
into an Ambuscade of four thousand of the Enemies who had secretly sallied out
of the Town by the Bridge-Gate. And meeting with these disorderly Soldiers in
the Plain laden with Provisions and without other Arms than their Swords, they
fell in among them, and notwithstanding all the Valor of Count Raimond and the
Prince of Tarrentum, they could not stop the Rout but that the Soldiers fled
toward the Mountains leaving all their Provisions and a thousand of their
Companions dead upon the place.

Godfrey who was immediately advertized of this Disaster by some who fled with
the first, took a Party resolving immediately to charge the Turks whom he
doubted not with the Joy of their Victory and the Greediness of the Booty to
find in sufficient Disorder; drawing out therefore four Batalions sustained
with all the Cavalry, at the head of whom were Hugh the Great, the Duke of
Normandy, and the Earls of Flanders and Bullen, he passed the Bridge of Boats,
and marched directly toward the Enemies with all the Marks of Hope and
Courage: in the way he joined the two Princes whom he had given over for lost,
and who after they had unprofitably used their utmost Efforts to rally their
Fugitives, had disingaged themselves very fortunately from the Turks. In the
mean time Accien who had an account of this Victory, and who from one of the
Towers of his Castle observed this great Movement of the Crusades, began to be
in pain for the return of his Men, he therefore commanded the greatest part of
his Army to sally out to their Relief. He conducted them himself to the Gate,
and giving order to have it shut after them, he thus addressed himself to the
Soldiers; That after the advantages which their Companions had had against
their Enemies, it would be a shame to them to think of Precautions, or to
assure themselves of a Retreat; that this was the time that they must think of
nothing but Victory or Death, and that they should never see this Gate opened
to them, but after an entire Conquest of their Enemies.

On the other side Godfrey who marched but slowly at the Head of his Troops,
having understood by the hasty return of his Scouts, that the Conquerors who
had joined the Succors from the Town, drew near laden with their Booty,
drawing his Sword and turning to his Men, after he had cast a fierce and
menacing look toward the Enemy, he cried, Follow me, It is the Will of God.
Giving them to understand by this action, that upon this occasion they should
trust to their Swords only without using either Lances or Arrows. Whereupon all
the Soldiers in an instant drawing their Swords, and making a kind of
Penthouse of their Bucklers against the Arrows of the Infidels, who running
hither and thither incessantly discharged upon them, they marched gravely,
neither with Precipitation nor Heaviness, till they came up to the Enemies at
Swords point, thereby rendering their Bows and Arrows useless. The Barbarians
terrified with this confident March, which put them out of their way of
sighting, and took away the Service of their Bows, they presently recoiled upon
their Reserves who were come to relieve them, and being encumbered with the
Spoils they had taken, were in no condition to resist the Swords of the
Christians, against whom they did not much delight to combat but at a distance,
so that the Fight was not very long; for after the first Squadrons of the Enemy
were repulsed, the Christians fell into the middle of them with their Infantry,
and on all hands made a most horrible Slaughter of these miserable Wretches,
with the mighty Blows of the Sword; so that they were totally routed, some
flying to the Mountains, others toward the City, not dreaming that the Gate
was shut against them. Here it was that Despair and the fatal Necessity of
vanquishing or dying which Accien had denounced against them, made them renew
the Combat in the view of the whole Town, which ran to the Walls and stood
there as in an Amphitheatre to be Spectators and Witnesses either of their
shame in being vanquished, or of their Glory in being Victors.

For Godfrey after he was pretty well assured of the Victory, had disingaged
himself from the Combat, with a Design to prevent the Runaways getting into the
Town by cutting off their Retreat, and therefore being got to a rising Ground
near the Bridge he flew like Lightning among his Enemies, who fled at full
Speed, thinking he had been at their Heels, who was at their Head to stop their
Cariere. Never was there seen any thing comparable to the Effects of that
extraordinary and prodigious Force which Nature had bestowed upon this Prince;
there was not one Blow of his terrible Sword which did not carry a dreadful
Death along with it; here he made a Head with the Cask that was on it roll off
from the Shoulders; there a whole Arm with the Cimiter which it yet grasped;
some he cleft down to the very Shoulders; others he cut asunder in the Middle;
filling all with Horror, Blood and Terror, Godfrey, made a most dreadful
Slaughter among them, or whilst they endeavored to save their Lives, made
them lose them in a manner as dreadful; for they constrained them blindly to
precipitate themselves into the Orontes, where the Soldiers dispatched them
with their Pikes, which the poor Wretches could no way escape but by Swimming.
The Places adjacent resounded with the lamentable Cries and the Tumult of the
Barbarians, dying either in the Field or in the River, which began to be
discolored with the Blood of the Slain, and the Noise was Ecchoed by those who
from the Walls saw the woeful Slaughter of their Companions, so that in
conclusion Accien was obliged to open the Gate, to help those who could to make
their Escape by the Bridge into the Town.

It was upon this Occasion that Godfrey performed an Action of which the whole
Earth talks, as of a Prodigy of Strength and Valor, and which I should not
have adventured to have given a place to in this History, if it were not
attested both by all the Writers of that Age, and by the Testimony of so many
Eyewitnesses of its Truth. One of the principal Captains of the Enemies, of a
Stature much exceeding the common, transported with Fury to observe that
Godfrey killed all that came within the reach of his terrible Sword at the
entry of the Bridge, where he had posted himself to obstruct the Passage, and
that the Turks to avoid his dreadful Blows, threw one another headlong into the
River, he ran up to him foaming with Rage, with his Sword advanced in the Air,
and with all his force discharged so terrible a Blow upon the Duke, that he
split his Shield in two pieces, which he had opposed to it, to ward it off his
Head, when Godfrey raising himself upon his Stirrups, gave him such a furious
Reverse, that his Sword falling upon his right Shoulder passed quite through
his Breast to his left side, and made that half of his Body tumble to the
Ground, whilst the other remaining in the Saddle, was carried by the Horse,
who was continually pricked by the Spurs which stuck in his Sides by the
convulsive Motions of the dying remainder of the Body, quite through the Town,
making there such a fearful Spectacle as struck Consternation, Horror, and
Despair, into the Hearts of the most resolute and daring who beheld it. The
Night now coming on, and the Defendants pouring whole Showers of Arrows from
their Engines upon the Walls, hindered the further Pursuit of the Victory. The
Christians lost something above a thousand Men in this memorable Day, but it is
impossible to recount the Loss which the Infidels sustained, for besides those
which were slain upon the Field of Battle, there were above five thousand who
lost their Lives upon the Bridge and thereabout, and the Number of those who
were either drowned or slain in the River, was so great that they almost made a
Damm with their dead Bodies; among the rest, one of the Sons of Accien, and
twelve of their Amirals or Emirs, which are their chief Nobility, perished in
that fatal Day; and two days after there were found fifteen hundred Persons of
Quality, whom according to their Custom they interred privately in the Night,
near the Bridge, with their Cimiters, their Arms, Habits, and some Gold and
Silver, and other their most precious Ornaments.

After this great Victory, the Besieged who were now more closely blocked up
than ever, by the Forts which were raised near the two Gates which had been
free, had totally lost their Courage, if at the same time they had not received
the News, that the Sultan of Persia, the most potent Monarch of the East, was
sending a prodigious Army to their Relief, which did something revive their
fainting Hopes: And in truth, this Sultan being continually solicited by
Soliman, and by Sensadole the Son of Accien, had sent Corbagath to relieve
Antioch, the Person in whom among all his Captains he reposed the greatest
Confidence, with a formidable Army of two hundred thousand Horse, and an
innumerable Multitude of Foot of all the Nations subject to his Empire;
consisting in all of six hundred and fifty thousand Men. This General after he
had in vain in his Passage attacqued Edessa, which was valiantly defended by
Prince Baldwin, Euphrates, and advanced toward Antioch with the Sultans of
Damascus and Jerusalem, who had joined their Troops with his Army, with an
intention to attaque the Christians in their Camp. This News which gave great
Courage to the Besieged, caused much Disorder in the Christian Army, so that
many, and some of principal Note, despairing of their Safety daily deserted,
and among the rest, the Earl of Blois was so terrified, that feigning himself
Sick, he caused himself to be removed in the beginning of June to Alexandretta,
whither he was followed by four thousand of his Soldiers; this Action made it
be feared that others following so pernicious an Example, the whole Army would
be in danger of Disbanding. But as it happened presently after, by a pleasant
Frolique of Fortune, this which was dreaded as a mighty Mischief, proved in the
end a great Advantage, and this News which made the Christians despair of
taking Antioch, was the Occasion that one Night, presently after, it was taken
in the manner which I am now going to relate.

There was a Person in Antioch, a Citizen of Quality, one Pyrrhus, a Man of
great Spirit, he was born of Christian Parents, and had been one himself; but
for the saving his Estate he pretended to turn Mohammedan, as did diverse others
in the fourteen years after the City came under the Dominion of the Turks. This
Pyrrhus had gained so much Esteem and Credit among the Infidels, that
notwithstanding the Distrust which they had of the Antiochians, whom therefore
they kept very low, not permitting them to exercise any Place of Trust, or to
bear Arms, yet Accien charmed with his good Qualities, and the Belief of his
Fidelity, had honored him with the Dignity of an Emir, entrusted him with the
Guard of three Towers, made him his Secretary of State, and gave him a Place in
his Council. This Man had a Son a sprightly young Gentleman, who at the
beginning of the Siege was in a Sally taken Prisoner by Bohemond; that Prince
who was no less Dextrous and Wise than Vailant, having examined his Prisoner,
whose Countenance promised so fairly, found in his Soul a great Inclination to
return to the Religion of his Ancestors, and that he was ready to undertake any
thing to deliver his Country from the cruel Tyranny of the Turks: He therefore
laid hold upon this propitious Opportunity to gain the Father, who passionately
loved this Son, and offered a mighty Ransom for his Redemption; for this
purpose, when he had well assured himself of the young Gentleman, who secretly
abjured the Mohammedan Superstition, and received Baptism, he freely sent him
back to Pyrrhus, who was so transported with his Return, and the account he
gave of the good Treatment which he had received from Bohemond, and the Wonders
which were related to him of that Prince, that there was nothing which he did
not resolve to do, to give him assurance of his Acknowledgments, and to procure
the honor of his Friendship. After this Bohemond failed not to maintain a
secret Correspondence with him by the Assistance of his Son, who frequently
went out of the Town into the Camp, under pretense of being a Spy, as diverse
others did, and he labored so successfully under the Favor of this Friendship
which was made between them, that in conclusion Pyrrhus desired nothing more
ardently than to reimbrace the Christian Religion, and to deliver his Country.

But that which perfected this Affair, was a great Conference which the Prince
had with Pyrrhus during the little Truce which was made after the Defeat at the
Bridge-Gate; for after he had given him a thousand Testimonies of the tenness
which he had for him, and the reason which he had to make his Fortune and a
true Happiness, he said such moving things to him upon this Subject, and so
well managed his Spirit, by his Arguments, his Entreaties, and his Promises,
that he quickly perceived he had so entirely gained him, that he was now become
absolutely at his Devotion.

In short, after the Truce was broken by the persidiousness of the Turks, who
in that time basely murdered one of the principal Crusades, Pyrrhus sent to
acquaint Bohemond, That having now fully considered of all things, he had taken
his last Resolution, which was, to be ready to serve him to the utmost; that
for his own particular, it was not any sort of Fear that he had to suffer in
the common Ruin of the City, that moved him to Act as he did, since he was
well assured that the Christians would never be able to take it by Force;
Antioch his Country from the Servitude and Oppression of the Turks, and to give
him some undeniable Effects of that Friendship which he might expect from him,
which obliged him to follow his Advice, and wholly to throw himself upon his
Word, in an Affair of that Importance, wherein he must hazard not only his
Fortune and his Life, but that of his whole Family. But that it was but just,
that in regard he had only entrusted him with the Secret, that he should give
him Assurance before any thing should be Attempted, that he should only depend
upon him; And that therefore he was absolutely resolved that this should be one
Condition, without which he would proceed no further, That whereas the other
Princes had all the same Authority in the Army, they would yield the
Principality of Antioch to Bohemond, to whom only he would deliver it, and from
whom only he would expect the Accomplishment of his Promises. That upon these
Terms he would put the three Towers, whereof he had the Command, into his
Possession, and by Consequence the Town; That he would send his Son as a
Hostage, to engage for the Truth of his Word; and that he desired him singly to
consider that he had not a moments time to lose, by reason of the Succors
which were now at hand, and that it was absolutely necessary for him to Act
according to these Offers, or else to resolve wholly to abandon the Design.

Now whether this Norman Prince, who was mighty Politic, had laid the Train in
this manner, by which he was resolved to accomplish his Ends, and therefore
made Pyrrhus speak at this rate; or whether Pyrrhus himself found it
effectually his clear Interest, to raise his own Fortunes by the greatness of
his Friend, and therefore proposed this as the only probable Expedient; most
certain it is that Bohemond accepted the Condition with all his Heart, and that
he was extremely satisfied to see, that there was no possibility of taking
Antioch, but by his single Interest. He nevertheless dissembled his Joy, that
so his Design might succeed the better; and failed not the same day, at a
Council of War, with a melancholy Air, to complain in these Terms of the
present Condition of Affairs, he said, That those Evils which the Army indu^ed
were Insupportable, which they daily Suffered, and which daily increased by
that long Siege, which had now lasted seven Months without making any tolerable
Advance, and which was yet worse, that they were in danger shamefully to
abandon the Siege, since there was no appearance that they should take Antioch,
neither by Force, which their Condition would not suffer them to attempt, nor
by Starving them, since the so long talked of Succors could not now be at any
great Distance. There remains therefore, added he very Insinuatingly, nothing
more to be done, but to try if there be any one amongst us who before the
Succors arrive, will endeavor to make himself Master of the Town, either by
Surprise, or by Intelligence, and gaining some in the place by Money or
Promises, or any other way, which his Mind can suggest to him as most probable.
And in short, that we may animate one another to this Enterprise, I am of
Opinion, that for the public Good, which every one of us ought to prefer
before his private Interest, we ought all to promise, that if the Design
succeeds, he shall have the Principality of Antioch for his Reward, who shall
perform this Exploit, and disengage the Army from this Siege which has so long
troubled it.

There is certainly nothing so clear-sighted as Jealousy, nothing that so soon
discovers a Rival, be it in Love, or be it in Honor. And whatsoever Artifice
there was in this Discourse of Bohemond, these Princes, who besides the
Interest of Religion, for which they made this War, had also those of their
Glory and their Advancement, easily penetrated into the Heart of the Tarentine,
and making no question by the manner of his Discourse, but that he acted for
himself, they all answered with some kind of Precipitation, That they were all
Brothers, and all Equals, and that they would never permit that there should be
any Preference among those who had equally served with the others. That there
was no manner of Justice to divide the Conquest, but to those who had shared in
the Pains and Danger, and that tho Antioch was to have but one Master, yet it
must be Lot that must choose him, and it was to Fortune only and her Power, that
the Principality of Antioch was to be owing.

Bohemond seeming not to take the least Notice that this Blow was levelled at
him, only smiled at the Discourse, without making any Reply, well considering,
that whether they would or not, Necessity without his Help would manage this
Affair, in which he could not now move but to his Disadvantage; and so it
happened, for at the same time News was brought them, by those who were sent to
make Discovery, that the Enemy approached with a most formidable Power.
Whereupon they went again to the Council, where some were of Opinion that they
should march out and meet the Enemy, with the whole Army, others were for
leaving only so many as might guard the Trenches in the Camp, and to lead the
rest to Battle: But Bohemond made it appear on the contrary, that neither the
one nor the other of these Propositions were practicable. For in doing the
first they raised the Siege, and then the Town would infallibly be Relieved;
that in following the second, they must needs run the Hazard of being beaten,
since their whole Army, lessened by above half, was scarce able to oppose the
Forces of the City alone. Now these things being so clear, and that there was
no Expedient so proper to draw the Army out of so pressing and manifest a
Danger, all the Princes except Count Raymond, found it more agreeable to
Reason, that Bohemond if he could gain it, should be Master of Antioch, than
that they should all be affronted by losing it after so tedious a Siege. They
therefore consented, that provided he took the City, let the Way be what it
would, every one should relinquish their Interest to him, with condition that
the Greek Emperor failed in his part of the Agreement made with him. The Prince
of Tarentum had now all that he could wish, for Alexis had already broke his
Word a thousand times, so that instantly he sent to Pyrrhus, to acquaint him
that he was ready to put the Matter in Execution according to those Measures
which he should himself prescribe, and to desire him to let him know as soon as
it was possible. Pyrrhus presently sent him an Answer, by his Son, who was to
be the Hostage, with the Order which was to be observed, which after it had
been Communicated to the Princes, was executed in this manner.

He gave out Orders through every Quarter of the Camp, that the Soldiers should
be ready to march the Morning following, being the third day of June, and
accordingly at high Noon he marched at the Head of the commanded Party with
Trumpets sounding, that so the Besieged taking Notice of them, might suppose
they were going upon some Design abroad, and be the more secure of any thing
intended against them at home; but toward the Evening, having taken a long
Circuit behind the Mountains toward the South, he turned Head, and taking his
March Westward to the left Hand, he stopped in a Valley a little distance from
the Western Gate, where stood one of the Towers which was to be put into his
Hands: From thence he sent sixty of the most resolute Soldiers with a Ladder of
Ropes, of the length which Pyrrhus had directed. But as a certain Lombard, who
had the Signal which was to show that Bohemond and Pyrrhus were met, was about
to give it, there followed an Accident which had like to have lost all.

The Turks who were ever jealous of the Christians, had received Advice that
there was some Treachery hatching in the Town, and that in particular there was
some Reason to suspect Pyrrhus: Accien who was resolved to clear the Matter,
sent for him, as was customary, to the Council, where this matter was under
Debate, and asked his Advice, to see whether he would change his Countenance,
and so betray his Guilt of such a Design. But this cunning Man perceiving the
Intention of the Turk, without the least Hesitation or mark of Astonishment
replied briskly, That nothing ought to be neglected upon such an Occasion, and
that he had thought of a most easy and certain Expedient to hinder so great a
Mischief. For, said he, with the greatest Assurance imaginable, there needs no
more but to change the Captains who command at the Gates and in the Towers, to
break all the Measures of those who may have entertained any Intelligence with
the Enemies. This Expedient which appeared so proper, made them banish the
Suspicion which they had entertained of him, and which they had no positive
Evidence to support; but considering that such a Change could not be made on
the sudden, Pyrrhus had well foreseen, the Execution of it was deferred till
the next Morning, and then it was resolved by this means to cure the Distrusts
which they had of the Christians, and thereby to quiet the Fears of the People;
however Orders were given to those who went the Round that Night, to acquit
themselves of their Charge with all the Care and Circumspection that was
possible.

Now as the Lombard began to speak to Pyrrhus, the Captain who walked the Round
in that Quarter came by, with one carrying a Lanthorn before him; and without
doubt all had been discovered, if Pyrrhus who saw him coming, had not instantly
acquainted the Soldiers with it, and ordered them to fall flat upon their
Bellies. After which the Round, who found all in good Order, being passed by,
Pyrrhus who had so luckily escaped two such eminent Dangers, having perceived
the Sign of Bohemond, threw down a Cord by which he drew up the Ladder, which
he fastened to one of the Battlements of the Tower: The sixty Soldiers being
now gotten up, Bohemond who was advertised by the Lombard that all was their
own, ran with the rest, who mounted with so much heat, and in such a Throng,
that the Ladder being overcharged pulled down the Battlement to which it was
tied, which with its Fall crushed some of the Soldiers; but this did not
hinder, but that the Ladder being well fastened again others mounted it with an
equal Ardor; and whilst some of them made themselves Masters of the Towers,
killing all the Turks which they met, others broke open a Sally-Port by which
Bohemond entered, followed by the rest of his Troops, who seizing upon the
Gates, by break of day the whole Army was without Resistance got into the City,
where Bohemond, as it were, to take Possession, had caused his Standard to be
planted.

It is impossible to express the horrible Consequences of this Surprise, which
being favored by a great Wind, the sleeping Turks had scarcely heard the Noise
which the Victorious Army made in their Entry. All went down indifferently
which came in their way in that terrible Tumult, the very Brother of Pyrrhus
was slain among the rest, being unknown, and which was most deplorable, by the
Hand of his Brother Pyrrhus, as the Archbishop of Tire writes, either because
he had discovered the Design, or because he opposed it; but this is contrary to
the positive Evidence of all those who were present, who affirm that Pyrrhus
was most sensibly touched with this Misfortune, which was wholly to be
attributed to Chance; however Bohemond did what he could to Comfort him, and
gave order for the Preservation of his Family, and of all the Christians, who
to distinguish themselves, came before the Conquerors singing the Prayers of
the Church. The greatest part of the Turks were killed either in the Houses, or
in the Streets, endeavoring either to defend themselves by sighting, or save
their Lives by flying: Few there were who saved themselves, all the Gates being
either shut or possessed by the Crusades; and at the last those who endeavored
to escape over the Walls, or who to fly into the Castle, were without Mercy put
to the Sword. The unfortunate Accien, whether it were that his Fear had
destroyed his Judgment, or that he thought thereby to hasten the Relief, or
that he feared there was the same Treachery in the Castle, fled out by the Gate
of the Plain in a Disguise, and having hid himself in a little Hut, he was
discovered by some Christians of Syria and by them slain, and his Head
presented to Bohemond.

After this the Soldiers fell to Plunder, and by that piece of Witchcraft of
good Fortune, which makes Men in Prosperity too commonly to forget God, they
plunged themselves headlong into all manner of Debauches, as it were to make a
Recompense to those great Evils they had suffered by a long Siege by committing
greator: But God that he might punish this brutish Ingratitude, permitted them
to fall into greater and more insupportable than any they had yet endured; for
within three or four days after the Town was taken, Corbagath arriving with his
Army, and having put what Men he thought good into the Castle, to attaque the
Retrenchments of the Christians, and having possessed all the Avenues, and made
himself Master of all the Forts which the Crusades had raised, he Encamped in
the Plain between the Orontes and the Mountains, and besieged the City much
more closely than it was before. So that there remaining but little Provision
in the Town after so long a Siege, Christian Army being there shut up, the
Famine in a little time was so great, that the ordinary sort of Provision being
spent, the Christians were reduced to the most deplorable Extremities that are
upon Record in any History, either Sacred or Profain. Insomuch that many did
every Night desert, and ran away to the Enemies, or climbing over the Rocks
endeavored to get to the Ships which lay in the Port St. Simeon, as did among
others of the first Quality, Alberic and his Brother William de Grandmenil, who
had Married the Sister of Bohemond, the Vicount de Melun, that famous William
the Carpenter, who thought that Famine was a sufficient Dispensation for the
Oath which he had taken to desert no more. The Earl of Blois feigning himself
Sick, was gone two days before the Town was taken, and joining himself with
them, they all together went to the Camp of Alexis, who was coming, or at least
pretended so, to join the Crusades; and there they made all appear so desperate
to cover their own ignomimous Cowardice, that that treacherous Prince, who was
before resolved to do nothing, was overjoyed to meet with so fair a Pretense to
alter his Course and march back again to Constantinople. In short, Matters went
so very far, that the Soldiers half mad with Despair, abandoned all sort of
Care of their own Defense, so that Prince Bohemond, who Commanded in the Town,
was forced to set Fire to their Houses, to force them out, and put them upon
Action.

Things being reduced to this deplorable Extremity, it is strange what Power
Religion has upon the Spirits of Men, and how in a Moment it will raise them
after once it becomes Master by the power of a strong Persuasion; for two
Priests, one called Stephen, the other Peter Bartholomew, both of Marseilles,
presented themselves before the Princes to acquit themselves of a Commission,
which they assured them they had received from Heaven. The first said, That at
his Prayers he had seen Jesus Christ, who after he had complained of the
Ingratitude and horrible Crimes of the Crusades, being in the end inclined by
the Entreaties of his Mother, he was come to him, and commanded him to let them
know, that if they would for the future amend and turn from their vicious Ways,
he would send them Succor within five Days. The second affirmed, That St.
Andrew had showed him within the Church of St. Peter, the Place where they
might find the Iron of the Spear that pierced the Side of our Lord, and that he
had assured him that this Holy Iron should be a certain Pledge of the
approaching Deliverance of the Crusades, provided they repented of their Sins;
and both the one and the other offered themselves to the Flames to confirm the
Truth of what they had declared. The Bishop of Pavia, who was a Person of a
clear Insight, did not believe these kind of Visions, which he knew were
generally the Effects of Forgery or Illusion, but nevertheless, that he might
not seem to neglect any thing that might be true, and which however, might be
of some Service to them, he obliged the Priests to Swear upon the Holy
Evangelists, that what they said was true, being unwilling to have Recourse to
those other Proofs, which had nothing in them of the Spirit of the Church, and
not thinking it agreeable to Religion, by such Methods to tempt Providence.
After which going to the Place which the Priest directed, they there found the
top of a Spear, so that the whole Army was so persuaded of the Truth of these
Visions, and that Relic, that no body durst presume to make any Doubt of it.

However, the Belief did not last always, for some eight or nine Months after,
as they were at the Siege of a certain Town, where they had recourse to this
Relic, which was most curiously preserved by Count Raymond, a Priest who was
the Domestic Chaplain of the Duke of Normandy, and a knowing Man, maintained
publicly that it was a Counterfeit, that the true Spear had been long ago
carried to Constantinople, and that the Provencals had put this in the Place
where it was found, only on purpose to please their Earl. Upon which the whole
Army was divided, the Priest of Marseilles constantly maintaining that he was
ready to prove the Truth of his Revelation, by passing the Trial of the Fire,
which in Conclusion the Bishops permitted him to do. After a Fast of three
Days, therefore, a great Fire was made, Raymond would by no means be persuaded
to abate of his Devotion toward this Relic, which for all this he would not
believe to be False; not thinking this Accident of the Priest, which went
something too high, was a sufficient Argument to prove the Falsity of the
Vision, For God, he said, was not obliged to confirm by Miracles, what he was
pleased to reveal to Men. But however, the Belief which was so firm while they
were at Antioch, that this was the real Spear which was Consecrated by the
Blood of Christ Jesus, found a most admirable Effect upon the Spirits of the
whole Army, who not doubting now in the least of the Protection of God, and a
most assured Victory, most eagerly demanded to be led to the Combat.

The Princes, who thought it very convenient to make use of this Heat, sent
Peter the Hermit with an Interpreter to Corbagath, to offer him the Combat
either Man to Man, between him and one of the Princes, or himself, and a
certain number of chosen Soldiers of one side and the other, or in short, a
general Battle, that so they might quickly determine the Quarrel between them:
And in the mean time every one applied himself to the Work of Repentance, and
with fervent Prayers to implore the Heavenly Aid from God, who had promised it
upon those Conditions. The Answer which Corbagath returned, was in these
haughty Terms, That it was not for the Vanquished to prescribe Laws to the
Victor, That it could not be long before he should have them with Halters about
their Necks, and that it would be in his Power to determine their Destiny, and
by what kind of Death they were to Dye. Peter having made his Report to the
Princes, they only acquainted the Soldiers that they must Fight, and that
therefore they should be ready to march against the Enemy the next day, which
was the twenty eighth of June, being the Eve of the Apostle St. Peter and St.
Paul. This Order was received with a mavelous Cheerfulness, every one
prepared his Arms, and fell to his Devotions, the Bishops and Priests
Administered the Sacraments of Penance and the Holy Eucharist all that Night, to
the Principal Officers and the greatest part of the Soldiers. Upon break of Day
the Army, which by the nine Months Siege of Antioch, was reduced to less than
one half, issued out by the Bridge-Gate, divided into six great Batallions,
which followed one another, every one sustained by a very small Squadron of
Cavalry, for that the greatest part of the Horses were dead and eaten by their
Masters during the extreme Famine, and who this day were therefore constrained
to serve on Foot. Hugh the Great accompanied with the Earl of Flanders,
commanded the first Body, the great Standard of the Christian Army being
carried before him. One shall not find in all the fabulous Histories of the
feigned Heroes, any thing comparable to the Actions of this brave Prince upon
this Occasion; he was so Meagre and Weak by reason of the extreme Famine which
he had endured in the Siege, that he was scarce able to support himself,
insomuch that he was requested by the other Princes to stay with those who were
left to guard the Retrenchments which were made against the Castle. If it shall
please God, said he, I will never lose so fair an Occasion of dying Gloriously
for the sake of Jesus Christ. I will this day Fight at the Head of the Army;
and I shall esteem myself extraordinary Happy to be of the number of those,
who, by a Death precious in the Sight of God, and full of Glory in the Sight of
Men, shall gain the glorious Crown of Martyrdom. In short, he was the first
that marched out of the Town, and who gave the first happy Presage of the
Victory, by cutting in pieces two thousand Turks, who were advanced out of the
Fort to hinder the Sally. Duke Godfrey led the second Brigade composed of
Lorrainers and Germans; Normands followed after him with his Body. After him
the Bishop of Pavia with his Troops which were increased by a part of Count
Raymond's, who being sick, remained in the Town with those who kept the Guard
against the Castle. Tancred led the fifth Batallion, and the sixth was
conducted by Bohemond.

There was little need of saying any thing to inspire the Soldiers with
Courage, who were already prepossessed with so advantageous Imaginations of
certain Victory. A little pleasant Dew which fell upon them as they marched
out, increased their Belief, and consirmed them in an Opinion that God had sent
it for their Refreshment, and to give them an Increase of Strength. And in
effect, whether there was any thing extraordinary in it at this time, or that
their Imagination impregnated with the favorable Visions which had been
published among them, acted more powerfully upon their Bodies, they felt
themselves strengthened in such a strange manner, that they began to sing, and
with a mighty loud Voice to cry, It is the Will of God, it is the Will of God,
and made no manner of Scruple but that they were going to a most assured
Victory. So soon as all the Battalions were drawn out, they marched Westward,
to that Quarter where the Mountains abutted upon the River, to the end, that
having them upon their Backs they might not be surrounded by the mighty number
of their Enemies; after which making a half turn to the left, toward the
North, where the Mountains make a kind of Semicircle, they divided every
Batalion into two, thereby forming twelve, which were ranged in two Lines
extending a great length, thereby to possess all the space between the
Mountains and the Orontes. Hugh the Great, the Earl of Flanders, and the Duke
of Normandy had the left hand toward the Mountain which covered them; Godfrey
of Bullen was on the Right, extending himself to the very River, having Eustace
his Brother to sustain him, together with the Earls of St. Paul and Toul,
Baldwin de Bourg, Renaud de Beauvais, Valon de Chaumont, Erard du Puiset, and
Tancred with his Brigade. The Bishop of Pavia was in the middle, having the
main Body of the Battle, with the Troops of the Earl of Tholose, which in his
Absence were Commanded by the Earls of Die and Rousillon, William de
Montpellier, Gaston de Foix Prince of Bearne, Amaneu d' Albret, Raymond
Viscount of Turene, Raimbaud Earl of Orange, and Peter Viscount de Castellane.
Raymond de Agiles, Canon of Pavia, writes in his History, that he carried the
Holy Spear before his Bishop, who although he was Armed for his own Safety, yet
fought no other way than by his Exhortations, by his Voice and Gesture
animating the Army, in showing them the Sacred Steel. He also adds, that by an
extraordinary Wonder, which ought to be attributed to the Faith which these
Soldiers had in Christ Jesus, whom they honored in this Spear, which they
believed was Consecrated by his Blood, not one Man of those who fought in that
Body, received any Wound in this terrible Day. Bohemond Commanded the Body of
Reserves, Composed of his Batallion, which was the strongest of them all, there
being diverse other Troops added to his, to the intent that he might send Succor
to any of the rest which might be too hard pressed by the Enemy. One part of
the Clergy which came out of the City in Procession at the Head of the Army,
was placed in his Quarter, to implore the Aid of Heaven during the Combat, the
other which were barefooted upon the Walls, displayed the Cross and the Ensigns
toward the Army, continually giving them their Benediction, and with grievous
Groans accompanied with the lamentable Cries of the Women and Children who
followed them, begging the Almighty Protection of God against the wicked
Enemies of his most Holy Name.

In the mean time Corbagath, who had so mightily mistaken the Christian Army,
was engaged in a Game at Chess, when he was informed by a Signal from the
Castle that they were issued out of the Town, and finding, contrary to his
Opinion, that they made Head that way, with an intention to sight him, he
immediately gave out all necessary Orders for the receiving of them. For he
instantly sent Soliman the Sultan of Damascus, with him of Alepo, and a brave
Turk, whose Name was Karieth, with two great Bodies of Cavalry and Infantry, to
go round about the Mountain upon the right Hand, to fall upon the Rere of the
Christians by the way of the Seacoast. But the Princes perceiving it sent a
great Detachment composed of several Troops drawn from the two Wings, under the
Command of Renaud Earl of Toul, Emir of Jerusalem, and partly upon the Plain
which in that place inlargeth it self, giving a very good Scope to extend his
Batallion which was commanded by his Lieutenant; the Left Wing where he had
placed his best Troops to oppose those of Godfrey, was conducted by Bulgadis
the Son of Accien, and Balduc Sultan of Samosatia; for he thought that these
two Turkish Princes, one of which had lost his Father, and the other his
Estate, would be animated more than any of the rest to avenge their particular
Losses by sighting more vigorously in the Common Cause. As for himself, whether
it were that his Courage failed him at that time, or that he was surprised and
astonished with the Prediction of his Mother an old Sorceress of above an
hundred years of Age, who to dissuade him from this War, had informed him some
time before, that it was written in the Stars that the Christians should be
victorious; he retired with a very puissant Body to an Eminence which was upon
the left of the Christian Army, under Pretext that from thence he might best be
able to discover whither to send his Orders and necessary Succors upon all
occasions: But in his ill Humor wherein he was to see the Christians in so
different a Condition from what he believed, and who by their possessing in the
manner of their drawing up the whole Plain, appeared to be far more numerous
than in Reality they were, he caused the head of a Deserter a Renegade to be
out off, for that he had assured him that almost all the Crusades were dead
with Famine, and that those who remained not being able to carry their Arms,
would never come out of the Town but to sly away.

The Christian Army in the mean time marching leisurely, more animated by
seeing the Spear which was carried up on high before Aymar and by the Priests
who went singing of Psalms, than by the Trumpets, advanced still forwards; when
the Infidels, according to their Custom making a hideous Noise with their
Instruments and Barbarous Shouts, extended themselves to the Right and Left to
surround the Christians, making at the same time such a Discharge of their
Arrows as for some Moments obscured the very Sky; but this did very little
Damage the Crusades, by reason that a great Westerly Wind which they had upon
their Backs, drove the Arrows back again upon those who discharged them, and
gave at the same time more Force to those of the Christians, which falling
among the thickest Ranks, made a mavelous Havoc upon that crowded Multitude,
where scarce any one Arrow fell in vain. After this first Charge, Hugh the
Great, Robert of Flanders, the Duke of Normandy, Baldwin Earl of Henault, and
Anselm de Ribemond, without giving the Enemies the Liberty of a second
Discharge, or so much as to draw their Cimiters, sell in furiously with their
Lances couched upon their right Wing, where the French, the Normans, the
English and the Flemings animated by the Example of their Chieftains, with
mighty Blows of Lance and Sword made a most horrible Execution among the
Barbarians. Godfrey who was to charge the bravest of the Infidels which he did
in a moment after, combated with no less advantage; for throwing himself like
Lightning into the thickest of the Enemies Squadrons which composed their left
Wing, he bore down all that opposed him with the prodigious Force of his
Terrible Sword, which the Saracens trembled at as if he had been Armed with a
Thunderbolt. The Gascons, the Bearnois, the Spaniards and the Provencals of
Earl Raymond, throwing away their Cross-Bows, and their Arrows, with which they
had before done mighty Execution, pierced into the main Body of the Battle,
being supported and followed by their Cavalry, till they were come to the place
where Hugh and the two Roberts, after having routed the Wing which opposed
them, were arrived, turning to the Right to fall upon the Rere of the Enemy. In
short, the Right Wing fell to downright running away, the Left began to
stagger, and the main Battle was in Disorder, when word was brought to Hugh the
Great and to Godfrey, that Earl Renaud and Prince Bohemond were extremely
pressed, and in danger of being defeated if they had not present Aid.

Soliman who had marched behind the Mountain with great Diligence was entered
the Plain upon the West, and had attacked Count Renaud, who was advanced to
oppose him, but with Forces very unequal in their Number. However he did most
bravely sustain the furious Shock of so many Enemies, till such time as joining
Artifice with Force, they took from him by a new Stratagem, the Means either to
attack them or defend himself. For Soliman who had observed that there was
abundance of Hay upon the Plain, had caused his People to set it on Fire, which
presently raised such a horrible thick Cloud intermingled with Flame and Smoke,
that being carried by a strong West Wind upon the Faces of the Christians, it
covered their Enemies, who all the while poured down Showers of Mortal Arrows
among them through the Cloud of Smoke; this put them into great Disorder, the
Horse being neither able to advance through the Fire and Smoke, nor to endure
the incessant galling of the Turkish Arrows whilst they stood; so that they
carried their Riders among the Reserves, and the Foot who could not retreat so
fast, remained exposed to the Fury of the Enemies. There were not however above
three hundred Soldiers slain, but all the rest were either taken or dispersed,
for Soliman did not follow the Pursuit, but according to his first Intention
advanced to fall upon the Rere of Bohemond, whom the stout Turk Karieth with
the Sultans of Damascus and Alepo who had now also entered the Plain, had
already charged upon the Flank. This Valiant Prince upon this occasion did all
that could possibly be expected from the Courage or Conduct of the Greatest Man
in the World; but after all it was impossible he should long be able to resist
so many Enemies as did surround him, if the Succors which he had desired did
not arrive more seasonably. Hugh the Great was the first that came in to his
Assistance, and presently observing that the terrible Turk Karieth did the
greatest Execution and encouraged others by his Example, he made one blow,
which ought to render the Memory of this great Prince a Son of France,
Immortal; and in Truth our own Historians in my opinion have not done him all
the Justice which is his due, and which History never refused to the meanest
Soldier who behaved himself in like manner upon such an occasion. For marking
out this Barbarian in the middle of the Turks, whom he was encouraging, and
pushing forwards against the Christians, crying to them with a loud Voice to
fall on, he ran upon him with his Lance couched, and hitting him between the
Curiass and the Cask, it passed cross his Windpipe, and cutting off one
Passage of that furious Voice which made such a Horrid Noise, opened two others
by which his Blood and his Life flowed out together. Eudas de Baugeny who
carried the Princes Colors, fell at the same time by the Stroke of a Poisoned
Arrow; but William de Beleme the Princes Esquire, animated by the Example of
his Master, threw himself into the Throng of the Turks, who endeavored to take
it, and killing all that opposed him, he recovered it all covered with their
Blood, and showed it to the Crusades in that Condition, being of the same
Color with those Crosses which they wore.

Godfrey who loved this Prince Hugh with a mighty Tenderness, and who was
reciprocally beloved by him; and Tancred whom the Danger wherein he saw his
Uncle rendered furious, being in this time come in with their Troops, the Combat
was renewed with more Fury than before; but it lasted not long, by reason that
the Enemies utterly unable to sustain the Force of so many Valiant Princes who
were rejoyned against them, and who being come up to the Throng rendered their
Bows useless, and their Artificial Fires vain, they now fled like the Smoke
toward the Mountains, leaving in the Plain new Mountains raised by the Heaps
of their slain Companions. The Princes immediately facing about, without
offering to pursue them, returned to their own Party, who were still hotly
disputing with those to whom this Diversion had given new Courage; but that
Courage was quickly cooled by the Knowledge which the Return of the Princes
gave them of the defeat of their Companions; and they who before were not able
to resist them, could less do it now that they returned Victorious, and
reinforced by the Troops of Earl Renaud and Bohemond to perfect and finish the
Victory. It is said that there were seen a mighty number of Cavaliers in White
Arms, who seemed to descend from the Mountains to assist the Crusades. Whether
it were so in Reality, Christians, under the Conduct of the Soldier Saints and
Martyrs Maurice George and Demetrius. The Bishop of Pavia however knew so well
to make good use of this Credulity of the Army, that therewith he animated the
Soldiers to make the last Effort against the Insidels, who now on every side
beginning to stagger immediately upon this vigorous Charge turned their Backs,
and thought of nothing but how to save themselves by Flight.

There was between the Place of Battle and the Enemies Camp a little Valley
divided by a small Rivulet which made the Passage very difficult; now the Turks
who made more have than the Christians, having passed it some time before them,
had the Leisure to rally upon the Mountain, where with their broken Troops they
formed a little kind of a new Army, hoping thereby to discourage some and
surprise others which they thought would follow them in Disorder. But Hugh the
Great with his Frenchmen who stuck closely to him, having first passed the
Valley charged them so Home, that Tancred and the rest of the Princes which
followed him being now come up, before they could recover the Disorder of that
brisk Charge, cut them all in pieces except a few, who repenting that they had
staid so long, found no small trouble to regain the Advantage which their first
slight had given them.

After this Corbagath who hitherto had not quitted the rising Ground from
whence he had with sufficient Cowardice beheld the Combat, without taking the
least share in it, seeing that all was lost, fled at full Speed toward the
Euphrates, every Hour taking fresh Horses, and never looking behind him till he
was got to the further side of that mighty River. As for the rest, the
Christians were so extremely weary with fighting and with killing, that the
Fugitives had a great advantage to escape, for there were none that pursued
them except Tancred, who gave them chase for about two Leagues, till the coming
on of the Night obliged him to return.

The Enemies lost in this Battle one hundred thousand Horse, and so great a
Number of Foot that it was not possible to compute them, and which was most
remarkable, this mighty Victory did not cost the Christians above four thousand
Men; and to comfort them for this inconsiderable loss, they took the Camp of
the Infidels which was full of inestimable Riches; which did so reestablish the
Army, that not only the Princes and Lords, but even the meanest Soldiers who
had been reduced to the extremity of Misery and Poverty, found themselves in
much a better Condition, and beyond Comparison far more Rich than they were
before they undertook this Voyage; and that which completed the Joy was, that
the Emir to whom Corbagath had entrusted the Guard of the Castle, instantly
surrendered it, and with three hundred of his Men turned Christians, the rest
having Liberty to retire whither they pleased. Thus was Antioch taken and
preserved by the most Memorable Exploits of War which ever were performed, and
which I thought my self obliged to recount with all its Cicumstances, to the
End, that considering the Faults which the Crusades committed, and the fearful
Extremities to which they were reduced both during the Siege and afterward,
the Reader may be satisfied that God who punishes the Offenses of Men by his
Justice, and pardons them in his Mercy, was the only support of this
Enterprise, which in all Humane Probability must otherwise have been most
unfortunate; so much does it concern mighty Princes who make great Wars, to
make it the Principal Maxim of their Policy, to gain Almighty God to be of
their Party, and that by returning to him with a true Conversion of their
Hearts, he may give Prosperity and Success to their Arms, without which they
must expect always to have him for their most Dreadful Adversary.

After this great Victory, of which the Princes gave an ample Relation to Pope
Urban, in a large Letter, as also of all which they had done till that time,
they took Care of resetling Christian Religion in Antioch; and then assembling
to deliberate concerning the Principal Enterprise, which was that of Jerusalem,
it was resolved to defer it to the first of November by reason of the great and
excessive Heats, Hugh the Great, and Baldwin de Mons, Earl of Henault, to press
him to the Conditions which he had sworn to fulfill; to come in Person instantly
and join his Forces with those of the Princes, if he expected that they on
their Part should keep the Oath which they had taken. Bohemond himself, to whom
all the rest except Count Raymond, had already quitted all manner of
Pretensions to Antioch, did not in the least oppose this Resolution, by reason
that he was well assured that all this Ceremony would produce nothing to his
disadvantage. And in Truth there never was any Embassage that proved more
unfortunate. The Earl of Henault perished in the Way, and it was never
precisely known what happened to him nor what was become of him, though there
was a current Report, that he was either taken Prisoner or murdered by the
Greek Soldiers of the Garrison of Nice. Hugh the Great after he had treated
with the Emperor, deserted the Crusades, and whether he had taken some
particular Disgust against some of the Princes, or that the Divisions which he
foresaw Ambition would produce among them made him despair of any good Success
of the Voyage, or that some particular reason of Importance obliged him to
return to France; it is certain that he returned from Constantinople in so
abrupt a manner, that it has given occasion to some of the Writers of that
Time to speak not very favorably of his departure. And for the Emperor Alexis,
as he knew very well that the Princes who had not at all flattered him in their
Embassage, were in no sort satisfied of his Honesty or good Conduct, he was far
enough from going to Antioch; for he was too cunning and politic not to govern
himself by that Maxim, That one ought always to distrust those whom they have
abused; especially when they have discovered the Abuse which has been put upon
them.

Now after all this, the Joy of having thus gloriously triumphed over the whole
Force of the Sultan of Persia, was mightily damped by the loss of that great
and good Prelate Aymar de Monteil Bishop of Pavia; who shortly after falling
sick with his great Fatigues, died the first of August, to the infinite Trouble
and Sorrow of all sort of People to whom he was for his incomparable Qualities
deservedly dear; and indeed never were there seen greater Marks of Esteem,
Tenderness and Grief, than those which the Princes, Soldiers and People gave
upon this mournful Occasion. Nor was it long before it appeared by the
Divisions which happened among the Princes to the hazzarding the loss of all,
that he was the very Soul of this great Body, who by his Wisdom and Presence
kept the different and jarring Humors in an equal Poise and Temperament. For
no sooner were the Princes who had separated during the Summer, reassembled in
November at Antioch according to Agreement to march together to the Conquest of
Jerusalem, but that Bohemond protested openly, that he would not move one step
except the Earl of Tholose put the Bridge-Gate Fortress into his Hands, and one
of the Palaces of Accien which he also kept. The Earl, doubtless little to the
Purpose, alleged the Promise made to the Emperor, and added that for his part
he was also resolved not to stir till Bohemond surrendered to him the Castle
which he had in Antioch. There was a great deal of Trouble at the last to gain
so far upon them, as to condescend that lest it might retard the Voyage, they
should remit their Differences to the Determination of the Princes after the
taking of Jerusalem. But this forced Accord endured not long; for these two
Princes, who were advanced with the first with their Troops, besieged and took
by Assault the great and strong City of Marra, some two or three days March
distant from Antioch toward Apamia. It is impossible to describe the Heat
which transported the Soldiers upon this occasion, who carried the Town without
expecting the Command of the Generals; for not being able to support the
Insolence, the Sacriledges and brutish Impiety of the Barbarians, who to
despite them did a thousand Indignities to the Cross which they had planted
upon their Walls, the Soldiers ran of their own accord to the Assault with so
much Heat, Courage, and indeed Fury, that undermining the Walls and Towers,
plying the Engines, and clapping up scaling Ladders on all Parts at the same
time, they vanquished the Infidels notwithstanding their obstinate Resistance,
and made themselves Masters of the Town. Geoffry dela Tour, a Gentleman of
Limousin. Who had acquired the Reputation throughout the whole Army of being a
most undaunted and Valiant man as was in the World, as he had made evident in a
thousand fair Occasions, and principally in one, which this History cannot omit
without doing injustice to the Merit of so brave a man, and without robbing it
self of one of its fairest Ornaments.

One day going out upon a Party as he frequently did, he heard the dreadful
roaring of a Lion, which seemed rather to be a crying out by reason of some
Mishap that he was fallen into, than in following his Prey to devour it; the
Bold Geoffry who by the Movement of his natural Generosity, always went without
a Moments Deliberation the Way that Danger led him, not withstanding the
Opposition of his Companions who would have staid him, broak away toward the
next Wood, and ran directly to the Place where he heard the Roaring; there he
saw a horrible Serpent of prodigious Magnitude, who having wound himself about
the Legs of a Lion had put him out of the Condition of defending himself, and
that he darted redoubled Blows with his Tongue to kill him with his Poison. He
was touched with the Danger of the Lion, and without thinking that in
delivering him, he must give him the Liberty to fall upon himself, he struck
the Serpent such a Blow with his Sword, that he killed him without hurting the
Lion, and after that cut the Wreaths of the Serpent with which he was
entangled; so soon as the poor Animal saw himself at Liberty, he came to
acknowledge the Kindness, and in the most expressive manner, and with the
greatest Submission to render Thanks to his Deliverer; for he couched himself
down and licked his Feet, and after that binding himself to him as to his
generous Defender to whom he owed his Life, he never would forsake him, but
constantly followed him, like as a Faithful Dog will do his Master, without
offending any Person except his Enemies upon whom he gave him a Sign to fall.
For the Lion went ever with him to the Combat and the Chase, and never failed
to provide his Master of Venison. But that which is most admirable is, that the
Master of the Vessel upon which Geoffry returned into France after the Crusade,
refusing to take his Equipage aboard, and amongst them the Lion who followed
his Master, the poor Beast unable to support the Separation from his
Benefactor, taking the Sea, so long as his Strength lasted swam after the Ship,
till at last he was drowned. A mavelous Instruction of Nature, and Reproach
to Mankind, whilst it shows them that Lions have done more than once that for
their Masters, by the Instinct of natural Gratitude, than men can be persuaded
to by all the Force of Reason; and that Ingratitude which is so common among
men, defacing the fairest Character of Humanity, should not be found in the
most Savage Creatures, whom the Charms of good Offices have divested of their
natural Fierceness toward their Benefactors.

But to return to our History, The taking of Marra revived the sleeping Quarrel
between the Earl of Tholose and the Prince of Tarentum. For the Earl pretended
to dispose of this Place as he had done before of Albaria and Rugia, upon which
he had seized during the Summer: but Bohemond who thought there was no manner
of Reason that Raimond should do that here, which he would not suffer to be
done at Antioch, opposed him stoutly; and in the Dispute they so heated one the
others Spirits, that the Tarentine thinking he had Reason to do the same on his
part, returned, and immediately drove out all the Earls Forces out of the Forts
which they held at Antioch. The Princes themselves could in no fort disapprove
of this Procedure, which they found to be but reasonable, especially after
having discoursed Raimond at Rugia between Marra and Antioch, they found it
impossible to persuade him to hear Reason, which obliged them to leave him and
return to Antioch. Thus the great Design of the Conquest of the Holy Land,
which all the Forces of the Infidels had not been able to hinder, seemed in a
manner to be ruined by this Difference between two Persons, otherwise reputed
extraordinary Virtuous, and as wise as any of that Age. So that we may see that
Wisdom and Reason instantly lose all their Authority, when once Passion by the
Heart seizing upon the Mind makes herself Mistress there.

Raymond, who on one side suffered extremely for want of Provisions after they
had been one Month at Marra, and on the other hand had a passionate Desire to
atchieve the Conquest of Jerusalem, thought that the Ambition of the Earl was
the only Obstacle, who after the Example of Bohemond, endeavored to establish
his own Fortune in these Conquests, as the other had done in Cilicia during the
Summer. And therefore making an Insurrection while the Conference was at Rugia,
they threw down all the Walls of Marra, thereby to take away from the Earl the
Temptation which he might have to keep it and stay there; and more over after
his Return they protested, that if he would not immediately march in the Head
of them toward Jerusalem, they would choose another Captain who they were
assured would lead them; that they were resolved to accomplish their Vow, and
that they did not believe they should find themselves alone, or abandoned by
the other Princes. Raimond extremely surprised at this Resolution, and fearing
in Truth that he should be wholly deserted by his own, as he was already by the
others, his first Zeal which had been so weakened by his Jealousy against the
Prince of Tarentum, began afresh to flame in his Soul, by seeing that of his
Soldiers, like a Torch that is just ready to be extinguished at the Approach
and Touch of another. In Conclusion he presently altered his Resolution, and
setting fire to Marra to show that he had quitted all Pretensions to it, upon
the Thirteenth of January he marched out barefoot in the Posture of a Penitent,
by that Humiliation to repair the Scandal which he had given to his Soldiers,
who had justly accused him of Ambition. He was followed with an incredible
Cheerfulness of his whole Army, who made no Scruple seeing him in this Estate,
but that he had taken up the same Fervor which he had so well witnessed in
being the first Person who took upon him the Cross, and who upon all Occasions
was wont to animate others by his Example and Persuasion to embrace it with the
same Zeal. And God also was pleased to bless this generous Action, for Robert
Duke of Nomandy, and Prince Tancred being advertized of this News, immediately
parted from Antioch, whilst the other Princes prepared to follow, and joined
him at Capharda where he had posted himself after he had quitted Marra, taking
the right hand Way toward the Sea.

Antioch, and the great Victory which they had obtained over the Turks, the
Persians and Arabians, had so filled all Syria, Phenicia and Palestine with the
Terror of the Christian Arms, that most of the Emirs who held any Places in
those Provinces under the Sultans of Persia or Babylon and Egypt, sent their
Ambassadors with rich Presents to the Princes, to desire their Friendship and
Protection, promising to pay them Tribute, and furnish them with Provisions in
their Passage. Now in Regard the Principal Design was to go immediately to
Jerusalem, and to leave the Conquest of the rest till that was taken, the
Princes thought fit to accept their Offers; only the Emir of Tripelis was
refused; for Earl Raymond persuaded them to besiege Arcas by Reason of the
Advice which he received from some Christians who were detained Prisoners at
Tripolis, that it would either easily be taken, or that the Emir to obtain
Peace would compound with them for a mighty Sum of money, and likewise restore
them to their Liberty. Arcas, which others call Archis, was a very strong Town
situate upon a Hill some two Leagues from Tripolis, and one from the Sea, in
the middle of a most beautiful and fertile Plain which extends it self along
the Lebanon and Antilebanon to the Sea shore. The Earl who thought to carry it
presently, assaulted it the eleventh day of February, but the Emir having
placed in it a very strong Garrison he was repulsed and constrained to besiege
it, which he did to no purpose for three months, losing before it a great
Number of Valiant Men, and amongst the rest Anselm de Ribemont descended from
the Ancient Earls of Valenciennes, and Chastelain of that City, one of the most
renowned among the Crusades; and the Accident by which it happened being
altogether extraordinary, it well deserves a particular place in this History.

Engelram the Son of the Earl of St. Paul, who a little before was slain at the
Siege of Marra, enter into his Tent. Now Anselm who had an undaunted Soul, and
to whom the Sight of his Friend gave an extraordinary Joy, And how now my dear
Engelram, said he, without being at all disordered, are you still alive, whom I
saw dead at Marra? Those, replied Engelram, who finish their Lives in the
Service of Jesus Christ, never die. But how comes it, Said Anselm, that I see
you now incomparably more beautiful than you were before? Look, replied
Engelram, showing him a most admirable Structure in Heaven, look there, and see
the Brightness and the Beauty of that Palace; it is from thence that I have
what you so much Admire in me. And further, added he, seeing him transported
with the Admiration of that Beautiful Palace, I am to acquaint you, that there
is one far more Glorious preparing for you. Adieu till to Morrow. And thereupon
he presently disappeared. Early the next Morning Anselm, having made his
Servants send for the Priests, he received the Sacraments, and very pleasantly
said to his Friends, that they should not be surprised at what he was to tell
them, but that though now they saw him in perfect Health, yet assuredly he
should die that day, and thereupon he related to them what he had seen the
Night preceding before he went to sleep. And the Event verified his Prediction;
for the Enemy making a furious Sally, Anselm who never failed upon such an
Occasion, ran thither with his Sword in his Hand, when a Stone which was
discharged from an Engine, hitting him upon the Head, sent him instantly to
that Beautiful Palace which Engelram told him was preparing for him in the
Heavens. Now in Regard that he who recounts this extraordinary Accident,
affirms upon his Salvation that he faithfully writ what he saw himself, and
that besides, one cannot reasonably accuse so brave a Man as this famous Earl
of Bouchain and Ribemont, as guilty of so much Weakness, as to make him pass
for a Visionary Extravagant, I cannot believe there is the least Place for
calling in Question the Truth of this Relation. And from hence our Brave Men
may draw an Excellent Instruction, and learn that in making a Christian War,
whether it be against Infidels, or Heretics, or whether it be in Obedience to
their own Prince who is only responsible to God for the Justice of his Arms,
which the Subjects have no Authority to examine, there is such an Insinite
Glory in Heaven to be acquired by their Courage on Earth, that they ought to
expose their Lives with all imaginable Frankness, to all sorts of Dangers and
Death it self.

After this all the Advantage that was gotten during this Siege before the
Arrival of the other Princes, was, that Raymond Viscount of Turenne, having
with him the Viscount de Castellane, the Lord Albret, and ten or twelve other
principal Gascons and Bearnois with about one hundred Horse and two hundred
Foot took Torlosa, in old Time called Antaradus, a fair and great Town upon the
Coast over against the Isle of Aradus, six or seven Leagues from Arcas toward
Antioch. He thought to have taken it by Surprise; but that Design did not
thrive, by reason he had so small a Number of Men, wherefore in the Night, at
the side of a Wood which was in View of the City he caused such abundance of
Fires to be made, that the Inhabitants taking his Party to have been the Van of
the Army, and that all the rest was now come up to assault them the next day,
they fled away that Night, so that the Viscount entered it the next Morning
without Resistance, and there found so rich a Booty as rejoiced the whole Army.

This Valiant Viscount was the Chief of that Illustrious House of Turenne,
which in Conclusion about two hundred years since happily fell into that de la
Tour d' Avergne, which by taking up the Name has restored it not only to its
first Splendour, but has also advanced it by an other Viscount Turenne to the
highest pitch of Honor to which it could aspire. This is he who after having
done so many fair Actions in commanding the French Armies in Italy, in Germany
and Flanders, as beyond Contradiction have given him the Reputation of a most
accomplished Captain, came to add to the Heap of his Glories the Execution of
his Kings Commands in this last Campaign, and who may well be celebrated as the
chief Engineer of the Military Art,

And certainly, it will be difficult to find any thing more admirable than the
War of this Campaign, of more than ten Months Continuance, wherein he by his
sole Presence, and the terror of his Name, not only stopped the Course of the
greatest Army of his Enemies, and hindered them from entering into the Provinces,
whilst in the mean time the King finished his Conquests; but also in
Conclusion, won two Battles, one on this, the other on the further side of the
Rhine, constraining them in Disorder to retire as far as the River of Mein; and
after that terrible Inundation of sixty thousand Germans had thrown themselves
over the Bridge of Strasbourg into Alsatia, he there gave them the Diversion of
weakening themselves by Famine and Sickness; after which, in the very Heart of
Winter he marched against them over the Mountains and the mighty Snows, and
there either cut in pieces, and dispersed, or made Prisoners their forwardest
Troops in three Combats; and in Conclusion, obliged the rest, which he had
reduced to one half of what passed the Bridge, to repass it with so much
Precipitation and Shame, that to save themselves in their own Country, they
would not give him the Opportunity to Attacque them. Thus it was that he
sustained the Glory of that illustrious Name, and rendered that of Turenne far
more glorious than it was in the first Crusade, after that Viscount Raymond
alone took so great a City.

In the mean time the Duke Godfrey, Earl Eustace, and Robert Earl of Flanders,
who Marched in the month of March, with their Armies in very good Condition,
Besieged Giblet, otherwise called Gabala, a Town upon the Sea between Tortosa
and Laodicea; but being requested by the Earl of Tholose to come to his
Assistance upon the Rumor which he had cunningly raised, that a great Army of
Saracens were advancing to Assail him; they accepted the Terms which the
Governor offered them to obtain a Peace, and came instantly before Arcas, where
they found no other Enemies to Combat with, but those who were within the Town,
who made a very brave Defense. But the two Ambassages which the Princes
received shortly after, determined the Siege which had been maintained so long.
For during the Siege of Antioch, they had sent their Ambassadors to Babylon,
with those of the Sultan of Egypt, to conclude with him that Alliance which he
had desired, and which was condescended unto upon Condition that he should join
his Arms with those of the Christians; That Jerusalem with all its
Dependancies, should be put into the Hands of the Christians; That he should
have such other Places as should be regained from the Turks who had usurped
them from him; and that the rest should be divided among them: But the great
Overthrow of Corbagath, which that Prince understood some time after, made him
change his Resolution; for now he imagined that he might make his Advantage of
this Victory of the Christians, and that it would give him the Opportunity, if
he knew how to manage it, to recover that by himself, which he could expect to
have but a part of if he joined with the Christians. He knew very well that
their Army was extremely weakened by the long Sieges, Diseases, and Combats,
which they had endured; and that the Emperor Alexis was so far from sending
them any Reinforcements, that he urged him incessantly to take Arms against
them, as appeared plainly after the Battle of Ascalon, when the Letters which
this perfidious Prince had written to him upon this Subject, were found in the
Sultans Cabinet: And in short, He was strongly possessed with the Belief that
the Turks were so drained both of Men and Money, that they were almost entirely
ruined, and could not possibly after such horrible Losses, be in any Condition
to Oppose him with considerable Force. And therefore whilst they were under
the Astonishment of their Overthrow, and that the Princes spent their time
about Antioch, either in Diversions, or in taking little Places, or that which
was far worse, in vain Contests, he sent a considerable Army into Palestine,
where he took the greatest part of the Cities, and Jerusalem it self, which for
a Sum of Money was surrendered unto him by the Governor,

After this, when he knew that the Princes were in Phenicia, he sent back their
Ambassadors, which he had detained above a Year, and joined with them his own,
who were to acquaint the Princes, That having made himself Master of Jerusalem,
which of right belonged to him, he did not think himself bound in Justice to
put it into their Hands; but nevertheless, if the Christians thought good to
visit the Sepulcher, they might do so, provided they did not come in greater
Numbers than two or three Hundred; and that they came as simple Pilgrims,
without any Arms, and returned immediately so soon as they should have finished
their Devotions. The Princes filled with Indignation at this Insolence of a
Barbarian, thought fit to treat him with Disdain, and therefore only smiling at
his extravagant Proposition, they instantly dispatched his Ambassadors to him,
with Order to let him Understand, That they were not to be treated like Fools
or Slaves, but like his, and the Conquerors of the whole East, and that if he
did not immediately Surrender Jerusalem upon this Demand, they knew very well
how to take it from him, in despite of all the Power of his Empire, of which
they made so very little Account, that after they had taken it, he might expect
the severest Punishment due to his dishonorable Perfidy, and from which he
would find, the proud Walls of Babylon, where he thought himself so secure,
should not be able to protect him.

Not long after this, the Princes gave Audience to the Ambassadors of Alexis,
who were sent from him to Complain, that contrary to the Promise of the
Princes, Bohemond kept Antioch, of which he pretended to be Prince, and also to
desire them to stay for him till July, when he would come and join them with a
puissant Army, and all kinds of Provisions, that so they might together, more
commodiously besiege Jerusalem. Earl Raymond, who preserved still some little
Remains of his Aversion to Bohemond, and who feared that they would raise the
Siege of Arcas, which he had given a Suspicion, that like Bohemond, he designed
also to keep for himself, was of opinion that it was fit to satisfy the
Emperor, and to wait his coming before they undertook the Siege of Jerusalem.
But all the others, who saw through the Artifice of the Emperor, who had no
other thoughts but to impose upon them, answered his Ambassadors, That Alexis
having upon all Occasions acted directly contrary to his Promises, they thought
themselves absolutely discharged from the Obligations of theirs; that Bohemond
possessed Antioch with the greatest Justice, all the other Princes having
yielded it to him; as for the rest, that which had already passed, answered for
what was to be expected from him, and that they would no longer regard his
Word, which he had with so little Honor so often Violated; and that they were
resolved immediately to advance without him toward Jerusalem, in order to the
Accomplishment of their Religious Vow.

In short, a few days after, having gained a great Victory over the Emir of
Tripoly, who had the Confidence to sally out and give the Christians Battle,
they granted him Peace at his Earnest Solicitation, notwithstanding that the
Earl of Tholose with a strange Obstinacy, did all that lay in his power to
oppose it; but with little Effect, more than the Displeasure which he had to
see himself forsaken of all his People, who, as did all the rest, demanded with
an incredible Ardor, without delaying about these other Places, to be lead
immediately to Jerusalem. The Conditions which these Victorious Princes made
with so much Honor and Advantage with the Tripoline, were these, That leaving
to the Emir Tripolis, Arcas, and Biblis, which were under his Government, he
should pay down a large Sum of Money, and furnish the Army with Horses, Apparel,
and Provisions; That he should set at Liberty three hundred Prisoners who had
been taken during the Siege of Antioch; and that if they took Jerusalem he
should become their Tributary, and turn Christian. This Treaty was concluded
the thirteenth day of May; and after the Repose of three or four days about
Tripolis, the Army put themselves upon their March, leaving Mount Libanus upon
the Left, and with good Guides following the Sea-Coast-Way, that so they might
be the more easily Accommodated by the Fleet, which consisted of Venetians,
Genoese, Pisans, and the Pyrate Vinimarc, who coasted all along with them.

Straits, where but a very few People might have stopped their Passage, they
descended into the Plain of Beritus, at present called Baruth; and from thence
passing over the Regions of Sidon, Sarepta, and Tire, between Mount Saron and
the Sea, they encamped in the beautiful and fertile Plain of Ptolemais,
sometime before called Accon, and since named St. John d' Acre. The Emir who
Commanded in so fair a Town, where there was a most delicate Port, and which
would have been most Commodious for the Princes, fearing to be Attacqued,
immediately sent to treat with them. He furnished them with all sorts of
Refreshments, and that he might quit himself of such Guests the Sooner, his
Fear constrained him to promise them with an Oath, That if they took Jerusalem,
and kept it twenty days against the Sultan of Egypt, he would acknowledge them
for his Masters, and put them into Possession of the Town; but the contrary was
soon after evident by a very surprising Accident, which showed that this
Perfidious Person had quite other Thoughts about his Heart, and that it was his
Fear of the Christian Army, which drew this Perjury from his Lips.

For as the Army quitting Ptolemais, pursued their Way by Caiphas and the
Passage of the Strait, which lies between the Sea and Mount Carmel, and was
about to Encamp near the Lake of Cesarea, a Pigeon which was escaped from the
Talons of a Bird of Prey, who astonished at the Noise of the Army, had quitted
her, fell down half dead at the feet of the Soldiers; being taken up, there was
found fastened to her a little Roll of Paper, in which the Emir of Ptolemais had
written to him of Cesarea, that he should do all the Mischief that he could to
this Army of Dogs, who were about to pass his Territories, for that he might
more easily Incommode their Passage than he could, and also that he should not
fail by the same way to give the same Advertisement to the other Cities. This
Accident occasioned a wonderful Joy in the whole Army; for from hence they
concluded, that God took a particular Care of their Interests, since he was
pleased, in so uncommon a manner, to discover to them the Secrets of their
Malicious Enemies. For this very reason the Princes staid in that place, that
they might with greaten Devotion celebrate the Holy Feast of Whit-Sunday, which
was the nine and twentieth day of May. After which leaving the Sea upon their
right Hand, as also the Cities of Joppa and Antipatris, they took the
Right-hand-way which leads through the pleasant Valleys which lie at the Foot
of Mount Ephraim, to Lidda, or Diospolis, a famous City of Judea, and at that
time particularly Famous for the magnificent Church which the Emperor Justinian
had caused to be built in Honor of St. George, in the place where that generous
Soldier finished his Martyrdom; but the Saracens despairing to maintain the
Town, had before ruined this noble Structure, burning the prodigious Beams
which sustained the Roof, for fear the Christians should make use of them for
Engines of War.

At the same time the Princes seized upon Ramatha, by some called Arimathea,
Rama, and Ramula, a City which the Birth, the Dwelling, and the Sepulcher of
the Prophet Samuel, have rendered remarkable in the Holy Writings. The Saracens
had also abandoned that place in so great have, that they left behind them so
much Provision as sufficed for three days to refresh the whole Army. And
because Rama was near unto Lidda, it was thought fit to give the Fee-simple of
those two Towns, together with the Tithes of the Booty, to a learned and
virtuous Priest, one Robert of the Diocese of Rouen, who was settled the Bishop
of that place, to the intent that he should not only take Care of the
Christians of Lidda, but also of such Pilgrims who resolved to pass the
remainder of their Lives in the Holy Land, and with which Rama was to be
peopled. This being done, the Army marched very early the next Morning
Eastward, and the same Evening arrived at Emmaus, some sixty Furlongs, which is
about two Leagues and a half from Jerusalem: This City which had in the time of
the Machabees been a considerable Place, was in our Savior's time only a
little Borough, having been ruined by Varus the Governor of Syria; but it was
rebuilt by the Romans after the end of the Jewish War, and in memory of their
Victories they called it Nicopolis, as it was at that time called when the
Christians seized it. At that instant there arrived Deputies from Bethlehem who
addressed themselves to Duke Godfrey, to request him to send them present
Succors, Saracens, as they had just ground to apprehend, who from all Parts
ran to put themselves into Jerusalem, should in their Passage fire that City.
Immediately Tancred, who was particularly united in his Interests, was
dispatched thither, and who, after he had given all the necessary Orders for
the Security of that Place, and had planted his Ensign upon the Church,
rejoyned the other Princes the day following, which was Tuesday the sixth of
June, a day after three years from the first Enterprise of the Voyage so long
expected, and so ardently desired; a day wherein after infinite Pains and
Travels, they came with incredible Joy to see the Conclusion of their Vows.

For so soon as the Army was g^^ to the top of the Heights which are on the
further side of Emaus, from whence there was a fair Prospect of the lofty
Towers of the Holy City, the Princes, the Officers, the Soldiers, and the whole
Troop of Pilgrims which followed the Army, broak out all together, as it were
by Consent, into Cries of Joy, Blessing and Praises to Almighty God, which
being reverberated and multiplied by the Echoes of the Rocks and Mountains
with which the City is Environed, repeated in a few Moments a million of times,
It is the Will of God, It is the Will of God. And immediately they found their
Hearts so lively touched and pierced with the extraordinary Sentiments of
Piety, Tenderness, and Love of God, upon the sight of those Holy Places,
Consecrated by the venerable Mysteries of the Redemption of Mankind, that they
threw themselves upon the Ground, shedding abundance of devout Tears, and
kissing with unconceivable Pleasure that Soil which had been honored with the
Footsteps of the Incarnate Word of God. Thus do present Objects without any
other Assistance, make the most violent Impressions upon the Minds of Men, and
such as far surpass the most profound Meditations, the most powerful
Reasonings, and the most elaborate Discourses of the most eloquent Orators or
Preachers, and the single View of them is more capable of softning the hardest
Hearts, than the finest Discourses at a distance, which cannot possibly
represent things with that Life and Efficacy, which by the Eyes passes in a
moment to the Soul. Thus the Presence of those glorious Monuments of the
Victories of the Son of God, after these first motions of Piety, inspired in
the Hearts of the Crusades, such an extraordinary Ardor to Conquer, that they
cried out to be instantly lead to the Siege of Jerusalem, not as Jewish, the
Enemy and Murdress of the Savior of the World, to destroy it, but as Christian
and Captive, to deliver it from the Tyranny of the Barbarians, who hindered the
whole World from the Liberty of rendering those Honors due to the Sepulcher of
Jesus Christ. The Princes therefore judging that they ought to make use of this
admirable Disposition of their Soldiers, instantly fell upon forming the Siege
of this illustrious City; of which, before I proceed further, it will be
necessary to represent the Situation, the Strength, and the Condition wherein
they found it at that time.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS of the Third Book.
The Present State of Jerusalem when the Christian Princes Besieged it. The
Distribution of their Quarters. The ill Success of an Assault given against the
Rules of War, by the Advice of a Hermit, who pretended a Revelation for it.
The Description of Duke Godfrey 's Engines. The solemn Procession of the
Besiegers about the City. The second General Assault for three days together.
Two Magicians who were Conjuring upon the Walls, have their Brains beaten out
with a Stone from Duke Godfrey 's wooden Castle. The Artifice of Godfrey to
drive the Enemies from the Walls. He is the first that by the Bridge of his
Castle mounts the Walls. Jerusalem taken. The fearful Slaughter of the
Saracens. By Godfrey 's Example the whole Army return solemn Thanks to God at
the Holy Sepulcher. An Assembly of the Princes to choose a King and a Patriarch.
The Speech of Robert Duke of Normandy upon this Subject. Godfrey of Bullen
chosen and proclaimed King of Jerusalem. The memorable Battle of Ascalon
against the Sultan of Egypt, and the Victory of the Christians, which concluded
this first Crusade. The Return of the Crusades. The Conquests of Godfrey of
Bullen, and his Death. An Abridgment of the History of the Kingdom of Jerusalem
till the time of the second Crusade. The Reign of Baldwin the First. The
flourishing Estate of the Christians in the East, till his Death. The Reign of
Baldwin the Second. The Relation of the founding the Military Orders of the
Knights Hospitallers. The Captivity of King Baldwin. His Deliverance. His
Victories and Death. He is succeeded by his Son-in-Law Fowk d' Anjou. The
Prosperity of his Reign. His Death, and the Regency of Queen Melesintha, during
the Minority of Baldwin the Third. The Occasion of the second Expedition of the
Crusades. The Relation of the two Josselins de Courtenay Earls of Edessa. The
taking of that City by Sanguin Sultan of Alepo, and afterward by Noradin his
Son. The Character of that Prince, and his Conquests over the Christians.
Applications made to Lewis the young King of France. His Character, and what
moved him to undertake the Crusade. He Consults Saint Bernard concerning it.
The Character of that Saint, and the Order he received from Pope Eugenius the
Third to Preach the Crusade. The General Assemblies of Bourges, Vezelay, and
Chartress, for the Crusade. It is Published by Saint Bernard in France and
Germany. The Emperor and King take up the Cross. The Abbot Sugere declared
Regent in France. His Character and Advice concerning the Expedition. The
Voyage of the Emperor. The Description of the Tempest which almost ruined his
Army upon the Banks of the River Melas. The Fleet of the Crusades take Lisbon
from the Saracens. The Original of the Kings of Portugal. The Character and
Perfidy of the Greek Emperor Manuel. His underhand Treating with the Turks. The
miserable Overthrow of the Emperor's Army. The Voyage of King Lewis to
Constantinople, and his Reception. The Advice of the Bishop of Langress, who
Counsels the King to take Constantinople; his Speech upon that Subject; the
reason that his Advice was not followed; the Treacheries of Manuel thereupon.
The Kings Voyage into Asia. His Interview with the Emperor Conrade, and the
Return of that Prince to Constantinople. The Description of the River Meander,
and the famous Passage of the King of France with his Army over it.

JErusalem, which after that Herod the Great had beautified it with the most
magnificent Structures, and had repaired the Temple, had been one of the
Wonders of the World, and one of the fairest Cities of all the East, was
nothing but a horrible Heap of Cinders and Ruins after its fatal Destruction;
till such time as the Emperor Adrian, who was the last that ruined it, caused
it to be rebuilt in a manner far different from what it was before. For in
times-past, there was comprised within the Circuit of its Walls four Mountains,
upon which it was successively Built: The first called Salem, otherwise Acra,
which was founded by Melchisedeck: The second opposite to that, toward the
South, and which was far higher, was the Holy and Famous Mount Sion, which
David after he had taken the Fortress of the Jebusites, joined to the former by
a Wall which environed it on all parts, to distinguish it from the other, which
in comparison of this new City, was called the Lower City: The third was the
Mountain of Moriah, between these toward the East, where the Temple of Solomon
stood: And the fourth upon the North, was the Hill Betheza, where the same King
built a new Town, which was afterward much enlarged by Hezekiah, and took in
all the Valley between the East and the North, to the lower Town.

This Glorious City of God was afterward destroyed by the Chaldeans; and with
the Temple restored to its first Estate, in diverse Ages by Zorobabel, Nehemiah,
the Machabees, and by Herod the Great, and was at the last overthrown to the
very Ground, and laid in Heaps of Rubbish by the Emperor Titus Vespasian, three
only of the fairest Towers called the Hippico, and Mariamne, which Herod had
Builded, escaping the general Desolation; for Titus was willing to preserve
them, as also part of the North Wall of the higher Town, to which they were
joined, that they might remain as Monuments of the Greatness of his Victory,
when Posterity should by the Strength of those make a Judgment how Impregnable
that City was which he had taken, though defended by such mighty Walls and
lofty Towers. But the Jews Revolting in the time of the Emperor Adrian, that
Prince after he had made the most horrible Slaughter among the Rebels, caused
those three Towers and the Wall also to be demolished and razed to the very
Foundation; thus without designing it, entirely accomplishing the dreadful
Prediction of the Son of God, That the day should come when there should not be
one Stone left upon another in that miserable City. After this, that Emperor to
immortalize his own Name in abolishing that of Jerusalem, caused a new City to
be there Built, which according to his own Name was called Aelia, giving it
also a quite differing Form from the Ancient City, whose Memory, as well as
Name, he thought thereby for ever to extinguish. For he left out of it the
whole Mountain of Sion, which had been the best and most Beautiful, as well as
strongest part of Jerusalem, almost all that which had been called the New
City, and a great part of the Lower Town. He made Mount Moriah be levelled, and
enclosed that and the little Remainder of the New and Low Town, as also Mount
Calvarie, which was nothing but a little Corner of Mount Gihon, which was out
of the Ancient City toward the West. So that this Aelia, as it was not by one
half so large as Jerusalem, so it had quite a differing Figure: For the Ancient
Jerusalem in its Dimensions approached to a Square, though not altogether
Regular, being something longer than it was broad, for it was Extended from
North to South a good League, the Breadth from East to West being something
less. On the contrary this new City, which was of a Figure altogether
Irregular, yet approaching to Square, extended it self in Length from East to
West some twelve hundred Paces, and in Breadth from South to North about a
third part so much. Moreover the Ancient City was wholly inaccessible on the
South part, by reason of the broaken Rocks of the Mount Sion, which Environed
it, it was also the same upon the East, having the deep Valley of Jehoshaphat
between the Mount of Olives and Mount Moriah. But this New City which had Mount
Sion close by the South Side of it, was easily Commanded from thence, and the
Valleys having been in a manner filled up by the Romans, it was very
accessible, particularly upon the North.

It continued a long time in this Estate under the Power of the Gentiles, till
such time as the Great Constantine peopled it with Christians, having there
builded the Magnisicent Church of the Resurrection, which Incloses the Holy
Sepulcher, where the Pagans had with the most impious Profaneness erected the
Temple of the Idol Venus. After this quitting the profane Name of Aelia, if
recovered that venerable Name of Jerusalem, a Name Consecrated by the Sacred
Records, and by so many Holy Mysteries, which for ever after to this present
time it has retained. It was taken from the Romans by the Persians under the
Reign of King Cosroes, and by his Successor Restored to the Emperor Heraclius;
and not long after, about the middle of the seventh Age, falling into the Hands
of the Saracens, the Caliph Omar, one of the earliest Successors of Mahomet,
built there a round Temple of eight Angles or Faces for a Mosch, in the same
place where sometimes stood the Temple of Solomon; and tho it did not in the
least Resemble that, except in the Greatness of the Porch, which was raised
very high, and with fair Galleries, in the Middle whereof stands this Round,
yet does it to this Day retain that Name. About four hundred Years after this,
the greatest part of Syria and Palestine falling under the Dominion of the
Turks, they also took Jerusalem from the Sultan of Egypt, and thirty eight
Years after it was retaken from them by him, making use of the Occasion which
was offered him by the memorable Victory of the Christians over the Turks, in
the Battle of Antioch.

This Saracen Prince, who notwithstanding his Ambassy, doubted not but the
Christians, who looked upon Jerusalem as the end of their Enterprise, would
certainly besiege it, Christians that were able to bear Arms to quit the City,
and put into it a Garrison of forty thousand of his Best Soldiers, besides
that there were twenty Thousand Inhabitants who were Armed, and to whom for
their Encouragement he promised a perpetual Exemption from all manner of Taxes
and Tributes. He caused also the Cisterns and Wells for six miles round the
City to be filled up, and made a most horrible Wast throughout the Country,
that so the Christian Army at the same Time that they were to Combat with so
strong an Enemy within the Walls, might have Famine a more terrible Enemy to
Combat with in the Field, and above all he hoped to destroy them for Want of
Water in those dry and barren Countries where the Heat is great and Thirst most
insupportable.

This was the Estate and Posture in which Jerusalem then stood immediately
before it was besieged by the Christians, whose Army was not in Truth so
Numerous as that which defended the Place: For of that immense Multitude of the
Crusades who passed into Asia and were at the Siege of Nice, there came not
above sixty thousand of both Sexes, among which there were not more than twenty
Thousand Foot and fifteen hundred Horse who were in a Condition to fight; the
greatest part of the rest being dead, either with Diseases or in the several
Encounters; some were returned, some wore put into Garrisons in the conquered
places, and some followed the Princes Baldwin and Bohemond to defend their new
Principalities of Edessa and Antioch. Nevertheless both Princes and Soldiers
were determined either there to perish or to carry the Pince, and to accomplish
their Vow either by a Devout Death, or Glorious Victory. After they had
therefore repulsed the Enemies who sallied out, they began cheerfully to form
the Siege in this manner; Godfrey of Bullen, Earl Eustace his Brother, and
Tancred took their Post upon the West near to the Fortress which they called
the Tower of David; The Earl of Tholose was upon his Right directly opposite to
the Gate of this Tower, and after a little while he enlarged his Quarters
Southward to the Extremity of Mount Sion, over against the Church of the Holy
Virgin. The Remainder of the City on the South and toward the East was left
free, in Regard the Hollow Vallius and the Craggy Rocks made the Approaches
Extreme Difficult. The North side was surrounded by the Duke of Normandy, the
Earls of Flanders and St. Paul, who lay before the Gate, which was then called
St. Stephens, but now Damascus Gate, to the Angular Tower near the Valley of
Jehosaphat.

Moreover, that they might avoid a tedious Siege like that of Antioch, it was
resolved to attack the Place by main Force, therein also following the Advice
of a Solitary who lived with a great Opinion of his Sanctity in a Cave in the
Mount of Olives; for he had promised the Christians that they should have the
Victory that day, telling them he had it in Command from God to acquaint them
with that Message, although it was told him on the other hand, that they were
not at all provided with necessary Materials for an Attack. But as it appeared
afterward, in all kind of Affairs, but especially in those of War, it is a
most dangerous Folly to quit the Rules of Art and Prudence, blindly to follow
the uncertain Ways of pretended Revelations, which one ought rarely to trust,
in Regard they are so often false; and when they are true one is not bound to
believe them but upon Invincible Proofs; and without those one is obliged
always rather to follow good Sense and Reason, which God has given to Men next
to his Divine Word, to be their Rule and Guide. However, upon the fifth day of
the Siege early in the Morning a General Assault was given upon the Word of
this Recluse, which was looked upon as an Oracle. Never was there seen greater
Ardor in the Soldiers, whose Courage was redoubled by the certainty of their
Belief in the Promise of this Holy Man that they should that very day take
Jorusalem. Some part were drawn up in close Rank, and they advanced holdly
after the manner of the Ancient Romans, covering themselveslike Tortoises with
their Bucklers, whilst others were extended in long siles and followed them at
a just distance, Braves transported with mad Courage, being prepossessed with
the Belief that they should carry the Town, planted that Ladder, and mounted
with so much Resolution, that pushing one another upwards, many of them got up
to the Top and threw themselves over the Wall, where they desperately fought
hand to hand against the Saracens, who were amazed at this more than Heroic
Boldness; and there is no doubt but if they had had more Ladders, Jerusalem had
been that day taken; for the Enemies who did not in the least expect such an
irregular and brisk Attempt, had not brought any of their Engines to the Walls.
But seeing there could but by one Ladder mount a very few men, who must needs
be exposed to a Multitude of Enemies without Hope of Succor, a Retreat was
sounded after having lost in that rash Attempt a great many brave men, who yet
sold their Lives at so dear a Rate that twice their Number of the Saracens paid
theirs in lieu of them.

Duke Godfrey who was ashamed of the Fault he had committed by preferring the
idle Visions of a simple Hermit before the just Rules of Military Art,
remonstrated to the Princes, that if they resolved to carry the Town by Force
it was necessary to attack it with good Engines of War, since they were to
sight with men who having once, would not a second time be surprised in their
Defense against a Scalade. This Advice was approved by all, but the difficulty
was, to know where they should be furnished with Materials to frame them, there
being never a Forest in all the Country. For as for the famous Enchanted Woods
of Ismena Clormea, Renaud and Armida, and a hundred other such like Inventions
of Tasso, they are nothing but the agreeable Visions of a Poetical Fancy, which
takes a great deal of Delight in pleasing others, with making new Creations,
which never were except in his own or the Imaginations of his Readers, but
which must as the Amusements of Fables and Chimera's, be rejected by Historians
who are to entertain their Readers with nothing but solid Truth. But this is
most certain, that while they were in this Trouble a Christian of the Country
informed the Princes, that about three or four Leagues off in the Way that
leads to Arabia, there was a Valley quite out of any Road, where in a great
Cavern there was a good Quantity of large Beams of Cedar and Cypress, and that
there was thereabout some Trees of which they might make very good Use,
although they were of no considerable Height. The Duke of Normandy, and the
Earl of Flanders went thither with some Troops being Conducted by this Guide,
where they really found such Wood which they caused to be carried to the Camp.
They also carried thither all the Planks, Joists and Beams of the Houses near
the City, which they could sind; and for a whole Month they wrought all sorts
of Engines which are made use of in Sieges, as also some of a new Invention,
according as they were designed by Duke Godfrey and Gaston de Foix Prince of
Bearne, who took care of the Management of these Works; but that which mightily
advanced them was, that nine great Ships being arrived at Joppa with Provisions
from Pisa and Genoa, for the Army, and despairing to defend themselves in that
little Fleet against that of the Saracens which was coming to attack them, they
broke up the Ships, and setting Fire to what they could not carry to the Camp,
the Seamen applied themselves most industriously to the building of these
Engines.

Cedron which divides the Valley of Jehosaphat has very little Water except in
the Winter, and the Fountain of Siloe, which is at the Foot of Mount Sion
toward the South afforded but a very little Water; so that there was scarce any
to be had but what was to be found two Leagues off, and that with great Hazard
of falling into the Hands of the Saracens, who lay continually in Ambuscades to
surprise such whose Thirst constrained them to straggle abroad to seek for
Water; and besides, what was to be had was so little, and there were so many
People, besides the Beasts that were to drink, that it became presently pudled
and stinking. In this Extremity there could be no other Resolution, but so soon
as ever the Engines which were preparing were sinished to give a General
Assault, with a sirm Determination either to carry the Place or perish in the
Attempt. And therefore before the Execution of so dangerous an Enterprise, and
whilst the Preparations were making, it was thought fit that public Prayers
should be made by the whole Army, to implore the Mercy of Almighty God and to
crave his Blessing and Assistance. For this Purpose after a Fast of three days
upon Friday the eighth of July there was a solemn Procession, where the Bishops
and Clergy barefooted, followed by the Princes and Soldiers in their Arms
surrounded the City, setting out at the Church of Sion, and passing by the
Oratory of St. Stephen through the Valley of Jehosaphat, and so by the Mountain
of Olives, to the Place from whence Christ Jesus ascended into Heaven. Here it
was that Peter the Hermit, and Arnold the Chaplain to the Duke of Normandy,
made such Powerful Exhortations to reunite the Hearts of the Army, that all the
Chiefs, and the Soldiers, and particularly Tancred and Count Raymond, who had
had the greatest Differences, embraced each other in Token of a mutual
Reconciliation, and Exhorted one another to revenge those Injuries and
Outrages, which were offered to Jesus Christ by the Saracens, who at the same
time made a Mock-Procession about the Walls within the City as the Christians
did without, vomiting out a thousand Blasphemies against Christ, and offering a
thousand Insolences and Indignities to a Cross which they opposed to that
which was carried in this Devout Procession before the Christians.

The next Morning Godfrey who had resolved to make his Attack upon that Quarter
which is between the East and the North, because it was the weakest and the
most convenient for his Engines to play, removed his Camp thither in the Night,
and employed the three following Days as did the other Princes to dispose of
their Engines. They had besides Rams, Slings to throw great Stones, and other
such Sort of Engines which were at that time in Use to batter Walls near at
hand, three great Castles of Wood of a new Structure. Every one of them had
three Stories, whereof the lowest was for the Ingeniers and Workmen, who by
great Force rolled the Machin upon its Wheels; the two others had their
Platforms which jetted out from the Work, so that the Combatants who were
placed in them might from thence fight as upon sirm Ground, either with their
Enemies at a Distance, or near at Hand according as they were able to advance
the Machin; the middle Story was as high as the Top of the Second Wall, which
was something higher than the Out-Wall of the City. And the third Story which
was raised with a narrow Top, was so framed that from thence one might see the
Enemies so as to have a sair Mark at them with Darts, Stones or Arrows even to
the very Heart of the City. These Wooden rolling Castles had four sides which
were covered with Hurdles to prevent the Damage which they might receive by the
great Stones thrown from the Walls, and the Hurdles were also covered with Raw
Hides of Oxen, Camels and Horses, to resist the Violence of Fire. But that
which was the Chief Design of these Machines was, that upon the side of the
third Story toward the Town, and which was just above the Platform of the
middle Story Level with the Height of the Walls, besides the two other
Covertures there was a third which was framed with Joists and Planks, and so
fastened to the Engine above at the third Platform, that being suddenly let
down by two Pullies, it was to fall upon the Wall like a Drawbridge, thereby
to enter into the Town.

It was resolved that there should be three Attacks, and one of these Rolling
Castles at every one of them; Godfrey and Earl Eustace had the first, a little
below St. Stephens Gate drawing toward the East; Duke Robert, Prince Tancred,
and the Earl of Flanders with the second, made the second a little lower at the
left Hand near the Angular Tower which was afterward called Tancred's Tower.
Earl Raymond made his at the opposite Angle at the South-West, with the third
which could not advance till he had caused certain deep Trenches to be filled
up which lay between him and the Wall. Upon Wednesday the thirteenth of July
the Attack was begun, which was continued all the next day with incredible
Fury; all the great Engines which were placed by the Castles played incessantly
upon the Enemies, with Huge Stones, whilst at the same time the Slings, the
Archers and Cross-Bows discharged continually upon them, the Castles advancing
still forward all the Time. The Captains stood all this while in the highest
Story of the Rolling Castles, accompanied with the most considerable and
bravest men of the Army, to animate their Soldiers by their Example, and by the
Danger which they ran, being above all others exposed as the Mark of the
Enemies Arrows. Duke Godfrey with his Brother stood upon the highest Platform
of his Castle, from whence whilst it approached by little and little to the
Wall, he continually discharged his lusty Arrows into the Town, and against
those who defended the Walls, scarce one of them falling in Vain; for as he was
without Contradiction one of the strongest men of his Time, so he was the most
dextrous and the best Marksman of his Age; which has given Rise to the Story,
which will have it, That seeing three Birds flying to the Top of one of the
Towers of Jerusalem, he shot them all three upon one single Arrow. And for this
Reason it is, that it is the received Opinion that those vast Arrows which are
kept in the Armory of the House of Lorrain, one of the most Illustrious of the
World, were his, since it cannot be doubted but he was descended from that
Noble Stem. Godfrey had placed in the second Stage of his Castle the two
Brothers Lethold and Engelbert most Vallant Gentlemen of Tournay, and Guicher
the stoutest man in the whole Army, who incountring with a Lion had cut him in
two at one single Blow of his Sword; these seconded the Efforts of their Noble
Master, and being accompanied with a many other Gallant Men, they did wonderful
Execution with the Sling and Arrows, and in playing their Stone Bows, which
without ceasing poured continual Showers from their Platform upon the Town. The
other Princes also acted with the like Vigor, some levelling the Ground, that
so the Castles might more easily advance, whilst others presented the Scalade
in many several places together, thereby to make the greater Diversion to the
Defendants, whilst at the same time the Walls were battered continually with
mighty Rams. There was one of a Prodigious Magnitude, with which after they had
overthrown the Out-Wall to make Way for Duke Godfrey's Castle, they also played
so vigorously against the Inward Wall that therewith they made a very great
Breach.

Those within the Town in the mean time sorgot nothing which might contribute
to the rendering the Attempts of the Beliegers fruitless, whom they exceeded
both in Number of Men and Engines. All their Walls were covered with them, and
they opposed four of an extraordinary Size against the three Rolling Castles,
from which they discharged Stones of a Prodigious Bigness, which hitting the
Engines fell upon the Platforms with a Terrible Noise, crushing, overthrowing
and tearing all in pieces, breaking the Braces and Posts, and crushing all
those who did not quickly get Shelter from that furious Tempest. The very Air
was obscured with that mighty Hail, and the Stones which were discharged from
one side and the other encountering one another, seemed to Combat as well as the
Men, and with a Terrible Noise fell down together among the Assailants, against
whom the Besieged shoured down without ceasing their Arrows, Darts and Stones,
to hinder their Approaches; they also threw abundance of Pots of Fire, and shot
Fire Darts against the Machines to burn them, and at the same time made a
furious Sally at the Breach which was made by the great Ram, to which they set
Fire, which was not without great Difficulty extinguished. In short, never was
there seen so long an Assault, nor a Combat maintained with that Equal
Obstinacy on both Parts, for it was only the Night and the extreme Weariness
that obliged them on both sides to give over as it were to take a little Breath.

Machines which were already much indamaged, and especially that of the Earl of
Tholose, which was rendered in a manner wholly unserviceable. But however they
wrought so hard upon it in the Night, that the next morning the Combat was
renewed on one side and the other with more Fury than before. The Christians
irritated by so long a Resistance made their utmost Efforts, resolute either to
lose all or to gain all; and the Sarasins animated by the Success of the two
preceding days, and by the hope of present Succor, which the Sultan of Babylon
had promised them, fought with new Courage, and with so much Assurance of
Victory, that they could not forbear insulting over their Enemies, and
assailing their Assailants. Above all they aimed at Duke Godfrey, against whose
Machin, whilst it advanced over the great Breach in the Out-Wall, they threw a
vast Quantity of Fireworks and huge Stones, one of which crushed with its fall
one of his Esquires just by his side. There were also two famous Magicians whom
they brought to the Walls, who promised to stop the Dukes Castle by their
Enchantments; but while the poor Wretches were busy muttering their foolish
Charms, a great Stone thrown from one of the Dukes Slings spoiled their
Conjurations, and crushing them both together sent them down to those Infernal
Spirits which they were in Vain calling up to their Assistance.

The Assault had now lasted till one of the Clock in the Afternoon without any
manner of Appearance of Advantage than it was the day before, when the Soldiers
discouraged to see themselves so often repulsed, began a little to relax of
their former Ardor, and indeed to recoil in Despair of ever being able to force
so many brave Men who defended themselves with so much Vigor and Advantage,
which the Sarasins perceiving sent forth great Cries of Joy, intermingled with
Horrible Blasphemies and Insulting Language against the Christians, reproaching
them with the Cowardice and Impotence of their Crucisied God; when Duke
Godfrey, whether he really was assured that he saw it, or whether his
Imagination heated by the Ardor of the Combat and filled with the Images of War
represented it to him, cried out amain, That Heaven was come to their Succor,
and that he saw upon his left hand upon the Top of Mount Oliver a Celestial
Cavalier, who shaking a shining Buckler toward the City gave the Signal to
enter it: And that which is most surprising is that the Earl of Tholose who
fought at a great distance from him against another part of the City, declared
the same thing at the same time to his Soldiers; so that one must either
conclude that these two Princes had before agreed this matter between them, to
re-incourage their Men when they saw them a little abate of their Courage and
Vigor; or else that by chance some Cavalier of the Army at that time getting
upon that Hill, was by the Princes who saw him at the same time taken for a
Warriour-Saint who was descended from Heaven to their Succor. Let it be as it
will, it is certain that this Vision, or at least the Belief that it was very
true, had the most admirable Effect that ever was seen; for no sooner was the
Report blown about, but the Soldiers persuading themselves that it was St.
George, who as the whole Army believed he had done at the Battle of Antioch,
was come again to sight for them, instantly reassumed such a new Courage that
they became quite other men; for they returned to the Combat like so many
furious Lions, and even all, without distinction of Age, Sex or Condition,
rushed in to the Assault, the Sick and Maimed not Excepted, ran before the
Rolling Machins; so that having in less than an Hour levelled the Way which
hindered their advancing, they pushed them Home to the innermost Wall, where for
some time they fought at push of Pike and Javelin.

But Godfrey who was resolute to throw himself into the Town, bethought himself
of an Invention which facilitated his Passage and cleared the Walls in a
Moment; for the Enemies to break the Force of the Blows of the Stones and Rams
which battered the Walls, had put abundance of Sacks filled with Chaff, Hay and
Wool, Rugs, and Alatresses, pieces of Cables and Ropes, and a hundred other
things of that Nature which they thought would by yielding and giing way,
North, and was upon his Back, made a great quantity of fire Darts be shot
against that soft and combustible Matter, which catching hold of them, very
easily set them in a moment all into a Blaze; the Flame which rose very high,
with a mighty thick Smoke, being driven by the Violence of the Wind, upon the
Faces of those who defended the Walls, and the two adjoining Towers, on the
Right and Left, they were forced at last to Retire and leave the Place Empty.
The Duke thereupon immediately letting down his Drawbridge, which was of an
exact Height to rest upon the Wall, descended instantly to the second Stage,
where putting himself at the Head of all those brave Men which accompanied him,
he threw himself, with his Sword in his Hand, into the Town, having at his Side
Eustace his Brother, Baldwin Earl of Bourg his Cousin, and the two Valiant
Brothers of Tournay, Lethold and Engelbert, who were followed by the brave
Guicher, and that choice Troop of Lords and Gentlemen, who never Abandoned the
Duke. In a little while after, the Duke of Normandy, the Earl of Flanders, and
Tancred, having used the same Artifice to drive the Enemies from the Walls,
threw their Bridge over the Wall also, and entered at the Angular Tower, being
sollowed by Gaston de Foix, the Earls Hugh de St. Paul, Gerrad de Rousillon,
Raimband de Orange, Louis de Mouson, Conon de Montaign, Lambert his Son, and
all the rest, who desired to have a share in the Glory of these great Men.

In the same Instant, the Soldiers seeing that the Princes threw themselves
into the Town, followed by the principal Persons of the Army, they were so
Animated, that they ran to the Assault of their own Accord, every one in the
way that his Courage Inspired him with, these presented the Ladders, and pushed
one another forward to gain the Battlements which the Enemies had Abandoned,
those mounted the second Stage of the Castles, to pass over the Bridges, and
the greatest part desperately threw themselves in at the Breach which had been
made the day before; so that all the North Side of the Town was immediately
filled with the Crusades, who ran to break open the Damascus Gate, by which the
rest of the Troops instantly Entered. So that the Victory being now Assured,
they used the Right they had to it, with the utmost Rigor, against those
Enemies which they thought they were bound utterly to Exterminate, to Revenge
the Outrages which they had Committed against Christ Jesus, and the Barbarous
Cruelties which they had so often Exercised against the Christians: All being
promiscuously put to the Sword, except such as acknowledged themselves to be of
that Religion; all that were found in the Streets or Marketplaces were cut in
pieces, and nothing was to be seen but the flying off of Heads, Legs and Arms
cut off, and the Carcases of Dismembered Bodies; the Streets ran with little
Rivulets of Blood, and it was impossible to step without treading upon Bodies
of Men dead or dying; and few there were that escaped this first Fury, for the
poor Christians who remained at Jerusalem, mingling with the Soldiers, showed
them the Houses of the Sarasins, who killed the very Children in the Arms of
their Mothers, if it were possible to extinguish that accursed Race, as God had
sometimes Commanded the wicked Amalekites to be Destroyed utterly. The greatest
part however of them, saved themselves in the Palace and in the Temple,
believing they should there find a Sanctuary, till this first Fury of the
Vanquishers began to Relent: But the Vengeance of God which pursued them, made
them Assemble thither, to deliver them all together, more easily into the Hands
of those whom he had chosen to Execute the Sentence of his Justice against
them; For Tancred and Gaston de Foix, followed with great Numbers, Forcing
those Places, made such a horrible Slaughter of those Miserables, that those
who Assisted at that lamentable Spectacle, assure us, that the Temple and the
Porch, were so filled with Blood, that it flowed in great Streams, and that
they were forced to wade out of it quite over their Shoes.

All this while Earl Raymond combated still upon his Quarter, with those who
defended that part of the Town which lies between the South and West, hard by
the Tower of David, where the Emir or Governor fought in Person. The Earl
receiving Intelligence by three Gentlemen who were sent from Duke Godfrey, that
the Town was taken; Ha! what? cried he to his People, The French are already in
Jerusalem, and we are yet disputing our Entry with these Sarasins. These Words
so Animated the Gascons and the Provencals, that some planting the Ladders, and
others throwing the Bridge of their Castle over the Wall, they threw themselves
in Flocks into the Town, where the Enemies, who at the same time understood by
the horrible and consused Cries behind them, that the Christians had carried
the Town, immediately sled and retired into the Fortress; the Governor then
seeing the Town was taken upon all Sides, offered the Earl instantly to
surrender the Place, provided he would save his Life, and give him Liberty to
Retire to Ascalon: This, the Earl, who was glad to have so strong a Fort in his
Power, easily accorded to; so the Emir opening the Gates, all the Earls Army
entered the Town, and began on their side to do the same Execution which the
Troops of the other Princes had done; all went down without Quarter, in the
Streets, in the Houses, and in the Porch of the Temple, where they sinished the
Slaughter of those who had escaped the Massacre which their Companions had
made. The Number of the Slain in this only Quarter, amounted to ten thousand,
those which were Slain upon the Walls, in the Streets, and Houses, could not be
Computed; it suffices to say, that all were Slain, except a very few Slaves who
were spared to cleanse the City, which was doing for three days after, the dead
Carcasses being piled up in prodigious Heaps in the neighboring Valleys, and
so Burnt. There were about three hundred Sarasins, who had saved themselves
from the Slaughter, in the Temple upon the Roof, who having obtained their
Lives of Tancred, and his Banner, which they erected in token that he had taken
them into his Protection; but the next Morning they were all slain by some of
the other Troops, whereat when Tancred was mightily displeased, looking upon it
as a base Action, the other Princes appeased him, by remonstrating to him, that
it might be of dangerous Consequence to spare those People, who might do them a
great many Mischiefs in the War which they must expect to make with the Sultan
of Babylon. In short, never was there seen a more Complete and Terrible
Vengeance than this which was taken upon these Infidels, upon this Occasion;
all their Houses were Plundered, and the whole Army found wherewith to Enrich
themselves beyond Imagination; and such Quantity of Provisions, besides what
was laid up in the Magazins, as might have served them, if the Siege had
lasted, without being raised, as long as did that of Antioch.

But the richest Booty was that which Tancred got in the Temple of Solomon,
from whence he took an inestimable Treasure in Silver, Gold, and precious
Stones, all which he most generously gave to Duke Godfrey, as to the Person, to
whose only Courage and Conduct it was due; and God by this way was pleased to
make him a Recompense for his Piety, which was no less Heroic than his Courage
in this Rencounter. For whilst all the rest fell upon the quarry of the Spoil,
he, so soon as he had taken Care for the Safety of the Town, went Bare-soot,
and without his Arms, by the West Gate, Accompanied with only three of his own
Domestics, and so Re-entring by the East Gate, he repaired to the Holy
Sepulcher, there to pay to Christ Jesus his most Humble and Ardent Thanks for
the Mercy shown him, in giving him the Happiness, after so many Dangers, to
Accomplish his Wishes and his Vow, in the Deliverance of the Holy City. There
is certainly, nothing that acts so powerfully upon the Minds of People, as the
Example of their Prince, be it Evil, or be it Good; this Devout Action of Duke
Godfrey, did so sensibly touch the whole Army, that passing all of the sudden,
from one Extremity to another, the Princes, the Captains, the Soldiers, the
People, and generally all the Crusades, together with the Christians of
Jerusalem, went in Procession to prostrate themselves at the Holy Sepulcher;
and that which was most Admirable, they there paid their Vows with so many
Tears and Sighs, and so many Marks of a Devotion infinitely Tender, that one
could difficultly have believed that these were People who had come to take a
City by Assault, and to make such a dreadful Slaughter among their Enemies,
seeing them now so busy at their Devotions, and in such deep Meditation of the
Mysteries of Religion, which seemed to have made so absolute a Change and
Alteration in their Hearts, by the Power of that Grace of God, Jerusalem
recovered from the Infidels by the Army of the Crusades, in the fourth Year of
their Expedition, the fifteenth day of July, upon a Friday, and which is most
Remarkable, at the very precise Hour wherein the Savior of the World rendered
his Blessed Soul into the Hands of Almighty God his Father; as if the Divine
Providence had determined so to manage the Movements of this great Affair, that
the Christians should recover his Inheritance, exposing their Lives for his
Glory, at the same time wherein he had assured them of Immortality and Glory in
Heaven, by dying upon the Cross to purchase it for them.

Eight days after this happy Conquest, during which time News was brought of
the Death of the Patriarch Simeon, who was Deceased in the Isle of Cyprus, the
Princes and Lords who followed them, Assembled to Reestablish the ancient
Kingdom of Jerusalem, by giving it a King, as David and Solomon, and the other
Princes their Successors had been, till the Babylonish Captivity. Count Raymond
of Tholose was then proposed, but whether he thought himself in the Age to
which he was advanced, too weak to sustain so weighty a Charge, or feared that
this Civility which was offered him would not succeed, in regard his own
People, who had already twice forsaken him, acted secretly against his
Pretensions, he excused himself by reason of his Age, and would by no means
suffer it to proceed to an Election. The same Honor was also offered to Robert
Duke of Normandy; but this Prince having a great Desire to return as soon as he
could, had no other design but to get his Chaplain to be chosen Patriarch; and
it is with great probability of Appearance, that it was he who made the Speech
which one of the Writers of that time has transmitted to us, which proposed
that double Election after this manner.

My Lords, Since it is full time, after having Accomplished so happily our Vow
in this Glorious Expedition, that we should now begin to think of Returning
into Europe, to Govern in our Persons those Estates which God has there been
pleased to give us; and since you have also thought it expedient, with all
convenient Dispatch, to take care for the Government of this Place, which we
came to reconquer from the Infidels; Now my Lords, this Capital and Holy City
of Jerusalem, being both a Royalty and a Patriarchate, it is necessary that it
should have both a King and a Patriarchate; the Royalty and the Priesthood are
so nearly linked together, and accord so well, that the one cannot be without
the other; for that has need of the Priesthood to procure the Blessings of
Heaven, and this stands in need of the Royalty to support it, and strengthen
that Spiritual Authority which God has Invested it withal. It is our Duty to
give our Assistance to the Clergy, in the Choice of a Pastor for this Church,
who may be a Man of Wisdom, Probity, Spirit and Eloquence, capable of so great
an Office; and all this we have Experienced in Arnold de Rohes, who is without
Contradiction, the most Knowing and Able Man of all the Ecclesiastics who have
followed the Army; and therefore I am of Opinion that we, who are to take Care,
as much as possibly we can, of this Church, ought to Recommend him to their
Election for a Patriarch. As for that which concerns a King, which is wholly in
our own Power, I can see nothing that should Oblige us to defer the Election
for one Moment, for it is most evident that we ought to Choose without any sort
of Hesitation, that Person, whose Piety, Modesty, Prudence, sweet Temper,
Clemency, Justice, Integrity, Liberality, Experience in War, Generosity,
Valor, Successfulness, Reputation, and the Glory which he has acquired in a
thousand noble Occasions, whose strength of Age, of Body, of Spirit whose
Nobleness, admirable Composure, and very Air of Greatness and Majesty, worthy
of an Empire, and a hundred other Perfections, conspire to rank him among the
greatest Kings that ever were. My Lords, All these extraordinary Qualities
which render themselves so Conspicuous in the Person that possesses them, make
it appear wholly unnecessary for me to name him, and must needs have prevented
me in that Design, nor is it what I can say, but it comes from an Authority far
Superior to mine. God himself, in giving him these surpassing Advantages above
the rest of Mankind, has himself named the Person whom he has chosen like a
second David to be the King of Jerusalem, It is the Illustrious Godfrey of
Bullen, Duke of Lorrain, and that --

Godfrey, all the whole Assembly Interrupted him, crying out with the same Mind
and Voice, Godfrey, Godfrey, long Live Godfrey the most puissant and pious King
of Jerusalem. And notwithstanding all the Resistance which the Modesty of that
excellent Prince brought to oppose it, he was obliged instantly to consent to
the Election, which by so sudden and universal Consent, manifested it self to
have the Divine Will and Approbation.

The very same day he was Conducted to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, and
there Proclaimed King, amidst the Acclamations of the whole Army, and all the
Christians of the Country, who came flocking in to Inhabit the City of
Jerusalem. He was there presented with a Crown of Gold, which he absolutely
refused, protesting that he would never wear a Crown of Gold in a City where
the King of Kings, had for the Sake of Mankind worn a Crown of Thorns. And tho
he would not take upon himself the Title of King, yet it was constantly given
him, as all the Historians of that time, and Posterity have ever since done, to
this very Day; and certainly never any King better deserved to wear that
glorious Title, which he adorned with so many Royal Actions; the first was of
Piety, for he Founded two Chapters of Canons in the Churches of the Temple, and
the Holy Sepulcher, as also a Monastery in the Valley of Jehosaphat. The second
was of his Power and Authority, in Obliging Count Raymond to put into his
Hands, the strong Fortress of the Tower of David, which he pretended to keep in
his Possession, at least, till his Return into France though he was generally
Condemned by the whole Army for it, and even by his own Gascons and
Provencalls. The third was an Action of incomparable Valor and Conduct,
manifested in that memorable Victory which he obtained over the Sultan of
Egypt; for the Sultan coming too late to Succor his People, Advanced with a
formidable Army to Besiege Jerusalem, but King Godfrey eased him of that
Trouble; For so soon as he received that News, he sent to recall Tancred, and
Earl Eustace, who were Marched to take the Fortress of Napolis, otherwise
called Sichem and Sichar, formerly the place where Samaria had stood: And as
these two Princes, who were Advanced as far as Rama, where they took some of
the Enemies Scouts, had Advertised him, that the Sultan was Encamped at
Ascalon, a City upon the Seacoast, two good days Journeys from Jerusalem,
toward Egypt, he resolved to go to meet him, and notwithstanding the
prodigious Inequality of their Forces, to give him Battle.

For this Purpose, having first Implored the Help of Heaven by public Prayers,
at which he assisted with mavelous Devotion, he parted from Jerusalem upon
Tuesday the eleventh day of August, with the Earl of Flanders, and that Arnold
de Rohes, who, by an Intrigue, which is no part of my History to relate, was
now chosen Patriarch of Jerusalem, with the Consent of the Pope. This new
Patriarch, who, for very many Reasons was not so very agreeable to the
generality of the People, thought to acquire Reputation, by showing his
extraordinary Zeal upon this Occasion: He therefore left Peter the Hermit to
take Care that Prayers might be made to God Almighty for the happy Success of
the Arms of the King, whom he would follow, carrying with him, to Encourage the
Soldiers, a part of the Wood of the true Cross, which an honest Christian had
hid during the Siege, lest the Sarasins should profane it. The same day the
King joined Tancred and Count Eustace, waiting the coming up of the Duke of
Normandy and Earl Raymond, who met him at Ibelin, which was Anciently the City
of Gath, one of the five Cities of the Lords of the Philistines, some few Miles
from Lidda and Ramula. The next day they advanced together to the Brook Soreck,
which was not above two or three Leagues from the Enemies Camp. There they
found a prodigious Number of Horses, Oxen, Camels, Asses, Sheep, and Goats,
which were guarded by some Arabians, who were easily Routed, some of them being
taken Prisoners, by whom they gained Intelligence of the Posture of the
Enemies; so that they easily Seized upon these Flocks and Herds of Cattle, but
there being reason to fear that this was but a Snare, which the Sultan had laid
for the Christian Army, to fall upon them whilst they were busy in dividing
the Prey, the King expressly Prohibited all Persons to meddle with the Booty,
and not to think of taking any thing from the Enemy, till they had gained the
Battle which they were going to give them.

Friday, and the Eve of the Assumption of our Lady, the Army at break of day
passed without any Trouble the Torrent, which at that dry Season of the Summer
had but very little Water in it; and the Sultan, who could never persuade
himself that the Christians would dare to be so hardy as to Advance to him, had
given no Order to hinder their Passage, or to Dispute it with them. Never was
there seen a greater Ardor than appeared in the Countenances of the Soldiers
upon this Occasion; so much Joy, and so much Assurance of Victory appeared
amongst them, tho they were but a handful of Men in comparison of the infinite
Multitude of their Enemies; for those who speak with the least, assure us that
there were a hundred thousand Horse, and above three hundred thousand Foot in
their Army; for the Sultan, who had set his Resolution, either to Preserve or
Recover Jerusalem, had Amassed all the Soldiers, that possibly he could, out of
Egypt, Lybia, Africa, Ethiopia, Arabia, and the Towns which were yet Possessed
by the Turks, who joined with him against the Christians, as their common
Enemies: And the Historians who speak the most of the Christians, will not
allow them to be above twenty thousand, among which, about five thousand Horse,
they being not in a Condition to Re-mount the Cavalry since the Taking of
Jerusalem. But that which gave this Confidence to the Christians, besides the
Contempt which they had of these Numbers of Sarasins, which they made no
account of, was the Zeal which they had for the Glory of Christ Jesus, and the
eager Desire which boiled in their Hearts, to Revenge the horrible Blasphemy of
the Sultan: For they had learned from the Prisoners, that this impious
Miscreant had haughtily threatened to Extirpate all the Christians and their
Religion out of the East, that he would raze the very Foundations of the Holy
Sepulcher, and utterly Ruin all the Monuments of Christian Religion, and
thereby spoil the Longing of those of the West, to make any more such Voyages
to Jerusalem.

They passed then over the Torrent, with Trumpets Sounding, and great Shouts of
Joy, as if it had been in Triumph, and that they intended with their small Army
to Affront the mighty Number of their Despised Enemies: But it happened by a
very surprising Accident, that the Mistake of their Enemies supplied the Defect
of their Number, by making them appear to be far more than in Reality they
were, which mistake produced all the Effect that could have been hoped or
wished, had they been really so many as they appeared to be; for that mighty
number of Cattle which had been taken the day before, and which the King had
forbidden the Soldiers to meddle with, followed the Army as they passed the
Rivulet, and without being in the least Conducted by any, Ranged themselves in
the order of Troops upon their March, as if it had been the Rere-guard of an
Army, extending themselves to the left Hand, to the very Foot of the Mountains
which border upon the East, covering all that large Campain, which from the
Brook extends it self even to Ascalon, which lies on the right Hand upon the
Sea Coast; and as these Animals filled all the Plain, even to the Mountains,
and that the Horses Excited by the Noise of the Trumpets, fell to Neighing,
according to their courageous Nature, in such a manner that they might be heard
afar off, so these great Herds of other Cattle in Marching, raised such mighty
Clouds of Dust between them and the Sarasins, that not being able to
distinguish clearly, they took them for part of the Christian Army, and
particularly, for Squadrons of Cavalry, and consequently their Fear also
multiplying them in their amazed Imaginations, they conjectured that their
Number was not at all inferior to theirs; whereupon they were Seized with a
general Consternation, and not being able to disabuse their troubled
imaginations, they stood as if they had been stupid, thinking they were to deal
with a million of Christians, who since the taking of Jerusalem, were Arrived
from the West.

In the mean time the Armies being thus near, there was a necessity of
Fighting; that of the Christians was divided into three Bodies, Count Raymond
Commanded the Right Point, which was extended to the Sea, that so they might
not be Surrounded on that side; The King took the Left, that so he might be
opposite to the Right of the Enemy where their Principal Squadrons were ranged:
The Duke of Normandy, the Earl of Flanders, Tancred, Gaston de Foix were in the
middle with the main Body of the Battle: These three Bodies were ranged upon
two Lines, in the first of which were drawn up the Infantry with very large
Intervals between the Batalions, and in the second the Cavalry, following here
in the new Order which the King had given and which was most exactly well
performed, thereby to put the Enemies in Disorder; The Enemies were also drawn
up in two long Lines, wherein the Batalions and Squadrons, had a great depth
and looked like two great Armies separated one from the other a great distance,
that they might not confound and indamage one another by reason of their
Multitude. The Lieutenant General, who was an Armenian Renegade, and the same
that had taken Jerusalem from the Turks the Year before, commanded the Right
Wing, where were the Turkish Auxiliary Troops and the greatest Part of the
Cavalry, which enlarged themselves toward the Mountain to charge the
Christians in the Flank. The Affricans and the Arabians were in the Left, and
the Sultan himself with the Egyptians, environed with all his Braves of
Babylon and Grand Cairo, was in the main Battle; the Ethiopians had the Van in
Regard of their manner of Fight, which was to expect the Enemy with one Knee
upon the Ground, and after having in this Posture discharged their Arrows, they
made use of certain Iron Flails with which they discharged weighty Blows upon
the Casks and Bucklers of their Enemies to break them in pieces; The Sultan had
caused it to be proclaimed among the Ranks as they stood in Batalia, that there
were no more Christians than that pitiful Company which faced them, and that
the great Number with which their Imagination was so disturbed was nothing but
a pure Illusion; that he would not have them permit one single man of these
Robbers to escape, whom the Despair of being able to escape his hands, and no
other reason had brought to the Battle. But the fear which had already seized
upon the Judement of these Barbarians, would not suffer them to understand any
thing that was said, nor give them leave to disbelieve their misinformed
Senses, which told them they saw what indeed was not, an infinite Number of
Enemies whom they were to encounter.

The Crusades all this time advanced still deliberately, encouraged by the
King, who spoke much better to them by the Language of that Joy which they saw
in his Countenance, the Fire that mounted into his Eyes, and the Assurance of
his Mine, Fierce and yet seeming to despise and contemn his Enemies, and by the
Terrible Glittering of his Sword, than by any words he could have spoken, which
would difficultly have been understood among the Noise of the Trumpets and the
cheerful shouts which the Soldiers gave when they saw him in that Condition. So
soon as they were come within distance, the Infantry according to the Order
which had been given, all together discharged their Arrows, and at the same
time the Horse ran at full Speed in the Intervals between the Batalions, with
their Lances couched against the Sarasins, and performed the Charge so swiftly
that they did not give them Liberty to draw their Bows; above all, the Brave
Duke of Normandy, who was accustomed in every Battle to distinguish himself by
some great and Illustrious Action, having observed the great Standard by its
shining Embroidery of Silver, and the Golden Apple which glistered under the
point of it, he ran upon him who carried it, and tumbled him dead at the Feet
of the Sultans; all the rest in their places charged so Home, and the Foot also
without further troubling their Darts or Arrows, with their Swords flew in like
Lightning at the Breach which the Horse had made in the Batalions, so that the
Sarasins already shaken with the Fear which their false Imagination had
imprinted in their Hearts, made a very miserable Resistance, and so absolutely
lost their Courage and their Sense, that throwing away their Arms, some of them
stood immovable as if they had been stupid, and suffered themselves to be
Slain without making any manner of Defense, whilst others of them scrambled up
the Trees which were there, the Soldiers fetching them down with a certain
Cruel Pleasure with their Arrows as if they had been little Birds; some of them
threw themselves down upon the Earth, either thinking to escape Death by
counterfeiting it among the Heaps of those that were dead, Ethiopians upon whom
Godfrey and his Troops fell, cutting off Heads and Arms with mighty Blows of
the Cimiter, in that very Posture wherein he found them with one knee on the
Ground, they never offering to make one Discharge against him. Those on the
Left Wing, where the Gascons and Provencals under Earl Raymond fought, made
also a most bloody Execution, and charged the Enemy so impetuously, that to
avoid their Death they hastened it, throwing themselves and crouding one
another Headlong into the Sea, where they were swallowed up in a Moment,
sparing the Victorious Christians the Trouble of killing them with the Mortal
Steel. In a word, all the rest betook themselves to flight, and in flying broke
and entangled those of the Second Line who had not yet struck a Blow; but yet
that did not prevent their having a share in the Misfortune of the first, for
the Conquerors eagerly pursued the Fugitives, killing them continually to the
very Gates of Ascalon.

There the Crowd was so great, every one striving to be foremost to save
himself, and they precipitated one another over the Drawbridge in such
Numbers, that two thousand of them were drowned and smothered in the Moat. The
Sultan himself unable to stop the flight of his Men, had like there to have
perished; and not thinking himself safe in the Town he quitted it, and with the
have of a flying Coward threw himself aboard the Ships which he had in the Port
laden with all sorts of Engines for the Siege of Jerusalem. It is true that
some of the Crusades made too much have to fall to the Plunder, insomuch that
they were in Danger of being surprised by the Lieutenant General who had
rallied some Troops to make his Advantage of such an Opportunity; but the King
whose Vigilant Eye was every where, perceiving it run immediately to their
Succor, and not only disingaged his own men, but cut in pieces those miserable
Remnants of his Enemies, and thereby rendered the Victory absolute and complete,
although it was not yet much above twelve of the Clock. After which he gave the
Pillage to the Victorious Army, which got there the Richest Booty that they had
hitherto met withal during the whole War: for the Great Lords of Babylon, and
all the considerable Persons of Egypt and the Neighboring Regions, were come
in their most magnificent Equipage to attend the Sultan, who had also brought
with him an inestimable Treasure, and vast Quantities of all manner of
Provisions for the Entertainment of so great an Army: and besides, they who
were to share in this prodigious Booty were but an inconsiderable Number in
Comparison of those who had been Parties in the other Battles. In this Battle
there were slain thirty thousand upon the place, and twice as many in the
Pursuit in, the whole above one hundred thousand Men, without counting those
who were stifled at the Gate of Ascalon, or those others who threw themselves
into the Sea, which though they were a great Number yet it was impossible to
compute them. On the part of the Christians there was not any one man of Note,
nor so much as one Horseman slain, and but a very inconsiderable Number of the
Infantry, and of those, most were of that unruly sort of Soldiers who disbanded
themselves from their Colors to run to the Plunder. Thus the King having
assured his new Kingdom by this great and Memorable Victory, led the Army back
again laden with Spoils and Glory to Jerusalem, where it entered in a kind of
Triumph which was finished by the solemn returning of Thanks to Jesus Christ at
his Holy Sepulcher; There Robert Duke of Normandy hung up the great Standard of
the Sultan, as his Sword also, which in his Flight he had let fall, and which
to add to his Offering, he bought of a Soldier who had found it.

See here the true Account of the Battle of Ascalon, which was rather a flight
on the one side, and a Slaughter on the other, than a Combat; which Tasso
nevertheless has rendered famous by a hundred Beautiful and Magnificent
Falsities, which his Art gives him the License to add throughout his Poem, of
which he makes this the Conclusion, as indeed it was also of this first Crusade.

For the Princes and great Lords with those who had followed them, believing
that they had fully accomplished their Vow, took their Leave of the King to
return into their respective Countries and Habitations; Crusades, and not only
that of the Realm of Jerusalem which I undertake to write, I shall not treat of
that but so concisely as may be, and as it has a necessary Connection to that
of the Crusades, in making it known by the Consequent Events, the Occasions and
the Causes which gave Birth and Rise to the others, and as it shows the
Condition in which the Christian Princes found the East when they were
published, and when they undertook their Voyages to assist them.

Crusades to the Number of about twenty thousand had quitted the Holy Land,
Godfrey, who had not remaining with him more than three hundred Horse and about
two thousand Foot, together with Tancred who never abandoned him, received a
reinforcement from Italy, which was brought him by Dambert Archbishop of Pisa,
Legate to Pope Paschal the second, who succeeded Pope Urban. It was with these
few Troops that the King to enlarge the Frontiers of his new Kingdom conquered
the places which were yet untaken round about Jerusalem; After which he made
himself Master of Tiberias, and other Towns upon the Lake of Genazareth, and
the greatest part of Galilee the Government whereof he bestowed upon Tancred.
He compelled also the Emirs of Ptolemais, Cesarea, Antipatris, and Ascalon to
become his Tributaries; and the Arabian Princes beyond Jordan, in most humble
manner to beg Peace of him. After which he caused the Port and the City of
Joppa, which afterward was called Jaffa, to be fortified, where he received
the Succors of the Venetians, who being joined with Tancred, some time after
took Caiphas at the Foot of Mount Carmel. And now after so many Toils being
fallen sick he caused himself to be removed to Jerusalem, whereupon the eight
day of July in the fortieth Year of his Age, and the first of his Reign he
rendered his glorious Soul into the Hands of his Almighty Redeemer by a most
Religious Death. He was a Prince in whom all the Virtues, Christian, Civil, and
Military were assembled in the highest Point of Humane Perfection without the
Mixture of any Default, so that it will for ever remain difficult to find
another like him, or of whom one may without the Magnifying Vice of Flattery
say the same things, even among the Catalogue of the greatest Saints.

Baldwin his Brother succeeded him; and leaving to his Consin Baldwin Earl of
Bourg, the Principality of Edessa, with a few Troops marched to Jerusalem, from
whence Tancred, after having rendered Caiphas into his Hands, was retired, in
Order to his taking upon him the Principality of Antioch, during the
Imprisonment of his Uncle Bohemond, who had, by an Ambuscade which they laid
for him, been taken by the Turks.

Genoa, at Jaffa, he with their Assistance took Antipatris and Cesarea, and in
Conclusion, in a set Battle Vanquished the Army of the Sarasins of Egypt, but
the Year following, Rama, without staying for his Infantry, though his Army
consisted in twenty thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse, he lost the Bactle,
and many French Princes and Lords, who at that time were come to visit the Holy
Places. For so soon as it was known in France, that Jerusalem was taken, there
were an Infinite Number of People of all Ages and Qualities, who for Devotion
undertook that Voyage; the Principal Persons were Hugh the Great, and the Earl
of Blois, who being retired into France, the one before, the other after the
taking of Antioch, thought to repair that Fault by this second Voyage; also the
Earls William de Poitiers, Geoffry de Vendosme, Stephen de Burgogne, and Hugh
Brother to Earl Raymond of Tholose, who having stayed some time at
Constantinople to treat with the Emperor Alexis, joined themselves with those
Princes.

The other Nations, and particularly the Lombards and the Cermans would also
have a part in this Expedition; and the Number of these new Pilgrims was so
excessive great, that counting also the French, there arrived when they passed
into Asia, Jerusalem, I do not reckon this among the Crusades. And indeed,
there never was one more irregular, or less fortunate; for the greatest part of
these ill conducted Pilgrims perished by the Miseries of the Way, or by the
Arms of the Turks under Soliman with whom the Persidious Alexis had beforehand
complotted their Destruction; there perished a hundred thousand men, besides an
infinite Number of Women who were led into miserable Captivity. The Earl of
Poitiers having lost all, was reduced to the deplorable Necessity to make his
Voyage on Foot; Hugh the Great could not finish his, but died by the way at
Tarsus in Cilicia. The Earl of Tholose making Use of the small Remainder of the
Pilgrims to regain Tortosa from the Saracens, who had seized it, abandoned his
Benefactors, and fortified himself in his Conquest, following the Design which
he had always cherished to acquire some little Principality in the East. The
rest after having visited the Holy Places conducted by their ill Destiny,
completed their Misfortunes by joining with the King in this unhappy Battle;
only the Earl of Poitiers escaped, having taken Shipping at Jaffa in order to
his return into France; the rest who stayed were either slain upon the Place,
as were the Earls of Blois and Burgogne, or taken Prisoners, as were the Earl
of Bourges, and many other brave though unfortunate Persons. The King
nevertheless escaped to Rama; and in a few days having drawn together the
Troops of Antipatris, Tiberias, Jerusalem and Jaffa, into which Place he had
put himself, he made a Sally to so good purpose upon his Enemies, who prepared
to besiege him, that in the End he constrained them to take their Flight
leaving to him all the Marks of an absolute Victory, the Field of Battle, the
Bodies of the Slain, all their Engines and their Baggage. After which he took
Ptoelmais, by the Help of the Genoese who besieged it by Sea with seventy
Ships; he a second time defeated the Saracens of Egypt in the Plain of Rama, he
took the City of Tripolis, Bertrand the Son of the Earl of Tholose, Sidon,
Beritus, and all the Seacoast Towns excepting Tire, which he kept blocked up
by the Fortress of Scandalion which he caused to be built upon the Coast some
five Miles from that City, in the same place where Alexander the Great had
formerly formed his Camp when he besieged that City: In the End after having
also built upon the further side of Jordan, the Castle of Mont-Real, to bridle
the Incursions of the Arabians, and having carried his Victorious Arms even
into Egypt, Godfrey at the Foot of Mount Calvary, in a Chapel adjoining to the
Church of the Holy Sepulcher.

He left the Christians in Possession of four large Soveraignties which they
had conquered in the East; the first was the Earldom of Edessa which extended
it self from the further side of Euphrates to the River Tygris; the second was
the Principality of Antioch, in which was comprised all the Country which is
between Tarsus of Cilicia, toward the West, and the City of Maraclea on the
East, upon the Coast of the Phenician Sea as far as Tortosa. It was afterward
governed by Roger the Cousin of Tancred, after the Death of that brave Prince,
who had governed it till after the Deliverance of his Uncle; and then returning
into France, he married Constance the Daughter of King Philip the first, and
after having made War in Epirus and in Dalmatia with the Greek Emperor, he died
in Italy, leaving behind him a Son of his own Name. The third was the Earldom
of Tripolis, which extends it self along the Seacoast of Phenicia beyond
Maraclea as far as the River Adonis which runs between Biblis and Baruth. The
fourth was the Kingdom of Jerusalem, which beginning at the same River,
stretches it self almost to the Castle of Daron upon the Frontier of Idumea
near unto Egypt.

In this flourishing Estate stood the Affairs of the Christians in the East at
the death of Baldwin the second. His Brother Eustace, Earl of Bullen, who ought
to have succeeded him, was at that time in France; and in Regard there was a
Necessity that they should have a King who should be actually within the
Kingdom, Edessa, his Cousin, Baldwin de Bourg, who was at that time at
Jerusalem, was called to the Succession of the Kingdom, which he took upon him,
leaving the Earldom of Edessa to Josselin Earl of Courtenay who was his Kinsman.

Now in Regard that it was in the Beginning of his Reign that the Order of the
Knights Templers were first founded in his Palace, and that it is requisite
something should be said of these Knights, as also of the other Order which was
called Hospitallers, I think it will not be amiss in a few Words to inform the
Reader of the Original, the Intention, the manner of Living, and the Employ of
these Military Orders, which were established in Palestine under the first
Kings of Jerusalem.

It is certain, that before the Christian Princes had conquered the Holy Land
there were Hospitallers at Jerusalem, whereof some received and Entertained the
Pilgrims which came from all Parts of Christendom to visit the Holy Places; and
others of them had the Charge of the Poor Sick and Diseased People, and
particularly of the Lepers of which there were great Numbers in those times;
Those who were called the Hospitallers of St. Lazarus are far more Ancient than
the first of these, as appears by the great Number of Hospitals and
Insirmaries, of the Name of St. Lazarus, which were wholly intended and
principally in the East for such as were afflicted with the Leprosy. St.
Gregory Nazianzen assures us, that St. Basil built one at Cesarea dedicated to
the same Saint, the supposed Protector of the Lepers, and that he gave Rules to
these Charitable Hospitallers, who devoted themselves to the Service of those
diseased People. As for the others who made Profession to serve the Pilgrims of
the Holy Land, they were not in being till a long time after, that the
Merchants of Amalphi in Italy who trafficked into Syria, obtained Permission of
one of the Caliphs to build a Monastery near the Holy Sepulcher, to which they
added a Hospital and an Oratory dedicated to St. John the Eleemosynary, there
to receive the poor Pilgrims as well as the sick and diseased. For after they
were embodied into a Community, as formerly they took Care only of the Infirm
and Leprous; so now there were others who were particularly appointed to attend
the Pilgrims, and both the one and the other were indifferently called
Hospitallers; they lived a long time in this peaceable Exercise of Charity,
under one Superior who was called the Master of the Hospital; until that after
tho Conquest of Palestine by the Princes of the Crusade, they took up Arms not
only for the Desence of the poor Pilgrims, but also to serve the Kings of
Jerusalem, for whom they performed many notable Services in their Wars. And for
this Reason the Hospitallers divided their Community into three different
Ranks, of which the first was that of Knights who went to the Wars; the second
of Friars or Brothers Servitors, who had the Charge of the Sick and the
Pilgrims; and the third was that of Ecclesiastics and Chaplains who
administered the Sacraments; and this Company which was thus advanced into a
Military Order was also confirmed by Pope Paschal the second.

It was in Imitation of these Armed Hospitallers, that many others also much
about the same time, taking up the Profession of Arms at Jerusalem, began to
establish other new Military Orders. The first were those who had the Guard of
the Holy Sepulcher for many Ages, and that King Baldwin the First, of Canons
which they were before, changed them into Knights of the Holy Sepulcher. They
retired after the loss of the Holy Land into Italy where they settled at
Perouse, and continued there, till such time as Pope Innocent the eighth sent
them to the Knights of the Rhodes; the Fathers Cordeliers succeeded them in
keeping the Holy Sepulcher, and to this day retain the Power of giving the
Honor of Knighthood to such noble Persons as resort thither to visit the Holy
Places.

Some time after, about the Year 1118. nine French Gentlemen, of whom the
Principal were Hugh de Pain, and Geffry de Saint Omer, going to present
themselves before Guarimond the Patriarch of Jerusalem, he persuaded them so
Effectually, that between his Hands they took upon them a Vow of Chastity and
Obedience, Holy Land. King Baldwin gave them Lodgings in his Palace near the
Temple, and from thence they came to be called Templers, or Knights of the
Temple: They continued nine Years in this manner, their Number not at all
Increasing, and without all distinction of Habits, until the Year 1128, when
Pope Honorius the Second bestowed upon them at the Council of Troyes a Rule
with a white Habit, to which Eugenius the Third added a red Cross. And after
that time, as they acquired a mighty Reputation by their Virtue, Courage, and
admirable Things which they did against the Infidels, so their Order grew
mightily, and became so Puissant, by the great Estates which were every where
Conferred upon them, that they became equal in their Fortune to the greatest
Princes; But in Conclusion, these great Revenues, which at first were the
Recompenses, and the Testimonies of their Merit, became the Occasion of their
Misfortune; for from thence sprung those Disorders with which they are but too
justly Reproached, though possibly the Hatred into which they fell, by reason
of their Pride and Arrogance, may have represented those Disorders greater than
they were in Reality; yet it is certain that they gave an Occasion to the
Fathers of the Council of Vienna under Clement the Fifth, utterly to Extinguish
their Order, the greatest part of their fair Revenues being given to the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, Rhodes.

Immediately after the Establishment of this Order of the Templers, that of the
Knights of the Teutonick Order began, being Founded by the Charity of a Rich
German Lord, who having had his Part in the taking of Jerusalem, had resolved
there to pass the remainder of his Days with his Family, in the Exercises of
Piety. He, observing that many Pilgrims and poor Soldiers of his Nation,
suffered extremely in a Country where no body understood them, built a Hospital
at Jerusalem to receive them, and some time after an Oratory in Honor of the
Blessed Virgin; many Germans drawn by the Example of his so great Charity,
joined with him, and quitting their Estates to the Use of this Hospital,
devoted themselves to the Service of the Poor of their Nation; and there being
among them many Gentlemen, who had undertaken this Voyage, principally with a
Design to make War against the Infidels, they added to this Vow, that of
Fighting unto Death against the Enemies of Jesus Christ, herein following the
Conduct, Manner of Living, and the Rule of the Templers; until that about
seventy Years after Pope Celestin the third, Erected it into a military Order,
under the Rule of St. Augustine, for those of the German Nation only, giving
them a white Habit with a black Cross, to distinguish them from the Templers.
Nevertheless, they could after that do no manner of great Services to
Christendom in Syria, by reason that the Affairs of the Christians were then
become altogether Desperate; about thirty eight years after, the Emperor
Frederick the Second, Returning from his unfortunate Voyage to the Holy Land,
brought them all into Germany, under their fourth Great Master Herman Psaltza,
to whom he proposed the Conquest of Prussia from the barbarous People and
Pagans, who at that time Inhabited there. This Valiant Man entered the Country
with his Knights and two thousand others, who took upon them the Habit after
the Example of Conrade Marquess of Thuringia, who accompanied him with twenty
thousand Soldiers. In three Years time they made themselves Masters of all the
Country, Reducing the People to Christianity, and Built Marienburg to be the
chief Seat of their Order, giving it the Name of the Holy Virgin, their
Protectress. After which their Successors Possessed themselves of the greatest
part of the Northern Countries, which are on both sides of the Vistula,
Extending themselves and their Catholic Religion into Lithuania, continually
Augmenting their Power and Dominion, till after a long War which they had
undertaken against the King of Poland, that King Jagelon Defeated them in that
famous Battle, wherein they lost the greatest part of their Knights, who were
accompanied with the Slaughter of fifty thousand of their Soldiers, who
remained dead upon the Place. So that all Prussia being almost Revolted, the
Great Master to preserve his remaining Interest, was obliged to do Homage for
it to Casimire King of Poland. Afterward Frederick Duke of Saxony, coming to
be Great Master, Albert Marquis of Brandenburgh, who was chosen Great Master,
abandoning the Interests of the Order, to Establish his own particular Designs,
submitted himself to King Sigismond his Uncle, who of Great Master of the
Order, made him Duke of one part of Prussia, under the Sovereignty of Poland.
After which, this new Duke Renouncing the Catholic Religion, and Violating
his Vow of Knighthood, Married the Princess of Denmark, and in Conclusion, left
to his Posterity the Ducal Prussia: So that after this time, this Order,
sometimes so Celebrated and powerful, having Flourished more than three hundred
Years, was in a manner quite Extinguished: It is nevertheless still kept up in
Germany, where the Knights, which are the prime Nobility, possess great Estates
under the Authority of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order.

But whilst these Military Orders began thus much about the same time to
Establish themselves by little and little in Jerusalem, that of the
Hospitallers, both Ancient and Modern, which one may say, were the Model of the
others, made a great Progress in Palestine, and became of great Consideration
by the great Services which it Performed both in Peace and War, and upon this
Account, both the number of Pilgrims, as also of Soldiers and Gentlemen, who
entered into that Order, increasing daily, St. Gerard, the Provincial of the
Isle of Martigues, who was Master of the Hospitallers, when Jerusalem was taken
from the Sarasens, built about the Year 1112. a third Hospital, giving it the
Name of St. John Baptist, and there placed his new Knights, who a little time
after began to form the Design of following a Conduct and Manner of Living more
Austere, and more Perfect than that of the old Fraternity. And indeed, when
after the Death of Gerard, Friar Bryan Roger was chosen by plurality of Voices,
to be the Great Master of the Hospitallers; these new Knights of the third
Erection of St. John Baptist, persisting in their first Resolution of Living in
greater Perfection, would needs Imitate the Knights-Templers, and add to their
other Vows that of Chastity, they separated from the Ancient Hospitallers, and
chose for their Master Friar Raymond of Pavia, a Gentleman of Dauphiny, who
drew up for them new Constitutions, full of solid Christian Piety, which may be
seen in the Book of the Statutes of that Order, with the Approbation of Pope
Calixtus the Second, in the Year 1123. as also the Privileges which have been
granted to them by forty eight Sovereign Popes. After which time, to
distinguish themselves from the other, they called themselves the Knights of
the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, and wore a white Cross of eight Angles
upon a black Habit. This is that famous Order, which contrary to what usually
happens to other Establishments, has daily Increased for above this five
hundred Years, Advancing to the supreme Elevation of Splendour and Glory,
wherein it appears at this very Day: That Order, I say, which in all times has
had the Honor to have its Commanders and Knights of all that is Brave and
Generous among the Nobility of all Europe, and above all those Princes who have
been most Remarkable, and more distinguished by the Greatness of their Merit,
than by their Illustrious Names or Birth; that Order, in short, which under the
Celebrated Names of Rhodes and Maltha, has filled the Earth, the Sea, and all
the Corners of our World, with the glorious Trophics of an infinite number of
Victories, which they have Obtained against the Turks.

As for the ancient Hospitallers, who were thus separated from these New ones,
with whom they formerly made up one Order, under one great Master, they still
retained their ancient Name of St. Lazarus; they added to the Habits of their
Knights, a green Cross, to distinguish them from the others, and maintained
themselves within the Limits of their first Institution, which allowing of
Marriage, consisted of three principal Vows; of Charity to withdraw themselves
from the World to the Service of the Infirm and Leprous; of Chastity, either in
a single or conjugal State; and of Obedience to their great Master; and above
all, to be continually ready to Fight against the Infidels and the Enemies of
the Church. They also performed after this, very signal Services in Palestine,
Fulk, Amaurus, Baldwin the Third and Fourth, and the Queens Melisantha and
Theodora, to take them into their particular Protection, and to honor them with
many Marks of their Royal Bounty; the precious Testimonies whereof, they do to
this day preserve in their Treasury. It was for this Cause, that the young King
Lewis, at his Return from the Holy Land, brought with him some of them into
France, there to Exercise their charitable Functions, and to this purpose gave
them the Supervising of all the Operations of the Infirmaries within his Realm,
as also the Castle of Boni near Orleans, to be the principal House and chief
Residence of their Order, on this side the Sea, as appears by his Letters
Patents, of the Year 1154. Signed by the Chancellor Huges, in the Presence of
the Constable Matthew de Montmorency: which was Confirmed to them by Philip
Augustus, in the Year 1208; who also granted them great Privileges and
Immunities, which have since been Augmented, and solemnly Confirmed by twelve
of our Kings of France. In process of time the Order extended it self by
Degrees through all Europe, but principally in France, England, Scotland,
Germany, Hungary, Savoy, Sicily, Pavia, Calabria, Campania in Italy, where the
Emperor Frederick the Second, gave them great Possessions in the Year 1225,
which was also confirmed to them afterward by the Bulla's of many Popes. It
was in that flourishing Estate wherein this Order was in Europe under this
Emperor, and under the King St. Lewis, that the Pope Honorius the Third
Approved it, and Confirmed it anew, giving it the Rule of St. Augustine, with
many great Privileges, which were also afterward Augmented by the Bulla's of
Pope Gregory the Ninth, Alexander the Fourth, Clement the Fourth, Nicholas the
Third, Gregory the Tenth, and John the Twenty second, and many other Sovereign
Popes, who granted to them the same Favors which were Enjoyed by the Knights
of St. John of Jerusalem, by which they were empowered to hold Estates given
either by particular Persons, or Bodies Politic and Corporate, and all the
Hospitals and Infirmaries, with their Goods and Possessions, which at any time
belonged to this Order.

In the time that the Affairs of the Christians were almost become Desperate in
the East, after the Return of St. Lewis from his Voyage to the Holy Land, the
great Master of St. Lazarus, with the greatest part of the Knights, came to
settle themselves in France, where this devout King, who took this Order into
his Royal Protection, and gave them of his Bounty a thousand Marks, besides
other Favors which he conferred on them, became in a manner a new Founder; and
in effect, it is most certain, as appears by most authentic Acts, that after
this time, the principal Seat of the Order of St. Lazarus, as well on this, as
the other side of the Sea, has always been kept at their Castle of Boni, where
the general Chapter of the Order ought to be kept once every three Years; and
that the Kings of France have always been the Conservators and Patrons of the
Order, and have nominated and appointed the great Master; That these great
Masters have Exercised their Jurisdictions upon all the Knights of the Order,
in all the States of Christendom, as the Generals of the Cistertians
Premonstratenses, and other Orders, which at present are in France, Exercise
theirs over all the Religious of other Realms. It is true, that this Order
began to Relax and Decay extremely by the iniquity of the Times, during the
Wars between the English and French, either by the Malice or Negligence of the
Knights, who either themselves did, or permitted others to encroach upon the
Estates of the Order, appropriating them to their own private Families. For
this Cause it was, that Pope Innocent the Eight, at the Request of the Knights
of Malta, suppressed this Order, to Reunite it with all its Estates, to that
of St. John of Jerusalem, which was obtained by Emery D' Amboise, Great Master
of the Rhodes, by another Bulla from Pope Julius the Second. But in regard that
the Parliament of France Declared these Bulla's to be Injurious, and contrary
to the Rights of the Kings of France, the Patrons of the Order, the Popes Pius
Fourth, and Pius Fifth, caused them to be Revoked, upon Remonstrance thereof
made to them by Charles the Fifth, and Philip the Second; who thought
themselves too nearly Interessed in the Commanderies or Places of Trust which
were within their Dominions; so that the Order was again Established, with many
new Privileges, by Pope Pius the Fourth, Jannot de Chastillon, his Nephew
Great Master of the Order; after his Death Gregory the Thirteenth Transferred
the Great Mastership to Emanuel Philibert, the Duke of Savoy, and to his
Successors, granting him also the Union of this Order, with all their Estate,
to that of the Knights of St. Maurice, the Erecting of which the Duke had
obtained about a Month before.

It ought nevertheless, to be taken for Indubitable, that these new Creations
to the Dignity of Great Master of St. Lazarus, were not made but with Respect
to certain Countries; and it is no less certain that it was extremely in the
Prejudice of the Kings of France, who could by no means lose that Right, which
they had so lawfully acquired, and for more than five hundred Years enjoyed, to
have the sole Nomination of the Great Master, who ought to be Elected at Boni,
the principal Conventical General House of the whole Order, and who ought to
have Jurisdiction over all the Knights of what Nation soever they be. Insomuch,
that all those who are called Great Masters in other Countries, are no more, to
speak properly, but Deputies and Substitutes, to him who is Established and
Acknowledged in France, as the King of Spain alleges in his Right, Affirming
that the Duke of Savoy is only his Vicegerent in Italy, which also a very
learned Civilian has remarked, according to the Bulla of Gregory the
Thirteenth. However, after all these Bulla's, reckoning from that of Innocent
the Eight, our Kings whose Rights are Sacred and Inviolable, have not failed
always to name, as they did formerly, without Interruption, the Great Masters
of all the Order of St. Lazarus both on this and the other side of the Sea. And
those of the Fraternity following, that is, Aignan, Claude de Marveil, John de
Conty, John de Leui, Michael de Seurre, Francis Salviati, Aymar de Chartres,
Hugh Castelan de Castelmore, and Charles de Gayan, who were provided and
nominated by the Kings Lewis Twelfth, Francis First, Henry Second, Francis
Second, Charles Ninth, Henry Third, and Henry the Great, never failed to take
this Quality upon them, although the deplorable Condition to which the Order was
Reduced in France, the small Number of Knights, and the Loss and Alienation of
their Estates, took from them the Opportunity of maintaining the Dignity of
their Place and Order. It was for this Reason, that Henry the Forth, after he
had Gloriously Settled the three Estates of his Realm, and that after the cruel
Disorders of the Civil Wars, he had put the Kingdom into a flourishing
Condition, was resolved also to restore to its primitive Splendour this Military
Order of the Hospitallers, from which he persuaded himself he should be able to
draw very considerable Services. He therefore Chose for Great Master one of the
Fraternity, whose Name was Philibert de Newstang, a Gentleman whose Birth and
Merit were equally Illustrious. He went upon the King's Account to Rome, there
to treat about this Affair with Pope Paul the Fifth, and did so well Negotiate
what he had in Commission, that the Quality of Restorer, Protector, and Patron
of the Order was reserved to the King; and the Dignity of Chief and General of
the whole Order of St. Lazarus, was Absolutely, and without Restrinction, to be
in him whom the King should name to be Great Master. Moreover the Pope having
Created a New Order of Knights, under the Title of our Lady of Mount Carmel, at
the Instance of the King he United them to that of St. Lazarus; after which
time the Knights have with this double Title born for their Arms a Cross, or
which is doubled, consisting of eight Points Pometty, between four
Flowers-de-Lys, with the Image of our Lady in the middle.

But as the Death of Henry the Great made the greatest of all his Noble Designs
to Vanish, the Order of St. Lazarus, which began to Recover after having
received these new Marks of Honor, did for the main stand at a Stay, continuing
in the Condition wherein he lest it, till now of late it begins to Flourish in
such a manner which would make one believe, that we shall one day see it
produce those Fruits, which it was accustomed to do in the times of its early
Force and Vigor: For the King, who undertakes nothing which he does not most
happily Accomplish, having taken up the same generous Design of his August
Grandfather, whose Sir Name the Acclamation of all Europe has bestowed upon
him, will not fail to take all the most Just and Essicacious Ways, to restore
this ancient Order to that Condition which may render it Serviceable to those
necessary Ends for the Good of the Church and State,

Baldwin de Bourg, who had abundance of Courage and of Virtue, obtained many
great Victories against the Turks, who after having Defeated and Slain in
Battle the Prince of Antioch, began to menace that great City. But as he went
to Succor the Earl of Edessa against Balac, the most Potent of the Turkish
Princes, who had taken Earl Josselin with his Cousin Galeran, in an Ambuscade,
he himself happened to be Surprised in the Night by that Emir, who sent him
Laden with Irons to the same Castle where the two Earls his Kinsmen were
detained Captives. His Imprisonment however had not those dismal Consequences
as were expected, for Eustace Garnier Lord of Sidon or Saietta and Cesarea, who
was made Regent of the Realm, Defeated the Army of the Egyptian Sarasens, who
Besieged Jaffa. After which, their Navy, which consisted in eighty Sail of
Ships, was entirely Ruined by the Venetians, who met with them in their Return
to Egypt. Lord of Tiberias, Succeeded in the Regency to Eustace, who died some
few days after his Victory, and he knew so well how to make good Use of it,
that taking this Occasion to Besiege the City of Tire by Land with his Army,
and by Sea with the Venetian Fleet, he became Master of the Place before the
Sultan of Egypt was in a Condition to Relieve it by a new Fleet. The Earl
Josselin also Escaping out of Prison, had gotten into Antioch, and Fought so
successfully with his little Army, Balac who had taken him Prisoner, that the
Barbarian lost both the Battle and his Life; whereby the King also recovered
his Liberty, paying his Ransom to the Princess the Widow of Balac.

The Deliverance of the King was succeeded by other happy Successes. He
overthrew in Battle Borsequin, another potent Turkish Prince, who had entered in
Arms into the Principality of Antioch; He Defeated the Egyptians and
Ascalonites, who were ready to make an Irruption into his Kingdom, and had very
great Advantages over Dodequin the Sultan of Damascus, whom he went to Attaque
in the very Heart of his Dominions; He took the strong Place of Raphana near to
Arcas, for the Earl of Tripolis, and by his Actions made it appear to the whole
World, that he was, as a most Virtuous Prince, so also, a very great Captain.
Antioch into the Hands of the Young Bohemond, whom he also made his Son-in-Law,
giving him in Marriage the Princess Alice, his second Daughter; for he had
before given his Eldest Daughter, the Princess Melisentha, to Fowk Earl of
Anjou, to whom he gave the two Cities of Tire and Ptolemais, he being also in
right of his Lady to Succeed him in the Realm of Jerusalem. But his good
Fortune was not constant to him till his Death; for having Besieged Damascus
with a Puissant Army, where were joined with him the Earls of Edessa and
Tripolis, the Prince of Antioch and Fowk Earl of Anjou, he was obliged for want
of Provisions, and by the Incommodiousness of the Season, to raise his Siege;
and not long after, his Son-in-Law, the young Bohemon, being Surprised by the
Turks, was Slain in Cilicia. After which, having given the necessary Orders for
Securing the Principality of Antioch to the Princess Constantia, the Daughter
of Bohemond, whom her own Mother would most unnaturally have Excluded from that
Right, he died most Religiously at Jerusalem, Calvary, near the two Kings his
Predecessors and his Cousins.

Earl Fowk who Succeeded him, did also Inherit his Virtues, and above all, his
Integrity and high Generosity. For after having Defended the Principality of
Antioch against the Designs of his Sister-in-Law the Princess Dowager of young
Bohemond, and against a mighty Army of the Turks, whom he cut in pieces near
Antioch; he gave the Principality thereof to Raymond the Son of the Earl of
Poitiers, giving him in Marriage the young Princess Constantia, the Daughter of
Bohemond, the lawful Heiress of those Territories. He also maintained him in it
against all the Forces of John the Constantinopolitan Emperor, who made two
fruitless Expeditions with huge Armies, for the re-gaining of Antioch, Alexis
had Concluded with the Princes of the first Crusade, when they passed by
Constantinople into Asia. He gloriously preserved both his own Kingdom, and the
States of Christian Princes his Neighbors, against all the Forces of Sanguin
Sultan of Alepo, the most potent among all the Infidel Princes, against whom he
entered into Confederacy with the Sultan of Damascus. He took from the Turks the
City of Paneas or Cesarea Philippi, otherwise in Ancient times called Dan, near
the two Heads from whence arises the River Jordan; he rebuilt and fortified
Beersheba at the other Extremity of his Kingdom, as it was in the times of the
Ancient Kings, and as it is frequently said in the Holy Scripture, he extended
his Dominion from Dan to Beersheba. But some time after he happened to have an
unfortunate Fall from his Horse, Ptolemais, of which he died in the eleventh
Year of his Reign, leaving for his Successor his eldest Son Baldwin, of the Age
of three Years, under the Regency of his Mother Queen Melesintha; and it was in
the time of this young King that the second Crusade was Published, upon the
Occasion which I am now going to relate.

It was about eleven Years after that Josselin de Courtenay Earl of Edessa
dying, had left for his Successor a Son of his own Name, but one who did
neither resemble his Father in Virtue nor in Courage, as too plainly appeared
by the Dishonorable beginning of the Son, and the glorious ending of the
Father: That valiant Prince who was retired half dead, and almost crushed in
Pieces by the Ruins of a Fortress which he had Attacqued near Alepo, lay
Languishing in his Bed, expecting every Moment his approaching Death, when News
was brought him, that the Sultan of Iconium, thinking to take the Advantage of
his Malady, had laid Siege to one of his Towns called Croisson. At this News he
gave order to the young Josselin, who was now arrived at the Age fit to
Command, to go instantly with what Troops he could draw together about Edessa,
to oppose the Enemy; But the Cowardly Youth, far from laying hold upon such an
Opportunity to gain Glory and Reputation by a Victory which should show that he
Merited that Crown, which by Birthright and the expected Death of his Father,
was shortly to devolve upon him, coldly answered his Father, That he did not
think it consisted with his Prudence to offer to Encounter an Enemy so much
Superior to him in Strength and Numbers; whereupon the Generous old Prince,
seeing to what an unworthy Successor he was about to leave so fair a
Principality, was resolved once more to show him, even as he was dying, by his
Example what his Honor obliged him to do in Defense thereof: and therefore
having instantly Assembled his Troops, he caused himself to be carried at the
Head of them in a Horse-Litter, being only able to act with his Noble Mind,
which still retained all its Vigor and Force, in despite of the extreme
Weakness and Languishment to which his bruised Body was reduced; as he Marched
in this Condition, still Advancing toward the Enemy, Word was brought him,
that the Sultan having been Informed, that he, who he thought Dead, was coming
against him with a Resolution to give him Battle, had raised his Siege, and was
Retreated into his own Territories. Whereupon the brave Earl, ravished with Joy
at the same time that he felt himself most cruelly Oppressed with his Pains and
the Approaches of Death, causing his Litter to be set down in the middle of the
Army, he lifted up his Hands and Eyes all Bathed in Tears of Joy, to Heaven,
and with great Devotion, he returned his hearty Thanks unto Almighty God, for
all the Benefits which he had received from him, but above all, for the Favor
which he had now done him, to let him die like a Prince of the Crusade, in
making War against the Infidels, and that he permitted him to Vanquish with the
bare Report of his Approach, and the Terror of his Name, these Enemies of
Christ Jesus, and of his Holy Faith. And thus did this Christian Hero,
Transported more with the Excess of his Joy, than of his Pains, render unto God
his generous Soul, going to the Eternal Triumphs of a Glorious Immortality in
Heaven, whilst his Army Victorious by him only, without Fighting, Re-conducted
his Body in the Litter, as in a Triumphant Chariot, to Edessa, there to receive
the Honors due to one of the bravest Actions that ever were Performed.

Josselin his Son began his Reign, which he dishonored by a Vicious and
Dissolute Life, spent in all manner of Debauches, and above all, by the Loss of
Edessa, which was the cause of the Decay, and in Conclusion, of the Ruin of
the Affairs of the Western Christians in the East. But is no new thing to
observe, that what the Wisdom, Courage, and Vigilance of many great Men have
not been able, without great Difficulty, to Establish, should be Ruined in a
moment by the Brutality, Pusillanimity, and Cowardice of one Dissolute and
Voluptuous Man.

This new Earl Josselin quitted the City of Edessa, which his Father and the
two Baldwins his Predecessors, who constantly kept their Court there, had taken
great Care to Fortify, and Retired to Turbessel, a delightful House, Situate
upon the Banks of Euphrates, where like a true Epicure, he drowned himself in
those Vices and continual Debauches, which the mistaken World calls Pleasures,
without ever regarding the weighty and troublesome Affairs of State. But to Ease
him of those Toils which attend a Crown, Sanguin the most Potent and Able of
all the Turkish Princes, Sultan of Alepo and Nineveh, now called Mosula or
Mussula, laid hold of this Occasion of the Stupidity of this careless Prince,
and knowing that there was neither a good Garrison, nor any kind of Provisions
fit to sustain a Siege in Edessa, he presently sat down before it, and by a
furious Assault Carried the Place, before the Unfortunate Josselin, who was of
himself destitute of any Power to prevent it, could procure any Assistance from
his Neighbors; for he had too much Disobliged Raymond Prince of Antioch, with
whom he lived in continual Broils, to afford him any, and Queen Melesintha was
at too great a Distance, to Assemble so suddenly such an Army as was necessary
to relieve the Place: So that the Conqueror had Opportunity enough to make a
great Progress with his Arms, had not his ill Destiny, rather than the
Christian Arms, prevented him; for as he was Besieging Cologembar, a Town upon
the Euphrates, he was Slain by one of his Eunuchs, who having thus revenged
himself of some Affront done him by his Master, saved himself by Flight. His
two Sons divided his Dominions between them, Cotebin the Eldest had for his
Share Nineveh and Assyria, and Noradin the Younger Brother was Sultan of Alepo.

This young Prince, who soon after made himself one of the most Potent Princes
of all Asia, had nothing about him that was either Turk or Barbarian, except
the Name; and without retaining any thing of the Vices of his Nation, he made
himself most Conspicuous in his Conduct by all the Virtues and accomplishing
Qualities of a great Captain: He was equally Wise, Provident, Moderate, Bold,
and Enterprising, Courageous, Valiant, and Fortunate, and what was most rare
among Infidels, he was a Man of Honor, Probity, and wondrous Devout in his own
Religion, which was Mohammedan; above all, he was the most Vigilant of Mankind,
the Stoutest, and most prompt to lay hold upon all Opportunities which
presented themselves with the prospect of any noble Action, as appeared
particularly in the Rencounter I am going to relate. Having understood at
Nineveh, that Earl Josselin, being underhand Solicited by the Inhabitants, had
Seized upon Edessa with a considerable number of Troops; he ran thither
immediately with such Forces as he could on the sudden get together, to Invest
it; this he performed so readily, that the Earl despairing to resist the
Enemies within, who yet held the Fortresses, and those without, who went about
to cut off all Provisions from coming to him, resolved, before all the Passages
were obstructed, to save himself with his Soldiers, by quitting the City, which
being accordingly put in Execution, the greatest part of the Inhabitants, who
were afraid to fall into the Hands of Noradin, would also Accompany him in this
dishonorable Flight. But that Prince falling upon the unfortunate Inhabitants,
at the same time, that those within the Fortresses Sallying out, had broken in
among them at the Gate which they had set open, they were all cut in pieces,
and then immediately pursuing the flying Army of the Earl, which were Retreated
some two Leagues to gain a Pass upon the Euphrates, he Charged them so briskly
that in the End he put them to a total Rout, so that the miserable Earl did not
without great Difficulty Escape to Samosatia, Noradin having no more Enemies
able to keep the Field, and having so easily Re-gained Edessa, quickly made
himself Master of the greatest Part of that Principality, from whence he
Menaced the other three, and all that part of Christendom which was in the
East, with utter Ruin and Desolation.

In the mean time, immediately after the first taking of Edessa by Sanguin,
there being great reason to fear, that that powerful Turk who had the Courage
and Ambition of a Conqueror, would also endeavor the Conquest of Antioch, a
Dispatch was immediately sent to request the Succors of all the Princes of the
West. But the principal Application was made to Lewis seventh King of France,
to whom the Christian Princes of the East, who were all of that Nation, had
Recourse as to their natural Lord, and whom the cross Accident which happened a
little after, put into the most favorable Disposition in the World to
undertake such an Enterprise. This Prince was in the very Bloom of his Youth,
being about twenty four Years of Age, he was of a most exact Shape, and of a
mavelous, and in his Sex an uncommon Beauty, of a sweet Temper, Civil and
Obliging, extreme Pious, Tender, and Sensible of the least Sufferings of his
meanest Subjects, whom he most passionately Loved, and was no less Beloved by
them; but above all, he had a most mighty Mind, and was as extreme Jealous of
his Authority that it was possible for any one to be: And as that Passion
carried him sometimes, as it does more moderate Natures, to strange
Extremities, his Sweetness, which happened to be mistaken by Theobald Earl of
Champagne and Blois, who openly espoused all the Interests directly opposite to
his, was changed into such a violent Choler, and furious desire of Revenge, so
that having desolated all the Earls Territories and Possessions, he took Vitri
by Assault, where he put all into Blood and Flames, and miserably burnt above
fifteen hundred Persons in the great Church, who had fled thither as to a
secure Sanctuary. This terrible Action which gave a Horror to all the World,
was most Dreadful to himself, when he came once a little to recover out of the
Transport of his Passion; and his Soul was pierced with a Grief so lively and
so cutting, that it almost drove him into Desperation; so that for some time,
he abandoned the Management of all public Affairs, and even those necessary
Services due to his Person, and it was not without mighty Difficulty, that he
was recovered out of that Abyss of Melancholy, into which he was so deeply
Plunged. This was the reason, that so soon as ever he understood the
Extremities unto which the Affairs of the Christians in the East were reduced,
he resolved to make that his Penance, and to take that dangerous Voyage for the
Expiation of so great a Crime as he had been Guilty of. So soon as he had
discovered his Design to some of his principal Officers, they advised him, by
no means to undertake an Affair of that Importance, until he should first have
Consulted the Celebrated Abbot of Claravall, who was at that time the Oracle,
not only of France, but of all Christendom. It was that famous St. Bernard, who
after the memorable Things which he had done during more than ten Years,
toward the Extinguishing the Schism which the Antipope Peter of Lions had
raised, and the Heresies of Arnold of Brescia, and Peter Abaillard, began to
take a little Breath in his Retreat at his Monastery. He was then about the Age
of fifty four Years, of a Stature something above the Middle, having a Face of
a very agreeable Composure, a delicate Complexion, his Cheeks fresh, and his
Hair fair, inclining a little toward too deep a Yellow, his Eyes sparkling
with a kind of sweet Fire, Lively and Ardent, his Air extreme Devout and
Modest, but ever like a Person of Quality with a becoming Assurance, his
Constitution naturally too Feeble, but much weakened by the Austerities and
Labors which he had been always most assiduous in, especially his continual
Studies and Inquiry after Knowledge; but this Weakness of his Body was supported
by the Force of a Spirit, Lively and Penetrating, Subtle and Dextrous, Bold,
yet easy and very persuading, and withal, with a Courage to which the greatest
Difficulties and Oppositions were so far from being by him thought Insuperable,
that they rather seemed to add Fuel to his Flame, and to provide those
necessary Materials for its Subsistence, which gave it Occasion to burn and
shine more Warm and Bright.

Bourges, where he also was resolved that this Devout Abbot should be present.
There it was that this Prince did first publicly discover the Secret of his
Heart, and the Design which he had to go in Person to the Relief of the
Christians who were very much pressed by the Infidels in the East. After which
Godfrey Bishop of Langres made such a moving Discourse concerning the taking of
Edessa, the Miseries of their Christian Brethren, and the Extreme Danger which
the Holy Land lately so gloriously conquered by the French, was like to run of
falling again under the Power of the Turks and Sarasins, that he drew Tears
from the Eyes of the whole Assembly, which was upon the very point of declaring
their Resolution to follow the King. But St. Bernard, who was by some believed
to be the great Promoter of this Voyage, was the only Person who with much
Constancy opposed it, and stopped the Torrent of their Devotion which he judged
had too much Precipitation, and to which he thought it convenient to give just
and sitting Measures. Now as he was obliged instantly to give the Assembly
whose Eyes were fixed upon him, his Advice in this Affair, he remonstrated to
them, that in a Matter of this Nature, they ought by no means to pass further
without consulting the Pope, to whom it appertained to declare the Pleasure of
God in this Holy War, as Urban the Second had done in the first Crusade, which
had so happily succeeded. Now St. Bernard had acquired a Reputation so full of
Authority that his words were received as if they had been Oracles, and
therefore his Opinion having the General Approbation, the King sent his
Ambassadors to the Holy Father, resolving to call another General Assembly so
soon as he should receive an Answer from the Pope.

The Pope then in being was Eugenius the third a Pisan by Nation, who from
having been the Scholar, and a Monk under St. Bernard, became Abbot of the
Monastery of St. Anastasius of the three Fountains at Rome, and from thence was
advanced the Year following being 1145 to the Pontifical Dignity. Christendom
which was in the East; He therefore received the King's Ambassadors with all
manner of Honor, and with all the Marks of an Excessive Joy and Satisfaction;
and in a short time dispatched them back again with most pressing Letters, by
which he exhorted the King, France, and not only so, but enjoined them so far
as his Spiritual Authority would permit, and by Virtue of the Merits of that
Obedience, to undertake that Holy Voyage, with the Spirit of Repentance, for
the Remission of their Sins, and those Punishments due unto them; and further
he gave to all those who undertook the Cross plenary Indulgences, and the same
Privileges which Pope Urban the Second at the Council of Clermont had bestowed
upon all those who had followed the Princes of the Crusade for the Conquest of
the Holy Land. He would also himself in Person have come into France to have
taken a Part in the accomplishing of a Work so advantageous for the Good of
Christendom; but not being able at that time to absent himself very far from
Viterbum, where he then was to endeavor the Reducement of the Romans to their
Obedience who had revolted, he sent an Apostolic Breve to St. Bernard, by
which he appointed him to preach the Crusade in France, and Germany; and to
exhort the People and Princes to take up the Cross, principally by the Motive
of Penitence for the Remission of their Sins, which they should obtain by
delivering their Brethren from the Tyranny of the Insidels, or in laying down
their Lives in so pious an Enterprise. So that it is from hence easy to
discover what was the only Argument which engaged St. Bernard in this Affair;
for before that, though he was most earnestly solicited even by Sovereign
Authority, yet would he never either discourse or give his Opinion upon a
Voyage of that Importance as Geoffry his Secretary, afterward the Fourth Abbot
of Claraval, has assured us in the History which he has left us of the Life of
that great Saint.

The King now highly satisfied to see his Design succeed so well, being so
solemnly supported by the Pontifical Authority, Verelay a little Village in
Burgundy between Auxerre and Nevers. There met so great a Number of Princes,
Prelates, Lords and Gentlemen, and People of all Sorts of Quality, that they
were constrained to hold the Assembly out of the Town upon the Brow of a Hill
which abutted upon a great Plain, which was filled with an Infinite Number of
People, who ran together from all Parts of France, upon the Report of the
Enterprise of a Holy War, wherein every one was desirous to have a share; there
was about the Middle of the Hill a Tribunal Erected, upon which after the
Letter of the Pope had been read, St. Bernard made a Speech to the People, with
mavelous Force of Spirit, Eloquence and Zeal, representing to them in most
Tender and moving Terms the Miserable Condition of the Christians in the East,
particularly since the second taking of Edessa by Noradin. For the sad News was
already come to France by the late Envoys from Antioch and Jerusalem, who were
come to implore the Succors of the French. He forgot nothing that might most
effectually move their Hearts; he pressed them with the Considerations of the
Glory of their Ancestors, whose Conquests they were in Honor bound to defend
and preserve; he urged their own Eternal Advantage, which they might assure to
themselves by this kind of Martyrdom, which they Voluntarily underwent by the
Spirit of Penitence, for the Abolition of all the Disorders and all the Crimes
of their former Lives; and above all he insisted upon the Honor of Jesus
Christ, whom he made appear as marching himself at the Head of the Crusades to
Jerusalem, to be there as it were once again Crucified, if it were necessary
for the Salvation of those that followed him.

So soon as he had finished his Discourse, the King who had heard him with all
the Marks of a most tender and sensible Devotion, rising from his Throne, threw
himself at his Feet, humbly demanding of him the Cross which the Pope had sent
to this pious Abbot to bestow upon him: he received it from his Hands with an
extreme Respect, and having himself fastened it to his Right Shoulder, he did
not believe he prostituted the Royal Dignity in any sort, by mounting in that
Condition up to the Tribunal with St. Bernard, and from thence to exhort the
People, as he did with incredible Zeal, to follow the Example of their King.
This Action far stronger and more persuasive than all the Eloquence of the
Saint, was immediately followed with a General Acclamation of all those who
stood round about, who with one Voice as it were by Consent cried out, The
Cross, The Cross. And at the same time Queen Eleonor, the Daughter of St.
William Duke of Guienne and Earl of Poitiers presented herself to receive the
Cross, and was followed by all the Great Men of the Realm, the Principal
whereof were Robert Earl of Dreux, Brother to the King; Alphonsus Earl of St.
Giles, Tierry Earl of Flanders, Guy Earl of Nevers; Renald his Brother Earl of
Tonnerre; Yues Earl of Soissons, William Earl of Ponthieu; Henry the Son of
Theobald Earl of Blois; William Earl of Varrennes; Archibald de Bourbon;
Enguerrand de Couci; Geoffry Rancon de Taillebourg; Hugh de Lusignan; William
de Courtenay; Renauld de Montargis; Ithier de Thoci; Guicher de Montgeay;
Everard de Breteil; Dreux de Mouchi; Manasses de Bulli; Ancel de Trenel; Guerin
his Brother; William Bouteiller; William Agilons de Try; and among the
Prelates, Simon Bishop of Noyon; Godfrey Bishop of Langress; Alwin Bishop of
Arras; Arnoeld Bishop of Lizieux; Herbert Abbot of St. Peter of Sens; and
Theobald Abbot of St. Colomb, of the same City. In short, there was not one of
the whole Assembly who did not protest that they would have the Cross, and St.
Bernard after having thrown down from this Tribunal a great Quantity which he
had caused to be made up in great Bundles, was obliged to satisfy their
Importunity, to cut his Robe into small pieces, and upon the Spot to make it
into new Crosses, which he dispersed among them; being forced at last to give
the rest the Liberty to cross themselves since it was impossible to make so
many Crosses as would suffice so vast a Number.

This was what was done in the Assembly of Verelay; as for the rest the King
adjourned the Deliberation of what was further to be done to another far
greater, which was to be held the third Sunday after Easter at Chatres, where
almost all the Arch Bishops and Bishops of France were present as if it had
been a General Council. Crusade, was there generally approved; and which one
cannot without some difficulty believe, if St. Bernard himself had not writ it,
that which made the greatest Impression upon Men's Spirits, was that the happy
Success of the Voyage, and of the War depended upon him; and that it was there
resolved by a Common Consent, not only that he should go along with them, but
also that he should have the General Command of the Army, which could not fail
of being always Victorious, under a Cheistain, who was believed to be the
Disposer of God Almighties Power, by the Gift of Miracles which all the World
attributed to him. So easily do the Spirits of men prepossessed with the
Opinion of the Sanctity of a Person, suffer themselves to be seduced, to take
an irregular Conduct, abandoning good Sense and that Reason which God has
bestowed upon them to regulate and govern the Deliberation of those Affairs
which they are about to undertake. But St. Bernard who was a man of a different
Complexion from Peter the Hermit, and who knew admirably how to make Wisdom and
Reason consort with Grace and Devotion, opposed himself stoutly against this
Resolution, which he believed was wholly dissonant to Prudence and Reason. He
writ to the Pope concerning it, and made it so evident to him who understood
War, which he did not in the least, that it must needs be a Prodigy of ill
Presage, to see a man devoted to a severe Profession of Religion to take upon
himself the Command of the Army; that they were at last satisfied that he
should do his Duty according to his Profession, in preaching up the Crusade; as
for any thing more, the Weakness of his Natural Constitution and his Age gave
him a Dispensation from the Toils and Hazards of a Voyage to the Holy Land.

Being therefore resolved to preserve himself always within the Bounds of his
Condition and to apply himself only to that which was his proper Ministry; he
set himself to preach the Crusade with so much Zeal, Power, and Success, that
there was never seen a greater Concourse of People, then ran from all Parts to
have the good Fortune to receive the Cross from his Hands, Geossry who writes
his Life, that it pleased God to confirm and approve of his preaching by a
Prodigious Number of Miracles which he did in healing all kind of Diseases by
his Prayers and the Imposition of his Hands. But as some of the Historians who
gives us this Account produce no manner of particular Proofs, but content
themselves with saying so only in general Terms, and on the other Hand it is
well known that in those times, they were not so strict and exact in their
Examination of those kind of Things, as they are in our days, but were rather
inclined to make even Credulity it self a Matter of great Merit, I think every
Person is at Liberty to believe at his own Discretion, without detracting in
the least from the Eminent Sanctity of St. Bernard. And that which makes this
appear more reasonable is that this great man himself, in that Apology which he
made after the ill Fortune of this Voyage, does not in justifying himself, in
the least inssist upon the Miracles which God wrought by his preaching, but by
the Obedience which he owed to the Pope, who had commanded him to preach. Be it
as it will; it is most certain as he himself says, the Obedience which he
rendered to the Pope in preaching the Crusade, became so successful that it
produced an infinite of Crusades; insomuch that the Towns and Villages, were
almost dispeopled of their Inhabitants, except the Children and the Women, who
remained as Widows during the Lives of their Husbands; thus it was that he
spoke, not knowing that so many of them were to be so in Reality. As for the
rest, in that time that he preached with so much Success in France, he advanced
the Crusade no less by his Pen in Italy and Germany, whither he writ most
Eloquent Letters, wherein he Exhorted the People to take up the Cross, with all
the most powerful Motives which were Capable of touching their Christian
Compassion; and in one of them he advertized the Germans to take Care that they
did not suffer themselves to be seduced by a certain Vagabond Monk one Radulph
who had taken upon him without any Commission to preach the Crusade, at
Cologne, Mayence, Worms, Spire, Strasbourg and thereabouts, exciting the People
to Massacre the Jews under Pretext of slgnalizing their Zeal against the
Enemies of Jesus Christ. He writ the same in pretty Boisterous Terms to the
Archbishop of Mayence, Germany to acquit himself of the Commission he had
received from the Pope, to preach the Crusade there, and arrived at Spires,
where the Emperor had called a General Diet against the Feast of the Nativity.

The Emperor at that time was Conrade the third of that Name Duke of Suabia,
and Franconia, who after the Death of the Emperor Lotharius, of the House of
Saxony, had ascended the Imperial Throne about eight Years before, and till
then had reigned with abundance of good Fortune and Glory. The Devout Abbot
treated with him both in Private and Public concerning the intended Enterprise
of the Holy War. He there did his accustomed Wonders; and though he preached in
a Language which the People did not understand, yet such was the manner of his
Delivery, that it wrought more upon them, then did his Interpreters who
endeavored to make them understand what it was that he said; it was enough
that the People saw him, to be as it were enchanted by his very Looks, and in
Consequence to be persuaded; for they ran to him from all Parts with such Heat
and thronging, that one time the Emperor was forced to take him in his Arms to
defend him from the Crowd which was ready to stifle him. In short, he acted and
spoke so effectually in the Dict, that the Emperor and his Brother Henry Duke
of Suabia, his Nephew Frederick who afterward succeeded him in the Empire, and
the greatest part of the Princes resolved to take upon them the Cross, which
they also did about two Months after at another Diet which was called for that
purpose. Their Example was followed by the famous Otho Bishop of Friburgh, half
Brother by the Mother to the Emperor; and after him by the Bishops of
Ratisbonne and Passau, and an Innumerable Multitude of Lords, Gentlemen and
Soldiers, who ran from all Parts of Germany to this Assembly to take part in
this Holy War. Labuslaus, Duke of Bohemia, Odoacer Marquis of Stiria, and
Bernard Earl of Carinthia, did the same not long after, and assembled a great
Number of their Subjects, disposing themselves to attend the March of the
Emperor in the beginning of the Spring.

During which time St. Bernard after having Constrained the Impostor Radulph to
retire to his Monastery, and preached the Crusade in the Low Countries,
returned back to the King, who had assembled at Estampes the Estates of his
Realm, in February upon Septuagesima Sunday, there to conclude, what was
necessary to be done before he undertook the Voyage. This Assembly sat but
three days, in the first of which he gave them an Account of the Progress he
had made in Germany, and the Generous Resolution of the Emperor, and Princes of
the Empire, who had undertaken to join with the French in this Enterprise for
the Holy Land. This was received with so much Joy, and so great Applause, that
nothing further could be done that day: the next day the way by which they
should march into Syria came under Debate, where the Ambassadors of Roger King
of Sicily, who were too well acquainted with the Malice and Persidiousness of
the Greeks, and the irreconcilable Hatred which they had against the Franks,
did all that possibly they could to persuade them to take the Sea Passage, as
did the Venetians, the Genoese and the Pisans, offering them their Ports and
shipping for the Commodious transporting of the Army. But on the one side, in
Regard it was impossible to transport so many Troops but at several times,
which would too much protract the Business, and on the other, that they could
not believe that all the East was able to oppose such a flourishing Army as was
then on Foot; the Resolution was taken, to sollow the same way which Godfrey of
Bullen had done, and to march by Land to Constantinople; but withal to follow
the Emperor at some distance, that so they might with more Ease have the
Convenience of Provisions for the two Armies. Upon the third day by Express
Order from the King, the Debate was handled concerning the Person who was most
proper to be entrusted by the Government of the Realm, during the Kings Absence
in so long and dangerous a Voyage. And therein, the Opinion which all men had
of the extraordinary Abilities of Sugerius Abbot of St. Dennis, France in the
time of Lewis the Gross, was so general, that without any Diversity of
Opinions, they unanimously solicited the King, already of himself inclined to
it, to conferr that Trust and Honor upon him.

This Great Man who without all doubt was one of the most able Ministers which
ever served any of our Kings, was about the Age of fifty five Years, of a Shape
and Stature something surpassing the middle, of a Meagre Countenance, and a
Constitution Weak and Tender, of a Birth no ways Eminent, but a man of a mighty
Soul, and of a Mind raised as high as ever any man possessed, a Spirit lively,
Subtle, Penetrating, and of a Prodigious Understanding, which he had also
Cultivated and polished with all manner of admirable Learning, and which was
accompanied with a most happy Memory and a most solid Judgment: Upon the matter
he was Politic, Dextrous, Insinuating, Persuasive, Civil, Obliging, Liberal
and Courteous to all Persons; but on the other Hand he was a most admirable
Justiciary, Magnanimous, Fearless, Firm and Inexorable, and continually
opposite to those, who went about to shock the Royal Authority, or to abuse
their own by oppressing the Weak and Poor. And that which Infinitely heightened
the Luster of all these Excellent Qualities, was that after he had by the
Advice of St. Bernard reformed both his Monastery and himself, for during the
Reign of Lewis the Gross who was none of the best bred men of the World, he
learnt so well to accommodate all the Imploys of his Ministry with those Duties
which became him as a Religious and an Abbot, that he lived at the Court as if
he had been in his Monastery, and when he lived in his Monastrey he forgot
nothing which was owing to the Court or to the Public. The King therefore
following the Counsel of the Estates of France, declared him Regent of the
Kingdom during his Absence, giving him for an Assistant, to command the
Military Affairs, Raoul Earl of Vermandois, who though he was a Prince of the
Blood, being Cousin to Lewis the Gross, yet submitted to the Authority of the
Regent without the least Jealousy or murmuring; so much was that of the King
reverenced even in those times, though the Royal Power was not then in any
measure arrived to that high Elevation and Supreme Greatness, to which, for the
Advantage and Glory of this August Monarchy we see it raised at this day. And
that which was yet more extraordinary in this Choice was, that this Wise
Minister whose foresight was more piercing, and reached further than others,
did not only, not advise the King to undertake this Voyage, but from the
Beginning did all that possibly he could to oppose that Resolution; foreseeing
without doubt the Pernicious Consequences, which according to all Appearances
in his Opinion it was like to have: So that it was out of pure Respect and
Necessity, that he was at last obliged to cease opposing it, knowing that he
should gain nothing but to be blamed for endeavoring to no purpose to hinder
the Execution of a Design which coming from the King his Master, had been
approved by the General Vote of four Assemblies of all the Great Men of the
Realm. Notwithstanding all this, Lewis without taking it amiss, that he was
almost the only Person in his Kingdom that did not seem to approve of this
Enterprise, did not fail in this occasion, to do him the greatest Honor that a
King can possibly do to a Subject; conferring upon him the Regency, that is,
all the Royal Power and Authority during his Absence. Which makes it evident to
Kings and Princes, that though their Sovereign Power dispenses with them from
any Obligation, always to follow those Counsels which according to the Rules of
Prudence they require from their Subjects, and which ought to be given them
with all Faithful Sincerity; yet it is great Wisdom in them to leave their
Counselors at entire Liberty to give their Advice; lest otherwise they give it
rather according to the Inclinations of their Prince, than the Sentiments of
their own Reason, Judgment and Conscience, which ought to be the Rules of all
Faithful and Wise Counselors; whereas the other, though they may have been
Grateful to their Masters, and sometimes advantageous to their Private
Interests, yet have too frequently proved Fatal to those who have received and
followed them.

As for the Abbot, he having at last submitted out of Respect and Duty to the
Pleasure of his Master in Reference to his Voyage to the Holy Land, Eugenius,
to prevail with him to accept it; for it was in this Year, some time after the
Convention of the Estates at Estampes, that the Pope came into France, both to
secure himself from the Persecution of the Revolted Arnaldists, as also there
to determine the Differences which were very hot, concerning certain new and
Dangerous Propositions which were maintained by Gibert de Porea, Bishop of
Poitiers. Eugenius was most honorably received by the King, and was by the
Pope reciprocally received with the Pontifical Benediction in the Church of St.
Dennis, where the Marks of his Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, were bestowed upon
him; Lewis there desired the Pope to do him the Honor, during his Absence to
take the Realm into his Protection; and the Pope to answer that Mark of Piety
and Affection toward the Holy See, solemnly Excommunicated all those who
during the Kings Voyage should attempt any thing against the Royal Authority.
After which, when the King had made all his Preparations, and had amassed great
Sums of Money for the Subsistence of his Army, even to the coining of several
Sacred Vessel belonging to diverse Churches, and borrowing considerable Sums
of many Monasteries with Promise of Repayment after the War, he went according
to the Custom of his Ancestors to St. Dennis to take the Oriflame or Standard
of that Saint. From thence he departed a little before Whitsunday toward the
middle of June, taking his way for Mets, where was to be the general Rendezvous
of all his Troops; whilst in the mean time the Emperor, as before was agreed,
marched with his toward Constantinople, where they were to rejoyn their Forces.

The Emperor accordingly having assembled almost all the Forces of the Empire,
parted from Noremberg about the End of May, upon Ascension Day with a most
flourishing Army, consisting in seventy Thousand Men, at Arms all Curiassiers,
without computing the light Horsemen, and with an Infantry the most numerous,
and in the best Condition that ever any Emperor had seen before. After having
passed the Danube at Batisbonne, crossed through Austria, Hungaria, Bulgaria,
and Thracia, without any of those mischievous Rencounters which happened to the
first Crusades, upon the seventh of September, they entered into a fair, large
and delicious Valley, in the middle whereof ran the River Melas, in his Passage
into the Gulf of that Name or the Black Sea, and sometimes borrowing the Name
of Cardia an Ancient City of the Thracian Chersonesus. The Beauty of so
agreeable a place, obliged the Emperor to stay there to refresh his Army, and
to Celebrate the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin which was the next day. But
there happened a sad Accident, which seemed to portend the unlucky Success of
this fatal War.

For the Army encamping while it was yet Early day, and it happening to be a
Serene and Glorious Evening, and the Medows on each side of the River extending
themselves a great length to the very Foot of the Mountains, there was nothing
during the whole Voyage to be seen so fair and magnificent as this Encampment.
For the Camp represented some fair and lofty City, being composed of an
Infinite Number of very rich Tents, which were disposed in diverse Streets the
whole length of the Plain as far as one could well discern, till they came to a
little rising Hill, where stood the Pavilions of Duke Frederick, and appeared
like the Citadel of this Enchanted City. They passed the Evening with great
Jollity, solacing themselves after the Fatigues of so long a March which they
had endured a little before they were to go to their Repose; after that the
Bishops had begun the Solemnity of the following Festival by the Public
Prayers for the Eve of Ascension, the Heavens began to be darkened with a few
small Clouds which produced some light Drops rather of Dew than Rain; but
within a Moment after there arose one of those furious Whirlwinds which they
call Hurricanes, which made such a disorder as is not imaginable; for
immediately the Impetuosity of these contrary Winds which rushed one against
the other with a most dreadful roaring, was so great, that having broken all
the Cordages which held up the Tents, all this City without Foundation, was
partly tumbled down to the Ground,

It is impossible to express the Tumult, the Consternation, and the Desperation
of the Army upon this Terrible Accident; all that the great Lords and Cavaliers
could do, was to run half naked to their Horses, to get to the Mountains over
this new Sea, which had now taken Possession of those Beautiful Medows, with
which they were before so much delighted: As for the poor Foot some of them got
hold of the Tails of the Horses, whilst others quaking with Wet and Cold as
well as Fear, followed the Track of the Horsemen; a great many got upon the
Wagons as upon a Rampart, and others stood immovable in the Places where they
were up to the middle in Water, waiting for the End of this Dreadful Tempest;
some by mistake falling into the River by reason the Banks could not be
discerned miserably perished in the Waters, and almost all lost the greatest
part of their Baggage. The loss of men however was not extraordinary in regard
that the Tempest was too violent to last long. The Inundation ceased in a few
hours, and the Waters falling immediately after, the dispersed Soldiers
rendevouzed upon the Mountain before the Emperor, who learnt in this Rencontre,
how easy it is in a Moment for God to abase the Pride of men, and when he
pleases to humble the most formidable Powers of the Earth which are weak and
miserable in Comparison of him. This Prince, who entertained himself with these
Pious and Christian Meditations, received this Blow of the Hand of Almighty
God, with great Humility and Submission to the Orders of his Providence, and
evidenced an extraordinary Greatness of Soul, and Constancy of Mind under this
Affliction, thereby to encourage his Army, at the Head of which he continued to
march very cheerfully; leading them to lodge in the Suburbs of Constantinople,
there in some measure to recover this Loss.

In this time a fair Fleet composed of above a hundred Sail of Germans,
English, Flemings and French, which several private Persons had rigged out to
make their Voyage more easily and quickly by Sea, was diverted by an Adventure
which was worth more than one Crusade, and in which they happily found in
Europe all that Glory which they went to search after in Asia; This Fleet set
Sail from England the twelfth of April, having on board three or four Thousand
men commanded by their particular Captains. After they had for a long time met
with foul Weather and Cross Winds, at last they came to an Anchor before Lisbon
thinking there to refresh themselves; when they were surprised by finding that
great City besieged by an Army of Christians, to whom God sent this unexpected
Succor, to take Lisbon from the Sarasins, and to make it the Capital City of
that Realm, which a Prince descended from the House of France had newly
founded. This Prince was Henry the Grandson of Robert of France, Duke of
Burgundy, and Second Son of King Robert. He being young and a passionate Lover
of Glory went to seek for it in Spain, at the Wars against the Moors, toward
the latter end of the Reign of Ferdinand the first King of Castile, and made
his first Campaign under that famous Captain Dom Roderigo de Bivar, so well
known in the World under the Glorious Name of Cid. After the Death of
Ferdinand, he linked himself to Dom Alphonso King of Leon, and rendered him such
Important Services in both his Fortunes, that that Prince after the Death of
his two Brothers Dom Sancho, and Dom Garchia, succeding to all the Estates of
his Father Ferdinand, he gave him in Marriage his Daughter Theresa, whom he had
by his first Wife Chimena de Gusman. He himself also marrying the Princess
Constantia the Daughter of the Duke of Burgundy and Aunt to Prince Henry, to
whom he also gave the City of Porto, and sometime after, all the Estate which
he held in Portugal, Crusade to the Conquest of the Holy Land, whereupon all
Occasions he Signalized his Courage and his Conduct. But in regard we find no
Traces of this Voyage in the Authors, his Contemporaries, who have written very
exactly of that War, I think I ought not to Incur any Displeasure, if I give
little Credit to some of the Historians of Portugal, who upon very weak
Conjectures have been pleased to Rank among the Heroes of that famous Crusade,
the Illustrious Head of the House of Portugal, though he had such a sufficient
Stock of true Glory, as not to stand in need of searching for that which may
with so much Justice be disputed.

That which he has which is most certain is, that this admirable Earl after
having Defeated the Moors in seventeen pitched Battles, and Conquered from them
the greatest part of Portugal, which he added to that which his Father-in-Law
had given him in absolute Sovereignty, he dying left this new Earldom to his
Son Alphonso, who gloriously changed it into a Kingdom. For he was Solemnly
proclaimed King in the Field of Battle, at the memorable Day of Ourique, where
he defeated the Army of five Moorish Kings who had Assembled against him all
their Forces, which consisted in more than four hundred thousand Men. The five
Kings lay upon the Place Buried in the Heaps of the dead Bodies of their
Soldiers, who were piled one upon another; in Memory whereof the new King, who
believed that during the Battle he had seen Jesus Christ upon the Cross, who
promised him the Victory, changed the Cross Azure in the Field Argent, which
his Father had taken for his Coat Armor, into five Escoucheons Azure, every one
charged with five Besants Argent in Saltire, to which afterward was added a
Border Gules charged with seven Castles Or. This is that valiant King Descended
from a Prince of the most August House of France, from whom in a direct Line
Male Issued the other sixteen Kings, who Reigned till the time of Cardinal
Henry for six Hundred Years in Portugal, whose Dominions Extended afterward
into three other Parts of the World, Africa, Asia, and America, where the
Heroic Piety and Courage of the Portugese, by finding a new Passage to the
Indies, have Established the Empire of Jesus Christ, as well as that of their
own Nation; and as one of their Rivers having for some time hid it self under
the Earth, afterward appears again and runs much greater than before; so does
the Illustrious Blood of our Kings, which has so long run in the Royal Channel
of Portugal, at length, after having for more than sixty Years ceased to appear
in its natural Place, the Throne of Portugal, which it ought to fill, begin in
our days to Recover it self with the Applause of all the World, in the Person
of King John the Fourth, the Head of the Royal House of Braganza, who besides
that he Possesses all the Title of the Infanta Catharina, is also Descended in
the direct Masculin Line, as also from that of John the First, from whom are
Issued the last Kings unto Sebastian.

But it was this great Alphonso, the Son of Earl Henry, and first King of
Portugal, who after he had taken Santaren, and all the places about Lisbon,
Besieged that great City, which was Defended by above two hundred thousand Men.
After he had unprofitably spent a whole Month in the Siege, having but a few
Troops in comparison of such a Number of Defendants, he began to despair of his
Enterprise, when he discovered this great Fleet at Sea, which he imagined to be
that of the Affrican Kings; but he presently after perceived by the Cross which
they bore in their Flags, that it was a Christian Fleet. He sent immediately to
be satisfied what they were, and upon what Design, and being informed that it
was a Party of Crusades, who were going against the Infidels, he went Aboard
the Admiral, and proposed to the Captains the Conquest of one of the fairest
Cities in the World, from those Enemies which they were going to Search for in
Syria. He Remonstrated to them, That God had presented to them a fair Occasion
for the present Accomplishment of their Vow, in Combating for the Glory of
Christ Jesus, against his Enemies, and that without exposing themselves by the
Hazard of the Sea, to the Danger of never Combating them at all: That they
would acquire more Honor by taking Lisbon with the Assistance of those few
Portugeses who Besieged it, than they could possibly hope for, Syria with two
such Puissant Armies as were those of the Emperor and King of France, to which
they would be Esteemed as nothing; and besides, that the Recompense which they
might expect would be incomparably greater, giving them the Word of a King,
that they should share the Conquest with him. There was no necessity for him to
say more to persuade People who sought nothing but Occasion to Fight against
the Sarasins; they with Joy accepted the Offer of the King, and presently gave
Order for the Disimbarking of their Troops, and went to take their Post upon
the West Quarter, the King with his Army being already Encamped on the East
Side of the City, in the place where now stands the Monastery of St. Vincent.

If the Attacque was Hot, Furious, and often repeated by the Portuguese and the
Crusades, the Resistance was no ways less on the part of the Moors, who far
surpassed the Christians in Number. This made the Siege last four Months, till
the twenty fifth day of October, when the City was in the End taken by Assault,
all the romainder of the Sarasins being put to the Sword, thereby to Extinguish
that accursed Race of Men. Thus this new Kingdom of Portugal, which was Founded
by a French Prince, was owing for the glorious Conquest of its Capital City,
principally to the Valor of the French Men, they being the greatest Number of
this Naval Army; for tho there were English and other Nations among them, yet
anciently the Title which the Portuguese gave indifferently to all Strangers,
was that of French Men. The King also Employed them in the taking of Almada,
Sintria, Palmela, and a great many other Places: After which, it being now too
late to pursue their Voyage into Palestine, the greatest part of these generous
Crusades, highly Satisfied with the punctual Fidelity of the King, who offered
them one half of Lisbon, nobly refused it, and contenting themselves with the
rich Presents which the King was pleased to make them, Returned laden with
those and Glory into their respective Countries; some of the most remarkable of
the Captains being willing to remain in the Service of a King so Valiant and
Liberal, settled in Portugal, and there Founded those illustrious Houses, which
to this very time hold the first rank of Nobility in that Kingdom. See now what
happy Success befell the smallest of the three Armies of this second Crusade,
whilst the other two, incomparably the greater in Number, but incomparably the
less Successful, disposed themselves to put in Execution their Enterprise by
Land.

For in the same time that the Naval Army made Sail upon the Ocean, the young
King Lewis began to March with his by Land. The Earl of Morienne, and the
Marquis de Monferat, his two Uncles by the Mother, joined him at Mets with many
brave Italian Troops; he received also a Reinforcement of Troops which were
raised in Lorrain by the Bishops of Metz and Toul, by Renand Earl of Monson,
Brother to the Bishop of Metz, and by Hugh Earl of Vaudemont. So that this Army
Royal was as strong in Cavalry, and much better Mounted and Armed, and not much
inferior in Infantry to the Imperial Army, which taking the same Way, it
Marched to join in Thracia. But it was Difficult for one single Province to
contain such a prodigious Multitude of Valiant Soldiers, which might easily
have Triumphed over the whole East, if they had been sufficiently Precautioned
as they ought against the most dangerous Enemy which they had to Encounter,
which was the Greek Emperor, whom they took to be their Friend.

This Emperor was Manuel, the Son of Calo Johannes, and Grandchild of Alexis
Comnenius, who has rendered his Name so Infamously Odious by his Persidiousness
toward the Princes of the first Crusade, and who notwithstanding, never
Arrived near the height of that horrible Baseness and Wickedness of this his
Grandson, of whom I speak. He was a Prince in whom both his Good and his Evil
Qualities were so Interwoven, that in the beginning of his Reign, made it
doubtful whether he did not deserve the Empire, of which his Father had
Disinherited his Elder Brother, to bestow it upon him. For, besides that the
Luster of some Virtues which he had, seemed very well to Conceal his Vices, He
was in Person very well made, tall, but stooping a little, his Face was very
Pleasing, his Color Lively, his Eyes Sweet and Winning, accompanied with a
certain Smile very natural to him, and Charming to those who had the Honor to
Approach him, he had Spirit, a natural Eloquence, and a great deal of
Knowledge; he was besides Politic and Prudent above his Age, Theodora his
Niece, with as little Precaution as if she had been his Wife. Besides he was
cruelly Covetous, rapaciously taking what he pleased, and fottishly Prodigal,
lavishing all, even the Money with which he was to pay his Soldiers and maintain
his Navies, giving away his Treasures without Discretion and without Measure,
to his Niece, to the Eunuchs, and to Strangers, who flattered him in his Brutal
Passions. He was after all this, infinitely Jealous, and outrageously Cruel
where he suspected, Superstitious even to Folly, especially in Judicial
Astrology, believing in every thing the false Oracles of his Figure-Flingers,
who Abused him to his very Death, promising him a little before it fourteen
Years of a most delicious and pleasant Life; but that which is infinitely more
Dangerous, he was Rash and Presumptuous in the matter of Religion; insomuch
that he commanded by an Edict that a place of Scripture should be Explained in
his Sense, which clearly gave it for the Heresy of Arius; at another time he
put out a Decree, which openly favored the false Law of the Impostor Mahomet.
But in short, that of his devilish Qualities which was most eminent in him, was
his Persidiousness, which made him commit the blackest and most horrid Crimes
upon the Occasion of this second Crusade, which have rendered his Memory
eternally Execrable to the whole Earth.

He received at the first the Ambassadors of Conrade indifferently well, they
coming from his Brother-in-Law; for these two Emperors had married two Sisters,
the Daughters of old Berengarius Earl of Luxemburgh and Sultzbach; He also sent
some Troops to meet the Emperor, not so much out of Respect or Honor, but to
observe his Motion during the remainder of his March to Constantinople, where
at his Arrival he was but very coldly Received; either because Manuel could not
without some Displeasure see a Prince who took upon him that Quality, which the
Greeks pretend appertained only to their Emperor; or that he feared that the
Germans, who had had great Differences upon the March with the Greeks, should
endeavor to Revenge themselves; or rather that he was resolved to Execute what
he had plotted against them, as soon as he could possibly. In short, he did so
violently press their Departure, that without giving them the Liberty almost of
taking Breath, the Army was constrained to pass the Strait, upon the Vessels
which he had ready to waft them over into Asia, where this perfidious Emperor
had long before disposed all things for the ruin of this Army. For so soon as
he understood that great Preparations were making in the West for this second
Crusade, he secretly gave Advise to Mamut the Nephew of Soliman the Sultan of
Iconium, who Reigned in Lycaonia, Cappadocia, and Galatia, and pressed him
vigorously to take up Arms against this Army of the Crusades, which he was like
to have upon his Hands. Whereupon the Sultan, immediately sent to all the
Princes of his Nation, to come for their common Interest, with all the Forces
they could raise, to Succor him against the Christians; which they did before
one could well think it possible, sending him a most formidable Army, composed
of an infinite number of Turks of the two Armenia's, Cappadocia, Isauria,
Cilicia, Persia and Media.

But this was not all, for this perfidious Emperor, laid of his own Soldiers
continual Ambuscades within his Territories, on both sides of the Army in their
March, commanding them to Kill, as they did without Mercy, all those who
straggled never so little from the Body of the Army, which for that reason not
being able to march at any Compass, suffered extremely for want of Provisions.
Not contented with this, having promised the Emperor to furnish his Troops with
Provisions for their Money, Germans, whose extreme Hunger would not permit them
to perceive the cruel Cheat; for they greedily devoured these poisoned Morsels,
to satisfy the Importunity of their starved Appetites; and so miserably
perished. He caused the Gates of all the Towns in their Passage to be shut
against them, not permitting any of them to enter, to buy Provision; but if
they would have any, the Greeks upon the Walls would tell them, they would
furnish them for their Money, provided they first received it by Baskets which
they let down to them from the Walls; and then the treacherous Villains, as if
they had been inspired by their perfidious Emperor, returned only Derision,
instead of Commodities, in exchange for their Silver. If at any time they were,
as many were, constrained to sell some part of their Equipage, to get
Subsistence, they gave them, who understood nothing of their Coins, false Money
instead of current; which, when they went to buy for their necessity, would not
pass in Payment. In short, there was no sort of Mischief, which this faithless
Prince, who had no sparks of Honor or common Honesty left, did not invent and
execute, for the destruction of this Army.

But the most detestable of all his Treasons, and that which completed their
entire Ruin was, that he gave them Traitors for their Guides and Conductors,
who were resolved to deliver them into the hands of the Turks. There are two
Ways by which one may go to Antioch; the one upon the Left, the shorter, but
more difficult and dangerous, by reason of the Deserts, and the Mountains,
which must be passed, in going through those more Inland Countries, which lie
remote from the Sea: the other Way lay upon the Right Hand, and was further
about, following all along by the Seacoast; but withal, this was the most
secure, and most plentiful for the Subsistence of the Army. When they were
arrived at Nicomedia, it was taken into Deliberation, what Course, of these
two, they should take: Otho, Bishop of Friburg, and some others of the wiser
sort, were of Opinion, that they should take the way by the Sea, as the most
safe; especially, since they could not resolve to rely upon the Faith of the
Greeks, in their Passage in an unknown Country: but the Emperor, who desired
nothing but to sight with the Turks, believing that all Asia, if it were
together, was not able to resist him, would follow his Guides, who promised, in
a few days, to bring him into Lycaonia, a most fertile Country, and abounding
with all things; and even to Iconium, where, they assured him, the Sultan would
never have the Confidence to stay for his Coming.

There is nothing that, in probability, can be more conducing to the Ruin of
the bravest Army, than the Presumption of their General; who, believing himself
invincible, does not take those Precautions, and those Measures, without which,
the Greatness of his Forces serve to no other purpose, but more easily to
occasion their Ruin. Conrad, puffed up with the Glory of such a flourishing Army,
as none of his Predecessors had ever commanded, lost his Judgment, to that
degree, that he could not see, what every common Man of Sense must needs know,
that it is impossible, without extreme Imprudence, and running the most
dangerous Risque in the World, to trust to the good or ill Faith of two or
three unknown Persons; and thereby make them absolute Masters, both of his own
Fortune, and that of his whole Army. Upon the matter, he was so blinded, that
these Traitors having assured him, as he lay encamped near Nice, that there was
no necessity of taking along with him more than eight days Provision, for that
in that time they would not fail to bring him to Iconium: So that he suffered
himself to be conducted, with all his great Army, in its magnificent Pomp, like
a Victim crowned with Flowery Garlands, to have its Throat cut upon the Altar.
For the eight days being past, they perceived that the Traitors, instead of
taking the Right Hand, to conduct the Army into Lycaonia, had taken the Left,
to engage them insensibly in the Deserts, and the Straits of Mount Taurus,
toward Cappadocia; where they found themselves without Provisions, or the
hopes of procuring any, in a Country so frightfully barren, that it had no
other Inhabitants but Bears, Tigers, Lions, Wolves, and other wild Beasts, who
dwelt among the Rocks and Mountains. The Emperor,

It is some pain to believe there should be so injudicious a Conduct in a
Prince, to whom his Age, and Acquaintance with the World, ought to have given
more Experience: for, instead of securing these Cheats, whose Credit ought to
have been, after this, very much suspected, he left them at liberty to escape,
as they did the Night following, and ran over the Mountains, to the Camp of the
Turks, who daily expected them, to take their Measures accordingly. And
thereupon they did not fail, immediately to appear on all sides, upon the
Rocks, and the Tops of the Mountains, to invest this Army, which was now
reduced to live upon the Flesh of their Horses, and know not what Resolution to
take; whether to retreat, or to advance. Never was there seen so piteous an
Overthrow of so gallant an Army. The Turks, who knew the Country, and who were
lightly armed, flew about with ease, and without danger, on every side
assailing these poor Troops, half defeated with Famine, and heavily armed, and
who could not be assisted by those few Horse that were left, who were able to
do little Service among the craggy and impassable Mountains. So the Infidels,
who never came nearer than within the distance of their Bows, without fear of
Lance, Sword, or these cutting Arms, which were of no use to those who carried
them, discharged, with a Certainty of hitting, and at their pleasure, a most
dreadful Cloud of Arrows upon that great Multitude, and then retired, without
searing a Pursuit from the half-dismounted Cavalry: Within a Moment they would
return again, to make another Discharge upon these poor People, at whom they
shot, from the higher Ground, to the lower, as at a Butt; they, in the mean
time, being neither able to defend themselves, nor revenge their death. So
that, without the Expense of one Man to the Turk, the poor Conrade, who himself
was wounded, though but slightly, with two Arrows, was compelled to abandon all
his Baggage, the Dead and Dying, the Sick, and the greatest part of his
Infantry to the Mercy of the Turks, who killed a great number, and carried the
rest into miserable Slavery; the Emperor himself, with great difficulty,
escaping, not with above the tenth part of his Army, retired to the French
Camp, which was now advanced as far as Nice.

For while the Emperor Conrade marched before, and was making this unfortunate
Voyage, the King, after having taken a Review of his Army at Metz, passed the
Rhine at Worms, the 29th of June, where he was most magnificently entertained;
and the Danube, at Ratisbonne; from whence he marched to Newburgh, and so
through Austria and Hungary, without any molestation: But being once entered
upon the Territories of the Greek Emperor, he found, oftener than once, the
perfidiousness of that unworthy Prince; who had given underhand Orders to all
his Officers, to do him all the mischief which possibly they could do in his
Passage. He did the same also himself, to the Ambassadors which the King had
sent, accompanied with a considerable number of the French Nobility; who
received a thousand Affronts and Displeasures, at the same time that this
dis-loyal Man made them a thousand Protestations of Amity and Friendship. The
King, however, who was resolute to pursue his first Design, and who, with case,
defeated the Troops which endeavored to oppose his Passage, dissembling these
Injuries, though some there were, who counseled him to Revenge, he being much
stronger than the Emperor. In Conclusion, the beginning of October, he arrived
at Constantinople; where Manuel, who knew his own Guilt, and was in mighty fear
of such a formidable Power, as he was in no possibility of resisting, received
him with all the Respects and Honors imaginable.

All the Great Persons of the Empire, the Patriarch, with the whole Clergy, and
all the several Companies of the City, went out to meet him; and the Emperor
himself, clothed in his Imperial Robes, received him at the Gate of the great
Palace. Sophia, and the other most celebrated Churches, which the King had a
mind to visit: after which, he treated him at an Entertainment, where the
magnificent Preparations, the sumptuous, rich and admirable Variety,
accompanied with all the usual Attendants of Rejoicing, surpassed all that ever
had been done by his Predecessors, in their most splendid Receptions of other
Princes and Kings. He himself also ordered, that so he might satisfy the
King's Devotion, that the Festival of St. Dennis the Areopagite, the Apostle of
France, whom the Greek Church acknowledged, as well as the Latin, should be
celebrated with a most extraordinary Pomp; causing the Divine Offices to be
performed with all the most Ceremonious Solemnity, and most admirable Music;
which, to the French, who are naturally Lovers of Novelties, was most pleasing
and delightful. In short, he did all that possibly he could, to please the
King; saying to him such smooth and obliging things, and framing his
Countenance, his Eyes, his Gestures, and all his Actions, into so perfect a
Harmony and Composure of extreme Joy and Satisfaction, that the greatest part
of the Lords, who judged the depth of his heart by these deluding Appearances,
which lay uppermost upon his Actions, were persuaded, that he acted most
sincerely, and loved the King with all his heart.

But the Bishop of Langress, who was a Man of wonderful Prudence, and who
observed every thing with a curious eye, easily perceived that all this was
Artifice; and that under all these affected Testimonies of a feigned Amity,
there lay hid some dangerous Treason, which ought, by some generous Resolution,
to be prevented, by putting the Greeks, the mortal Enemies of the French, out
of the capacity of doing them any mischief. Upon the Debate, therefore, of the
Council, which was holden to deliberate concerning the March of the Army, which
the Emperor pressed with a great deal of Heat and Earnestness; when it came to
the Bishop's share to speak, he gave advice, which, if it had been followed as
warmly, as it was slighted imprudently, had in a few days, put a period to the
War, to the immortal Glory of the French, as well as to the universal Good of
Christendom. For he said that, In his Opinion, it was neither convenient for
the King to stay there any long time, to attend the coming up of the Troops
which were expected from Italy; nor yet, according to the sense of others, to
be so hasty to pass the Strait, to join with the Germans: but that in his
Judgment, the King ought to lay hold on that fair Occasion which God Almighty
seemed to present him, and to strike the last, and the great Blow to that Holy
War, by making himself Master of Constantinople. This, Sir, added he, is the
only, absolute, and necessary way for Your Majesty, happily to finish this War,
to assure the Conquests in the East, and to make new ones, by repulsing, to the
remotest Confines of Persia, those Infidels who now dispute with us the
Possession of Palestine, and of Syria. For, most certainly, so long as we leave
Constantinople behind us, in the hands of the perfidious Manuel, we are assured
there of a most potent and treacherous Enemy; who will not fail to cut off from
us all Re-inforcements of men, and all Supplies of Provision; without which, it
is impossible for Armies to subsist: and who will do more toward our
Destruction, by his secret Correspondencies and Intelligence with our Enemies,
than all the Barbarians are able, by their united Forces. Greeks, who have
neither any sense of Honor or Honesty, or any manner of regard to the Dictates
of common Faith, or good Conscience. Their Intentions are most evident; and
Manuel makes it very clearly appear, that he intends, not only to tread in the
steps of his perfidious Father and Grandfather, but to outdo them; since he
has had the Confidence to demand of the French Nobility, that they should do
him Homage, even in the Presence of Your Majesty. Let us therefore, once for
all, remove this dangerous Obstacle of our Conquests: Let us, by one generous
Blow, assure our selves, both of the Freedom of Passage, and of all the Cities
of this Empire, both in Europe and Asia, which will, doubtless, follow the
Fortune of this Capital City: And let us not, by a foolish Scrupulosity, spare
an Enemy, who will never cease to employ all the blackest Contrivances of a
mischievous Mind, to ruin and destroy us. It ever was, and ever will be lawful,
to prevent our own, by his Ruin, who has contrived ours: And were there
nothing else, the repeated Attempts of his Troops, and the Baseness of his
People toward us, in our Passage hither, which, doubtless, was by his secret
Orders, so contrary to the Faith they had given us, and for which that
dis-loyal Man will not make the least Reparation, are sufficient to legitimate
the Vengeance which we ought to take upon him and his perfidious People. In
short, Since this holy War which we have undertaken is just, it is also just to
make use of those Ways and Means which are absolutely necessary to make it
successful; and that, nothing can assure us, but the Taking of Constantinople.
And to me it appears, the Voice of God, who himself seems to call us to it;
and, by opening the Gates of this City to us, to give us an easy Conquest over
it: for we have nothing more to do, but to cut off their Water, by breaking the
Conduits, and slopping those proud Aqueducts which supply them therewith: Or if
we be obliged to make use of Force, their Fortifications are all ruinous, the
Towers half demolished to our hands, the Ditches almost filled and grown up,
the Walls weak and defenseless, and, for the most part, ready to fall before
our Faces; as if God, without the help of Engines, had himself undertaken to
make Breaches, large enough in all reason for us to enter; which we may do
without Resistance, since we have, not only one of the bravest Armies that ever
yet were seen, but that also these pitiful Greeks, with whom we have to do, are
most miserable Cowards, without Conduct, without Experience in War, and
abandoned of God, for their Schism, Heresy, and horrible Perfidiousness and
Impieties. For which Reasons, Sir, I argue, that before we advance any further
in the Pursuit of the great End which Your Majesty has proposed, we ought to
take this Way, and this Means, which will conduct us to it, and which does not
only appear of absolute necessity, but highly just, and equally easy.

This Discourse of the Bishop was diversely received in the Council: Some of the
Wisest approved it, but it was contradicted by the Majority, rather out of a
vain Scrupulosity, than any manner of Reason which they had to oppose it. They
confessed indeed, that it was a very easy matter to take Constantinople; and
at the same time, they could not deny but there was all the Justice and
Prudence in the World to do it: but, on the other hand they alleged, that
having undertaken this War out of pure Devotion, by their Arms to deliver the
Holy Land from the Oppression of the Infidels, they could not accomplish their
Vow, and, by Consequence, have no hope of the Remission of their Sins, if they
should chance to dye in sighting against Christians, and taking their Cities
from them. All this while never considering what the Bishop had so well
remonstrated, That he who will most certainly attain the End which he proposes,
must make use of such Means as, provided they be lawful, are most necessary and
conducing to it; and that, who endeavoring the one, does the other, must of
necessity, lay a Claim to the same proportion of Merits. But thus it is; When
once a groundless Scruple, under the specious name of Religion, has fixed it
self in the Minds of Men, it becomes so absolutely Master, and is defended with
so much Obstinacy, that good Sense and Reason, and that natural Right which God
has given to Man,

But however, when it was too late, they afterward found their mighty Error,
in not following this Judicious Counsel. The crafty Greeks, that so they might
hasten away the King into Asia, by giving a Jealousy to the French, whom they
knew to be extreme amorous of Glory, spread a malicious Report, that the
Germans had already taken Iconium, and given Chase to the Infidels, who fled
before them. At this the whole Army presently took fire to that degree, that,
what with their Murmurings, and what with their importunate Cries, they
constrained the King to pass over into Asia upon the Vessels of the Emperor,
which lay ready for that purpose; and no sooner did he see the greatest part of
them on the other side, but he threw off the Mask: For, upon pretext of some
particular Disorders, committed by a private Soldier, who had taken some
Merchandise without paying for it, he took occasion to stop and pillage all the
French that were behind at Constantinople: And though the King had commanded
instant Justice to be done upon the Criminal, yet he thereupon absolutely
prohibited his Subjects from carrying any manner of Provision to the Army. And
so fierce and furious was he now grown on the sudden, knowing that their
Dependence was so great upon him, that it was not without great difficulty that
he was appeased: And at the last, notwithstanding all the generous
Remonstrances of the Bishop of Langress, not until there was a new Treaty
concluded, by which the King engaged, that he would take neither Town nor
Castle from him, and that the French Princes should do him the same Homage
which the Princes of the first Crusade had done to his Grandfather Alexis:
Manuel, for his part, promising to furnish the King with three or four Greek
Noblemen, who had Skill to conduct his Army by good Ways; and that he would
furnish Magazines of Provisions for them, during their March.

The French Lords, who were ready to dye with the desire they had to make
haste, to have their share in the good Fortune, and the Glory, which they
believed the German Army were now reaping, made no sort of difficulty to make
that Oath to the Emperor; saying, That they did the same every day, in France,
to the Lords of Fieffs, without any prejudice to the Sovereignty of the King.
But the Count de Dreux, the King's Brother, believing that he should dishonor
the Blood of France, if he should acknowledge for his Lord, any one, except the
King his Brother, took occasion to give them the slip; taking along with him
some of the most Generous, as also the Princess, his Cousin, whom Manuel
desired for a Wife for one of his Nephews: And while they were hotly disputing
about these two Articles, which the Bishop of Langress ever most vigorously
opposed, he had Leisure enough to get as far as Nicomedia. At the same time,
the King of Sicily, who made War with Manuel, with Success enough, did whatever
he was able, by his Ambassadors, to oblige the King to join with him, in a
League against that Emperor, and to attack him, both by Sea and Land, in
Europe, and in Asia. But the Scruple which the King had still in his Mind,
which made him fearful of violating his Vow, if he should make never so little
a Sally from this Holy War, made him refuse all these fair Offers, contrary to
the Advice of the wise Bishop of Langress; who clearly foresaw, and to no
purpose foretold, the Misfortunes which would befall him and the Army, by the
Perfidiousness of the Grecian Emperor. Thus the Treaty being concluded, and the
Emperor, after an Interview with the King, upon the Banks of the Propontis,
having sent over all the French that yet remained at Constantinople, the whole
Army marched, in the beginning of November, toward Nicomedia; a City which, at
that time was, in a manner, wholly ruinous.

And now the Baseness and Treachery of the perfidious Manuel began plainly to
appear; for the Guides and Officers which he promised to send, to conduct the
Army through a good Country, and to give Orders for Provisions, were not to be
found; and in the Road wherein they now were, there was very little Subsistence
for the Army: so that it was resolved to change it; and quitting the lest Hand
where the Provinces were very barren and desolate, Ascanius near unto Nice.
There it was, that in the Heat of those Desires which possessed the Army to
advance, and join as soon as possible with the Germans, who were supposed to be
so victorious, they were extremely surprised with hearing of their Defeat. At
first the news came but by some whispering Rumors, but it was in a little time
confirmed by Frederick Duke of Suabia the Emperors Nephew, whom that
unfortunate Prince, who with great difficulty had recovered Nice, with the
pitiful Remainder of his ruined Army, who in their Extremity were very ill
treated also by the Greeks, had sent to the King to advertise him of his
overthrow, and to request of him that he might see him, to the End that from
his disaster he might give him Notice of some things of great Importance in
this unhappy Conjuncture. The King who certainly was a Prince the most Civil
and Obliging in the World, and had a Soul of the best Temper of any man of his
time, resolved instantly to prevent the Emperor in his Design of seeing him,
and to endeavor to sweeten his ill Fortune by all manner of Honors and good
Offices which he was capable to do him; he therefore immediately mounted to
Horse, accompanied with all the great Lords and Officers of his Army, and went
to find the Emperor in the Place where he was encamped, expecting the Return of
his Nephew Frederick.

Never was there any thing seen more Tender and Moving than this Enterview; for
no sooner did these two great Princes see each other, but they ran into mutual
Embraces, wherein they held one the other for a long time, without being able
to speak any other Language, but those Tears which the Joy, the Grief and
Compassion, which moved so diversely in their Hearts, drew at last into their
Eyes. The King was the first who broke the Silence, and endeavoring to force a
Joy into his Lips, in Despite of the Sorrow which surrounded his Heart, he said
all that it was possible in the most Christian and obliging manner to comfort
the Afflicted Emperor for his Loss; he offered him all that he had, his Forces
and his Fortune, and protested, that he always would esteem it as great an
Honor to be his Faithful Companion in this War, as he should have done were he
still at the Head of an Army, as numerous and flourishing as that which he
commanded before this Disaster. The Emperor also on his part, said all that was
most capable to touch the Heart of a Christian Prince; he acknowledged with
great Humility, the Heavy hand of God to be justly laid upon him for the Sins
of his Army, and for his own too great Presumption, in relying so much upon the
Strength of his own Arms, to the Prejudice of that Confidence which he ought to
have reposed in God alone, in whose Almighty Hands is the Disposal of the
Fortunes of Kings. Nevertheless, he said, since God had been pleased still to
give him the same Ardent Desire to accomplish his Vow, and that he had in his
Extremity found out for him such a Generous Protector, he hoped that his Divine
Majesty would be pleased yet to make use of him to combat the Infidels among
the Arms of France, which he hoped would be happier than his, and that he was
resolved never to part from them. After which the two Princes having held a
great Council with the Principal Lords of the one and the other Nation, it was
resolved that the two Armies should march together, following the Road which
the King had already taken, in drawing toward the lesser Asia, between the Sea
and Phrygia.

But this Resolution of the Emperor did not continue long; for the German Lords
some or other of them every day demanding of him leave to depart, under Pretext
that they had lost their Equipage, when they were arrived at the City of
Ephesus after having suffered much by the mischievous Greeks, this poor Prince
found himself so slenderly accompanied that he was ashamed of himself; and
believing that it was putting an Affront upon his own Character, and the Empire
which he governed, to have it said that an Emperor of Germany without an Army
should seem to serve under a King of France, he therefore Excused himself in
the best manner that he could to the King, and sending away the little
Remainder of his Infantry by Land, himself with a few Noblemen who yet attended
him, took the Opportunity of the Return of the Greek Ambassadors who had
followed the King to Ephesus, Constantinople, where his miserable Fortune which
entitled him to pity, procured a better Reception for him from his Brother in
Law the Emperor, than he found in his more prosperous Condition to whom the
Attendance of a flourishing Army which he had before, gave so much Occasion of
Fear and Jealousy: So Great is the Malignity of Humane Nature, that it is a
Pleasure to see men become unfortunate.

As for the Ambassadors which Manuel had sent to the King to Ephesus, they only
seved more to manifest the base Perfidy and Malice of this Emperor, their
Business was only to present the King with Letters from their Master, by which
he advertized the King, that he was like to have upon his Hands such an
innumerable Company of Turks that it was impossible for him to resist them; and
therefore he advised him to secure himself from so furious a Tempest by
retiring into some Places within his Empire where he might be in safety. The
King who easily discovered the Malice of that wicked Prince, whose Design was
to stop his further Progress, and by obliging him to divide his Troops to
weaken himself in such sort, as that he might become an easy Prey to the
Infidels, generously answered the Ambassadors, That as he did not in the least
Degree stand in Fear of the Turks, so he stood in no Necessity of the Favor
which the Emperor their Master pretended to do him, and that he was fully
resolved to pursue his Enterprise. Whereupon the Ambassadors, according to the
Orders which they had received, seeing they had unprofitably spent the other
foolish Temptation of Fear, presented the King with other Letters, by which
that Emperor discovered more plainly his Malicious Will; for therein he
complained mightily of the Disorders which he said the Kings Army committed in
his Territories, and with a kind of Menace gave him to understand, that it was
impossible for him hereafter to prevent his Subjects from taking Vengeance upon
them upon all Occasions that should offer. To this the King who amidst all the
Goodness of his Natural Disposition, ever retained a certain Air and Character
of Greatness, and a Noble Fierceness, worthy of the Greatest of all Kings, made
no other Answer than by a Gesture of Disdain, by a short turn Leaving the
Ambassadors to carry that Account, for he would send no other, to their Master:
leaving Ephesus therefore which at that time was almost nothing but a miserable
Heap of Ruins, he went to pass the Feasts at Christmas in the open Fields in
that fair and delicious Valley where now the rest of that City is situate.
After Christmas he quitted the Seacoast, and advanced more within Land
toward the East, drawing right toward Laodicea a City of Lydia between Tralla
and Apamia, upon the River Lycus, where it goes to lose it self in that of
Meander, upon the Banks whereof all the Army went to encamp in the beginning of
the following Year.

The River of Meander so celebrated by the Songs of the Poets, for the singing
of her Swans, of which they have there created great Numbers, which never
mortal man could yet find, is one of the fairest Rivers of the lesser Asia, and
which in its Course waters more Countries than all the others; for it has so
many several Windings and Turnings, that it is said between the Head of its
Spring, and its Fall into the Sea it makes six hundred Semicircles. It rises
out of a Fountain sometimes called Aulocrene, at the Foot of the Mount Selenus
in the greater Phrygia, and after having moistened that fair Province, it turns
from the East to the West running between the Mountains and the Hills, through
those rich and spacious Valleys and delightful Medows, which on the right Hand
divide Lydia and Ionia from Caria, whose Boundary it is on the left Hand, till
it falls into the Egean Sea, between the Cities of Miletus and Priena. When the
Army was arrived to the Banks of this famous River, it was resolved to stay
there to refresh themselves for a few days in that place, which is one of the
richest and most delightful Countries of all Asia. But they were no sooner
encamped, but they perceived that the Turks had posted themselves most
advantageously upon the Mountains which lie on both sides of the River. For the
Infidels had learnt by their Greek Spies, who gave them constant Intelligence,
that the French marching from Ephesus, took the way for Laodicea, which lies on
the further side of Meander; and there they imagined they might combat them
with great advantage, and defeat them without difficulty in their passage over
the River. French Army should attempt to pass it, the one should fall in upon
their Rere, at the same time that the others being posted on the further Bank,
should oppose the Van in their Endeavors to pass over, and in Case either of
them found themselves pressed, they should retire to the Mountains which were
at no great distance from them.

The King presently apprehended their Design, and finding no Possibility of
passing it in that place where he was encamped, by reason the River was too
deep and large, resolved to pass up higher toward Laodicea; and to secure his
March, he placed the Baggage and all that was feeble in the middle, ranging his
best Troops in the Rere, and on his left toward the Mountains; for he feared
not to be attacked either in the Front, or on that side where the River
separated him from the Enemies who marched over against him to impeach his
Passage. In this Condition he marched some time, but could make no manner of
Progress, because he was continually obliged to make Halts, to repulse the
Enemies who perpetually followed the Army, coming to make a Discharge with
their Arrows without coming nearer, and then wheeling off at full Speed;
immediately returning in the same manner without ever coming to handy Blows. So
that the second day, seeing that he could neither sight, nor march at quiet, he
stopped short about Noon, and resolved to attempt the Pass in the View of both
the Armies who observed his Motions.

In Truth it was a brave and Generous Resolution, but extreme difficult in the
Execution; for the Meander though it be not very Rapid by Reason of its many
Windings, yet it is very broad and deep. It was in the Month of January when
Rivers usually are at the biggest, and it had now rained for four days in such
abundance, that its Waters were considerably increased; there was one Army at
his Back, and another appeared drawn up in Batallia upon the further Bank, and
in the Plain whither it was descended to defend the Pass; and if the Entry into
the River was easy the getting out was difficult, the further Bank being not
only possessed by the Enemies, but very steep and high; and that which made the
Difficulty greater was, that there was not one fordable place to be found, all
the Country People though several Examined agreeing in the Protestation that
they never knew any passing there. And besides all this, so soon as any of the
Soldiers entered the River to search for a Ford, the Turks on the other side
also entered the River, and showred down their Arrows upon them. Nevertheless
the Desire which the Army had to pass and fight the Infidels was so great, that
after having tried both above and below to find out a Ford in the River,
without regarding the Arrows of the Enemies, they at the last found one,
turning a little upon the left hand, which those of the Country had never known.

The King after he had given Orders to the Cavalry of the Avant-Guard to pass
the Ford, he put himself at the Head of the Rere, which faced the Turks who had
charged them there, and running upon them at a full Cariere before they had the
Liberty according to their Custom to retire, he cut a great part of them in
pieces, and repulsed the rest with Sword and Lance at their very Reins, even to
the Mountains. At the same time Thierri Earl of Flanders, Henry the Son of
Thibald Earl of Champagne, and William Earl de Mascon, having thrown themselves
with the first Squadrons into the River, were followed by all the rest, and in
Despite of the Arrows which like Hail were showred most furiously upon them
from the opposite Bank, which did but little Execution upon those armed Troops,
they gained the other Shore, and sustained the Shock of their Enemies, till the
rest of the Troops got over and drew up in Batalia. Immediately thereupon they
made a most furious Charge upon the Turks, who now no longer able to use their
Bows were presently overthrown; for these Barbarians having no defensive Arms,
and not accustomed to fight Foot to Foot against the Franks, were constrained
to give way to that Terrible Shock, and therefore betook themselves to Flight,
leaving a great Number of their Men extended upon the Earth, and a great many
of Prisoners; the rest were pursued to the Mountains where they saved
themselves,

There ran a Report in the Army, that a Cavalier in white Arms, who was never
seen before nor after, passing before the rest as it were to show them the Way
they were to take, gave the first Charge upon the Squadrons of the Enemy. But
as it was the Humor of those times to feign such Visions, to render
extraordinary Actions as this was, more miraculous, one may without scruple
dispense with disbelieving this Apparition. Eudes a Monk of St. Dennis who was
the Successor of Sugerius, and who was by that great Abbot recommended to the
King as an able Man to serve him, both as his Chaplain and his Secretary,
during that Voyage satisfies himself with saying, that there were several who
affirmed they saw that white Cavalier, but that for his own particular he was
resolved neither to be deceived nor to deceive others, and that he saw no such
thing. He adds, like a man of Sense, that without having Recourse to this
Marvel which was not easy to prove, there was another Passage not less
remarkable or surprising, and which ought to be wholly attributed to the Divine
Protection, and that is, that in this Attempt there was not one Person of
Quality lost except Milon or Miles the Lord of Nogent who was drowned. A
strange and mavelous Adventure! which we have seen repeated within a few
days, by that admirable Reflux, and if I may venture to express it so,
Circulation of the same Events which produces the same thing in succeeding Ages
which have happened in those past so long ago. For in the War with Holland,
where the King of France by the prodigious Success of his Arms made himself
Master in less than one Champagne of above thirty strong places; he commanded a
Party of his Cavalry to pass the Rhine not far from its Mouth, under the
Conduct of the Generous Count de Guiche, where those Braves, in the View of
their Enemies who were drawn up on the other side to oppose them, passed that
great River, partly by a Ford till that time unknown, and partly by swimming,
without any other considerable Loss than that of the Count de Nogent, who there
perished in signallizing by a glorious Death, his Zeal and Courage in one of
the fairest Occasions that were ever seen. But it is in short, that one ought
to expect, that what ever was great or Heroic in their Ancestors, is in our
time to be performed by their Descendants, under a King, who hitherto has
carried the Glory of this August Monarchy to a higher Degree, than any of his
Illustrious Predecessors have done since Charlemain.

The End of the First Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
TOME II.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS of the First Book.
The Rereguard of the Kings Army Defeated in the Mountains of Laodicea for want
of observing the Kings Orders. The Description of that Combat. A most Heroic
Action of the King in an extreme Danger of his Life. His March, and admirable
Conduct to Attalia. The new Perfidy of the Greeks in Betraying the Royal Army.
The Arrival of the King at Antioch, and his Difference with Prince Raymond. The
Conquenty March to Jerusalem, where he is met by the Emperor Conrade. The
Council at Ptolemais, where the Siege of Damascus is resolved. The Description
of the City of Damascus. The manner of the March of the Christian Army toward
that City. The young King Baldwin makes the first Attack, his Character, and
extraordinary Valor in the Attack against the Gardens and Suburbs of Damascus.
The great Combat upon the Bank of the River. A brave Action of the Emperor
Conrade. An Account of the Siege of Damascus, and the Treachery of the Syrians,
which occasioned the ill Success of that Enterprise. The Return of the Emperor
and the King. The Murmurs against St. Bernard, and his Apology. The Conquest of
Noradin after the raising of the Siege. The Death of King Baldwin and his
Elogy. His Brother Amauri Succeeds him. The History of that Princes Life, who
by his Avarice loses the Opportunity of Conquering all Egypt. The History of
Syracon, who Seizes upon the Kingdom of Egypt, and leaves it to his Nephew
Saladin. The Elogy and first Conquest of that Prince. The Death of Amauri, and
the Troubles and Divisions which it caused in the Realm. The Conquests of
Saladin thereupon. The Reign of Baldwin the Leprous. The Embassage to the
Princes of the West, to desire their Help against Saladin. The Negotiation of
the Ambassadors with the Pope and Emperor, in France, and England with Henry
the Second. The Artifices of that King to Elude this Embassage. A famous Care
of Conscience proposed in the Parliament at London upon this great Affair. The
Reasons on one side and the other. The best Opinion rejected by the Bishops as
False. The Displeasure of the Patriarch Heraclius against the King. The
Conference between Philip Augustus and King Henry, which Recommences the War.
The Apostasy and Treason of a Templer. The Death of King Baldwin the Fourth,
and of the young King his Nephew. The Artifice of Sybil Mother to the deceased
Infant King, to obtain the Crown for Guy de Lusignan her second Husband. The
Despite of Raymond Earl of Tripolis thereupon. His Character. His horrible
Treason, and secret Treaty with Saladin, who Enters Galilee and Besieges
Tiberias. Division in the Council of War held by the King. The unfortunate
Battle of Tiberias; which was lost by the Treachery of Count Raymond. The
Advantage which Saladin made of his Victory. The Relation of the Siege and
taking of Jerusalem by that victorious Prince. The sorrowful Departure of the
Christians from Jerusalem, and the Generosity of Saladin. The Cruelty, and
miserable Death of the Earl of Tripolis. The Triumph of Saladin. An Account of
the Preserving of Tire by Marquis Conrade. The Causes of the Loss of the Holy
Land.

Greeks who could by no means endure the Glory and the Advantages of the
French, began more openly to declare themselves against them than before; for
now they plainly joined with the Turks, to whom they afforded not only a
Retreat to Antioch in Pisidia, but gave them also the Opportunity with Ease to
Assemble and Reunite their scattered Troops. Whilst in the mean time the King
was in great Straits for Subsistence, and finding himself in no Condition to
Attaque them in so strong a Place, drew toward Laodicea, a large City, but not
so well Fortified as to be in a Condition to Resist him, and there he hoped to
meet with some Refreshment for his Army. He arrived there three or four days
after the Battle, but to his great Disappointment he found, by the Baseness of
him that Commanded there for the Emperor, that there was no manner of Provision
for the Army. It was this wicked Villain, who pretending to Convoy a party of
the poor Germans who had saved themselves after their Defeat, lead them into an
Ambuscade of Turks, who put them all to the Sword, and with whom, as it was
before Agreed, he divided their Spoil. This Infamous Traitor, fearing, it
seems, that the French would be Revenged of him for his Treachery, or else
that, imagining he should not be able to Betray them in the same manner, he was
resolved to do them a greater Mischief, after having caused all the Inhabitants
to Retire with their Goods and Provisions to the Woods and Mountains, went
himself to seek a Refuge among the Turks; so that the King was obliged to stay
there, till those Fugitives could be found and persuaded to return; Pamphilia,
that so they might by Marching near the Sea have a more commodious Passage, and
meet with better Plenty of Forage and Subsistence. And tho they knew that both
the Greeks and the Turks Coasted along with them, tho at a great Distance, yet
they were esteemed such contemptible Enemies, and the French were so Confident
after the Victory they had gained, that there was too little care taken to
stand upon their Guard: But this Presumption, as it usually happens, did not
fail to be very Pernicious to this Army, which was unfortunately beaten by the
Turks, by the Fault of one Man, who neglected to observe the Orders which were
wisely Established by Military Discipline.

the Army following the Custom of those Times, was divided only into two
Bodies, one of which composed the Vanguard, and the other the Rereguard. To
avoid Jealousies, these two Bodies were every day Commanded by two of the
Principal Lords, who under the King took their several Turns, the King
sometimes Marching with one, sometimes with the other: Every Night they
Assembled in Council, at which all the Lords Assisted, where Orders were issued
out concerning the Way of the next days March, and the Place where the Army was
to Encamp. Now there happened to be in the Way which they must of necessity
pass, a mighty high Mountain, extreme difficult of Access by reason of the
dangerous Narrowness and broken Craggs and Rocks where the Army must file off.
The King therefore following the Resolution which had been taken at the
Council, gave Order, that they should Encamp on the Top of the Mountain, and
that they should pass the Night there, and the next Morning descend into the
Plain in order of Battle. He who led the Vanguard that Day, was Geoffry Rancon
of Poitiers Lord of Taillebourg, who carried the Royal Standard according to
the Custom, next the Orislame at the Head of this Vanguard; The Count de
Morienne, the King's Uncle, with the Queen and all the Ladies of Quality were
there also by very good Fortune, going before, that so they might come in
better time to the Place where they were to Incamp. The King, who usually chose
the Place where there was most Danger, had put himself into the Rere, that so
he might make Head against the Enemies, if they should attempt to Follow or
Molest him as they had done at the Battle of Meander. Geoffry Arrived at the
Mountain in very good time, and seeing the Sun yet of a great height, and his
Guides telling him that if he did but make a little the more Have, he might
Incamp far more Commodiously, in one of the fairest Plains of all Asia, where
he should meet with all sorts of Refreshments for the Army; forgetting
therefore the Orders of the King, with extreme Rashness he descended from the
Mountain, and Marched a great way to that agreeable Place which had been showed
him, supposing that the Arrierguard not finding him upon the Mountain, would
certainly follow him. But he took very false Measures, and in deceiving himself
in this manner, occasioned the Loss of the other part of the Army, which was
more miserably deceived by him. For the very same Reason which made him March
forward from the Mountain to gain the Valley, made the others also, seeing the
Sun so high, to make no have to get to the Mountain, where they doubted not but
to find him Encamped according to the King's Orders. By this means the Turks,
who Coasted all along constantly with the Army, perceiving that the two Bodies
were so separated, that it was impossible for the one to Assist the other, ran
immediately to Seize upon the Top of the Mountain, where they presently cut in
pieces all those of the scattering Infantry, whom they found there for the most
part Unarmed, being not able to follow the Gross of the Army, and having seized
the Pass, they cut off the Rereguard in such manner that it was impossible for
them to join with the Van, without passing through the whole Army of their
Enemies.

It was a strange Surprise to these Troops, who after they were Advanced a good
way up the Mountain into the strait Passages, believing there to find their
Companions, instead of them to meet with their Enemies, who at an Instant
discharged upon them a fearful Cloud of Arrows, and who shooting from on high
upon a company who were Entangled and Disordered one among another, tumbled
them down with mighty Blows of the Mace and Cimiter, Turks had Posted
themselves in Battalia, to support those of their Troops who had made the first
Charge. There it was that there was a kind of regular Combat; the French
Animating one another by the Presence of the King, and by the little Account
that was to be made of such as they had Vanquished at the Meander, and
principally by the fatal Necessity to which they were reduced, either to
Conquer or to Dye. The Turks on the other hand were Encouraged by the great
Advantage which they had already gained, by the Disorder in which they saw
their Enemies, by the small Number of those that Charged them, and especially
by the Remembrance of the Fortune of the German Army, which they had so luckily
Defeated in the Straits of such sort of Mountains. The Fight was maintained
with extreme Fury, for the French, to whom still those who could Advance joined
themselves, slew in like Lions among the thickest of their Enemies, where they
made a most horrible Slaughter. But the Turks, who had there their whole Army,
sending in continual Troops of fresh Men to Enforce their Men, and the French,
who were but a small Handful, surrounded with a vast Multitude, could do no
more than it was possible for Men to do, so that it was impossible, but being
drained of all their Blood and Strength, and not having time to take any
Breath, but that they must sink under that Misfortune; most of those gallant
Men being there either Slain or taken Prisoners; the Count de Va^ennes, and his
Brother Everard de Bretuil, Count Renaud de Tonnerre, Gauthier de Montjay,
Ithier de Magni, Manasses de Bulli, and five and thirty other great Lords who
Accompanied the King, lost their Lives there, in this glorious Occasion of
defending his.

This brave Prince still Fought with an invincible Courage, Environed with so
many Enemies, and the Bodies of so many of his generous Friends who lay dead at
his Feet, till such time as some one of his Cavaliers, laying hold of his
Horses Bridle, made way with their Swords quite through the Body of the Turks,
and so gained the Top of the Mountain, where they Enclosed him with a Wall of
their own Bodies, to defend him, till the Obscurity of the Night, which now
drew on apace, favored him with a Retreat. But the greatest part of them being
Slain by a great Troop of Turks who Pursued them, without knowing that it was
the King, he found himself almost alone, and therefore quitting his Horse, he
scrambled up a Rock by the help of some Bows of a Tree which grew there,
thinking that might be a convenient Place to enable him to defend himself from
the Pursuers. But the Turks Compassing him round, some shot at him to bring him
down, others endeavored to Climb up after him, to Kill or take him Prisoner.
In all appearance it was impossible that he could Escape, but nevertheless by a
particular Protection of God, and by a Prodigy of Courage and Valor, he did
escape this Danger. His Curiass guarded him sufficiently against the Arrows,
and with his Sword cutting off the Hands, and splitting the Sculls of those who
endeavored to get up to him upon the Rock, he Defended himself with such an
incredible Force, and without Weariness, that the Turks who took him for some
ordinary Cavalier, surprised by his astonishing Valor, and fearing besides
that here they should get nothing but Blows, and loose also their Share in the
Plunder, they left him to run to the Booty, before it was quite Night, with the
rest of their Companions.

In the mean time some Soldiers and Servants of the Army, who under the Favor
of the Darkness were endeavoring to Escape, Eudes, the Monk of St. Dennis, to
save himself as well as he could, and make have to the Camp of the Vanguard, to
order them to March instantly to his Relief; but the Way being long and
difficult, and that they had not Notice till very late, this Succor came too
late, and served to no other purpose but to Conduct the King to the Camp, after
having found him in this pitiful Estate. It is impossible to express the
Consternation which the Army was in, seeing the King so slenderly Accompanied,
after the Loss of so many Lords of the first Quality, and almost all the
Rereguard, except a few Soldiers who saved themselves in the Woods and
Mountains, and at last found the Way to the Camp, whither they came straggling
one after another all the Night. There was scarcely any Person in the Camp but
what had some Share in this deplorable Loss: One lamented his Father, another
his Son, this his Brother, that his Kinsman or his Friend; some ran to Embrace
those of their Acquaintance, who were got off half Naked, and without their
Arms; whilst others who conceived a like Hope for theirs, in vain expected
those who were never to Return. However all of them Comforted themselves in
this extreme Grief, by the Joy which they had at the Kings Escape, after he had
run such a fearful Danger of being Lost, and had defended himself from it in
that Heroic manner which has been related; and in short, all of them in the
midst of this Grief and Joy, tumultuously and loudly demanded the Death of
Geoffry, who had most apparently been the only Cause of this horrible Loss, by
disobeying those Orders which had been prescribed him by the King, and so
furiously were they Incensed against him, that nothing would satisfy them but
to have him Hanged immediately: And certainly it is impossible to deny but that
he well deserved to have suffered Death, but such was the Bounty and natural
Goodness of the King, and the Count de Morienne, having also in a great Measure
been Guilty of that Miscarriage, for whom the King had a great Value, he escaped
with his Life.

The next Day when they were to Decamp, the Army was reduced to very great
Extremities. For they discovered the Enemies upon the Tops of the Mountains,
ready to follow the remainder of the Army, and to take all Advantages to
Surprise them again upon their March. The Provisions began to fail; they had
twelve days March to the Place whither they designed to go, they wanted good
Guides, and must of necessity pass through Countries possessed by the Turks and
the Greeks who were equally their Enemies. All these Dangers and Difficulties,
how great soever, did not yet abate the Courage of the French, who are usually
Reproached with loosing a great part of their Fire and their natural
Confidence, when they are under adverse Fortune; however it did not happen so
upon this Occasion, which only made them more Wise, and not less Valiant or
Resolved. The King to model this new Army, divided it also into two Bodies, one
of which was the Rereguard; He gave the Command of this to the Great Master of
the Temple, Everard de Bars, a most valiant Gentleman, who some days before
was come to join the Army with a good Troop of the Knights of that Order. The
Conduct of the other he entrusted with an old Captain, one Gilbert, to whom all
the others, though in Quality much Superior to him, yet, made no Difficulty to
submit themselves, since the King himself protested that he would obey his
Orders. But he most humbly entreated the King, to put himself between these two
Bodies with a good Body of Horse and Foot, that so he might be able from thence
to send Assistance to either of them, if they should happen to be much Pressed
by the Enemy. The Baggage marched in the Middle, and a great part of the Horse
were Ranged upon the Wings to the Right and Left, to cover the Flanks of the
Army. In this manner it was that they Advanced, and in this Order marched daily
toward Pamphilia, with so much Conduct, that the Enemies who Coasted along
with them, and Attacked them four several times, Barbarians, and putting the
rest to a shameful Flight.

The most troublesome Enemy which he had to Combat was Want, for all the Country
was either Desert, or ruined by the Enemies, who laid all wast wherever the
Army was to pass; so that they were reduced to that Extremity to Eat their
Horses, which they were also constrained to kill for want of Forage for so
great a Number. But that which supported them still, was the Example of the
King, who endured all these Inconveniences as if he had been one of the meanest
Soldiers: Some he commended, others he encouraged, and liberally bestowed what
he had among them to Comfort the poor Creatures; his Care was every where, and
he took his Share in all the Troubles of the War, having his Curiass on almost
Night and Day, and performing all the Functions of a Great Captain and a
Soldier with all the Vigor imaginable; And to all this he added a Piety toward
God so constant and regular, that in all the time of this laborious Voyage he
never failed to attend the Divine Offices of public Prayers. In Conclusion,
the Enemies after their last Defeat not daring to appear or to molest the Army,
they performed this long March with the greater Ease, and about the twentieth
of January Arrived near the City of Attalia, Situate upon a Bay on the Coast of
Pamphylia, near the Mouth of the River Cestrius. The Governor of that City,
which was under the Dominion of the Greek Emperor, fearing that he was not able
to Resist so great an Army, if he declared himself their Enemy, offered the
King Provisions and Ships to Transport his Army into Syria, which was the Thing
he most ardently Desired, thinking himself in no Condition to accomplish so
long a March by Land; for the King, who had no Engines for a Siege, and was
willing to satisfy his Army by shortning the Voyage, was very ready to accept
of his Offer: But there was no manner of Mischief which this Perfidious and
true Greek, who held Intelligence with the Turks, did not do, to Incommode and
Ruin, as far as he was able, this whole Army, during five Weeks which they lay
there in Expectation of a Wind. And then he would find such a small number of
Ships, and those at such excessive Rates, that the King was at last constrained
to Imbarque himself, without his Infantry. He then treated with the Greeks, who
obliged themselves for a large sum of Money, which was paid in Hand, to receive
the Sick into the Town, till they should be able to endure the Sea, and to
Convoy the rest who chose to go by Land, through the midst of the Turks, than
to trust to these Treacherous Greeks, who notwithstanding failed not to Sell
and Betray them.

For so soon as the King was gone, the Infidels, who received Advertisement
from these Traitors, came pouring down from all Parts, upon these who were to
venture by Land; and for those who were received into the Town, the Greeks
either Starved them, or inhumanly Delivered them into the Hands of the Turks,
insomuch, that of all those brave Men, there was but a very few who Escaped by
Land with the Earl of Flanders and Archambald de Bourbon, who generously
offered themselves to be their Conductors. And now it was, that it appeared too
late, to be a vain Scruple, which was to so ill Purpose opposed against the
wise Council of the Bishop of Langres, who advised the Seizing upon
Constantinople; and which occasioned the Loss of such a fair Army, as, if it
had begun with that Enterprise so just, so easy, and so necessary, might
gloriously have Triumphed over the whole East, and absolutely assured the
Christians of the Possession of the Holy Land. But it is the common Weakness of
the greatest part of Mankind, not to know what they ought to do, till for want
of doing it, all is so far lost, that when they would, they want the Power
proportionate to the Will. But as for this persidious City, it was afterward
equally Punished both by God and the Greek Emperor, though for very different
Reasons. For God to revenge the Inhumane Treachery with which they had treated
the French, sent such a Pestilence amongst the Inhabitants a short time after,
as swept away the greatest part of them; and the Emperor out of Madness that
they had assisted the French with Provisions and Shipping, laid such a Mul^t
upon them, as drained them of all their ill gotten Gold and Silver,

In the mean time the King, who had taken the Sea, with all the great Lords,
and the remainder of the Cavalry, which might yet compose a considerable Army,
came happily to an Anchor at the Port of St. Simeon, upon the Mouth of the
Orontes, about four or five Leagues from Antioch; into which place he made his
Entry, upon the 19th Day of March, and was received with all manner of
Magnificence by Prince Raymond, who was Uncle, by the Mother, to Queen Eleoner.
Now this Prince passionately desiring that the King should immediately enter
upon a War in Syria, to conquer for him Aleppo, and the other places belonging
to the Principality of Antioch, which were yet possessed by the Turks, there
was no sort of Artifice which he did not put in practice, to oblige him to
undertake it. He had Recourse to all manner of Submissions and Prayers; he made
use of the Solicitations of the Queen, his Niece; he made magnificent Presents
to all the French Lords; and in short, he omitted no kind of Reasons, but
pressed them with his utmost force, both privately, and in Council, to persu^de
the King, that it must be, not only for his own Interest and Glory, but for
that of all that part of Christendom in the East. But at length he perceived
that he labored but in vain. The King, whether it were that he feared to
engage himself in so long and so dangerous a War, for the particular Interest
of Prince Raymond; or whether it were that some certain Intrigues which the
Queen had in Antioch, which, no doubt, did not please him, obliged him to leave
that City; he always answered Raymond, that he was fully resolved, in the first
place, to go and pay his Vows at the holy Sepulcher. So that, as it commonly
happens, that one violent Passion easily passes to another Extreme; this
Prince being insinitely exasperated by that Refusal, and it may be, not a
little animated by another Passion in his Niece, to which he joined his, he
entertained such a mortal Hatred against the King, that there was nothing which
he did not resolve to do, to revenge himself. For this reason, the King, who
knew he was to apprehend all things from a Spirit so furiously transported,
that he valued not what he did, secretly conveyed himself by Night out of the
City, in a manner not very well becoming the Majesty of so great a Monarch; and
taking the Queen along with him, not much to her Satisfaction, he went and
joined his Troops, which were encamped under the Walls, and marched directly
toward Jerusalem, where the Emperor Conrade was already arrived, from
Constantinople, where he had passed the Winter.

For that Prince, who was resolved to accomplish his Vow; and who, by reason of
the small Remainder of his Troops which were left after his Misfortune, gave no
Jealousy to Manuel, easily obtained from him Shipping, to transport himself
and his Troops, in the Spring, by Sea; as he did, to Ptolemais, or Acon: from
whence he passed by Land to Jerusalem. Alphonsus, Earl of Tholose, and Son to
the brave Raymond, who had so great a Part in the first Crusade, coming at the
same time, to the same Port, took another Way, all along by the Seacoast; but
he was stopped in his Journey, by a deplorable Death, as he passed by Cesarea;
being unfortunately poisoned one Evening, at his Supper, without ever being
known, either for what Reason, or by what Person, that execrable Fact was
committed.

It was no sooner known at Jerusalem, that the King, who, it was feared, would
have stayed at Antioch, according to the earnest Desires and Solicitations of
Raymond, was parted from thence, and that he took the Way of Tripolis, but that
King Baldwin, who feared lest the Earl of Tripolis should also press him
strongly to stay there, sent immediately to him, Fulcherius the Patriarch, to
propound to him such Reasons as, he believed, would oblige him to make what
haste he could to Jerusalem, where the Emperor had now been for some time; that
so there they might take some good and solid Resolution, for the common and
public Advantage of Affairs: To this the King, who desired nothing more,
easily accorded; and therefore kept on his way, without staying any where, till
he arrived at the Holy City. There he was received with most extraordinary
Honors; Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord, whilst he made his
Entry into the City, as it were, in Triumph: After which, all the Princes and
Prelates accompanied him, to visit the Holy Places; which he did with a great
Piety and Devotion. This being done, it was resolved, that there should be a
General Assembly held at Ptolemais; whither all the Bishops, and the Lords of
Palestine and Syria, might easily come by Sea: where, by common Consent, the
last Resolution was to be taken, upon what was to be undertaken, for the
Security of the Christians in the East.

There never was a more illustrious Assembly seen in Palestine, than this;
which was honored with the Presence of so many great Princes. There was the
Emperor Conrade, accompanied with the Cardinal Theodin, Bishop of Porto, and
the Great Men of the Empire, who stayed with him; among whom, the principal
were Otho of Fribourg, his Brother by the Mother; Frederick, Duke of Suabia,
his Nephew; the Bishops of Metz and Toul, as Princes of the Holy Empire: as
also, the Bishop of Basle, Henry his Brother, Duke of Austria; Berthold,
afterward Duke of Bavaria; William, Marquis of Montferat; Guy, Earl of
Blandras; and Herman, Marquis of Verona. The King came attended with Guy,
Cardinal of Florence, the Pope's Legate in his Army; and the Bishops of Langres
and Lizieux: The Count de Dreux, his Brother; Thierry, Earl of Flanders; Henry,
Earl of Troyes; the Son of Thibald, Earl of Champagne; Ives de Nele, and many
other Lords of the first Quality, who came with him from Attalia. The young
King Baldwin, with his Mother Queen Melesintha, also assisted at it; together
with the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Archbishops of Cesarea and Nazareth, the
Bishops of Ptolemais, Sidon, Beritus, Paneas and Bethlehem; the Earls of
Napolis, Tiberias, Sidon, Cesaria, Beritus: as also, the Constable Manasses,
and the great Masters of the Temple of the Hospitallers.

It was a long time under Debate, what was most advantageous to be undertaken
for the common Interest; and in conclusion, they determined to besiege
Damascus: Which being, as it were, in the Center and Midst of the four
Principalities which the Christians held in the East, might be equally
dangerous to them all. Upon this, all the Troops were appointed to rendezvous,
the five and twentieth Day of May, at Tiberias; where a general Review being
made of the Army, they advanced to Paneas, near the Head of Jordan; the
Patriarch carrying the true Cross, or, at least, that which was believed to be
so, before them. The Measures which were taken for the Siege, were according to
the Opinion of the Lords of that Country, who were best acquainted with the
Strength and Weakness of the place. After which, crossing the celebrated Mount
Lebanon, they descended into the fair Champain of Damascus, and encamped at
Daria, a little Village, about two Leagues from Damascus; from the most
elevated place whereof, the Towers of that stately City were easily to be
discerned.

Damascus, one of the most ancient, and sometimes one of the fairest and
greatest Cities of Asia, is situate in a large Plain, at the Foot of Mount
Lebanon; which is watered with two Rivers, and a great number of little Springs
and Fountains; which, notwithstanding its natural Inclination to Sterility, it
being a hungry, sandy Soil, render it very fruitful and delightful. These two
Rivers take their Rise upon the East, at no very great distance, from the Foot
of the Mountain Amana, which is a part of Mount Lebanon: the lesser is called
Abana, and slows all along by the Walls of the City, upon the West; the
greater, which is Pharpar, and which some have confounded with the Orontes;
and, for the beauty of its Streams, is called Chryorrhoas, or Golden Stream;
after having passed through the City, and wandered through the Fields and the
Valleys of the neighboring Country, loses it self under the Earth; either
because, being divided into a multitude of Canals, which are drawn, to render
the Earth more fruitful, that it is so diminished, that at last it ends in
them; or that by some unknown, Subterranean Passages, it discharges it self
into the Phenician Sea.

It was the great Convenience of making these Canals, Orientals, for the
Convenience, and the Lodging of its Master: So that the City being very
populous, the number of Gardens which covered those sides, was very great, and
extended themselves almost two Leagues; so that, viewing it upon that side, it
represented to the Sight a large Forest, which seemed to extend it self to the
very Walls. But on the contrary, the other side, which lay to the East and
South, had not so much as a Tree, a Hedge, or a Bush; but showed a bald
Champaign, from whence it was easy to discern the whole City; which was
defended with high Walls, which were fortified with great Towers, whereof four,
which listed up their proud Heads above the rest, were of an extraordinary
height and strength: and above all, it was defended by a Fortress, which was
esteemed the fairest, and most regular of all Asia.

This City had been taken from the Sarasins, by the Turks, whose Sultan,
Dodequin, made a most cruel War against the Christians, between the time of the
first and the second Crusade. After his death, his Successors, seeing
themselves attacked by Sanguin, the redoubted Sultan of Alepo and Ninevch, who
endeavored the Conquest of all Syria, joined themselves with the Christian
Princes, to make War against this common Enemy. They assisted them, according
to the Treaty in the Taking of Paneas, which they had taken from the Christians
before, and Sanguin from them again. But there being little Faith to be
expected from Infidels, they soon brake the Peace, and declared themselves, as
before, the mortal Enemies of the Christians. For this reason it was, that the
Resolution was sixed to attack them, and above all things, to carry this City,
which was in a Condition to give the Check-mate to the four Christian
Principalities of the East. Hereupon it was also resolved in the Council, to
attack the Town on the Garden-sides, that so the Army might have the
Convenience of the River, the Fruits and Forage, which were there to be had in
abundance. The next Morning therefore, the Army, being divided into three
Bodies, marched in good Order toward Damascus; drawing from the West, toward
the North, to the Garden-Quarter of the City. The young King of Jerusalem,
Baldwin the Third, commanded in Person the first Body, composed of his own
Troops, and those of the Princes of Syria, who had the same Interest with him
in the Siege. The French made the second, having at their Head King Lewis to
support the first, which they followed at a little distance, to be always ready
to afford them Succor. The Emperor, with his Germans, had the Rere, to oppose
the Enemy's Cavalry, if they should attempt to fall upon them as they made
their Approaches. Baldwin, who thirsted mightily after Glory, and was
transported with Joy, to meet with so fair an Opportunity to display his
Courage, in the View of the French and Germans, did instantly press to make the
first Attack; which was easily granted him, in regard he alleged, that his
People were better acquainted than the rest, with the nature of the place, and
the Turnings of the Gardens. He was a Prince, who was now advanced to the
Flower of his Youth, being between eight and nine and twenty Years of Age: he
was of Stature something less than the Middle, but of a Proportion so just and
regular in all the parts of his Body, that his want of Height did not lessen
that Port and Majesty of a King which he wore, and which made him be known for
one, by such as had the honor to see him; the Shape of his Face, and the Turn
of all his Lincaments were very handsome; his Eyes indifferent large and full,
extreme sweet and sparkling, with a Fire that wanted nothing in it of
Attractive; his Hair was inclining to Fair, of a lively Color, well assuring
the Beholders of the strength of his Robust Constitution; his Cheeks plump,
Melesintha, his Mother, and the Vivacity of Baldwin the Second, his
Grandfather, whom he much resembled: And, to make the Harmony complete, he had
a Soul proportionable to his Body; for his Mind was quick, easy, ready and
penetrating, which had been cultivated by the Study of all manner of gentile
and ingenuous Learning, and which was of wonderful Advantage to him; he had a
most happy Memory, and a mavelous Facility in expressing himself eloquently
upon the sudden, concerning any kind of Subject of Discourse; he was naturally
of one of the best Tempers in the World, of a heart truly Royal; being liberal,
magnisicent, affable, obliging, complaisant, of a good Humor, and one who
understood innocent and divertive Rallery, and how to use it without losing his
Friend, rather than his Wit; for he was rather naturally sober, vigilant and
provident, brave and undaunted in War, exposing himself freely to Dangers, and
suffering equally with the meanest Soldier: And, to conclude, all his greatest
Accomplishment was, that he was, above all, a most devout and religious Prince;
having, among all these Perfections that could be wished in a great King, as
few Failings as most common Men, being a little inclined by his Heat, to love
Play, and the Conversation of the Ladies; but if he erred in any thing in this
last Particular, he corrected it afterward, by a lawful Marriage.

Baldwin being such as I have endeavored to describe him, full of Courage, and
Martial Fire; ambitious of Glory, in valiantly fighting in view of an Emperor,
and a King of France, who were followed by the bravest Men of the West, marched
briskly to attack these Gardens, which, like a Labyrinth, seemed to render the
Town inaccessible on that Quarter: but he found that the Enterprise was not so
easy as he had painted it in his conquering Imagination; and that the Honor
which he pretended to gain, was like to prove a very dear Purchase. For the
Turks, who well knew that their Safety depended upon the Preservation of this
Post, had placed the greatest part of their Garrison there to defend it: Some
of them were retrenched and barricadoed in the Narrow Ways, where not above two
could pass abreast; where they repulsed those who assisted them, with Push of
Pike: Others, having broken small Holes in the Walls which parted the Gardens,
pierced with their Javelins, from both sides, such Soldiers as were in the
Passages, who could not come to be revenged of those Enemies, who wounded them
without appearing: A great number of others were mounted upon the Turrets, and
the Tops of the Houses; from whence they poured an insinite number of mortal
Arrows from above, upon the Christians who were below, whilst others threw down
huge Stones upon those who were wedged in those narrow Passages, and could no
ways secure themselves from that fearful Hail. So that the Soldiers being
neither able to advance, nor retreat, by reason of the multitude of those who
pressed forward in following them, and that they were stopped by the
Retrenchments, perished miserably, without being able to come at the Enemy, who
attacked them under their Covertures, without partaking at all in the danger of
the Combat.

The young King, fretting with Anger and Madness, to see his first Attempt
succeed so ill, resolved to repair the Loss, or to perish; and therefore
commanded to change the Order of the Attack, and to turn the Fight from Filing
two and two a breast in those narrow Ways, to the attempting to make Breaches
into these Enclosures, through the Walls. Now these Walls being but low, and
made of Earth, the ardent desire of the Soldiers to be revenged, re-doubled
their Strength: so that they fell to pulling down the Walls with their
Ponyards, and other Instruments which were brought for that Service; and in a
little time they had made a great many Breaches, by which they furiously entered
into these Gardens. The Turks who had, for their own Security, and to keep out
the Christians, shut themselves close up in these Gardens, being closely
pursued, had so cut off their own Retreat, that in a little time there was made
a mighty Slaughter among them: Whereupon, the others, who were yet in the other
Gardens that were not taken, having taken the Fright, as well as those who
guarded the Barricades, abandoned them, and saved themselves within the Town.

The Ways being thus cleared, Christians, after they had carried the Gardens,
would run in disorder to the River, had placed themselves in Battalia upon the
Banks of it, to prohibit their Approaches. The young King, who was resolved to
have all the Honor of this Day, making use of the Heat of his Soldiers, who,
all covered with Sweat and Dust, and burnt with Heat and Thirst, longed for the
Water of the River; having instantly rallied them, he charged fiercely into the
thickest Squadrons of the Enemies: But they being all fresh, whereas his People
were faint, and quite tired out, do what he could, after he had made two
furious Charges, he was repulsed, and his Troops put into some Disorder. There
was a necessity that he must stop a little, to rally his Men, and to attend the
coming up of the Main Body, which followed slowly; and was also obliged to make
a little Halt, after it had joined him, for Convenience of drawing up into
Order. It was upon this Occasion, that the Emperor Conrade performed an Action,
which, though certainly something too rash, and a little irregular, yet ought
to have given him sufficient Consolation for all his former ill Fortune in this
second Crusade: For having demanded why these two Bodies which marched before
his, halted so long, since he understood that the Vanguard was engaged with
the Enemy, who had gained some Advantage upon them, he suffered himself to be
so transported with the desire of the Combat, that running at full Speed,
followed by all his Germans, quite through the Body of the Battle, without any
Order, he flew, with his Sword in his hand, into the midst of the Enemies; who,
unable to resist the Shock of such a furious and unexpected Charge, instantly
gave Ground. It is said also, that he gave such another dreadful Blow as that
of the great Godfrey of Bullen, which finished the Victory, already inclining
upon his first Charge; for a puissant Turk, armed with a Curiass, having
attacked him, he discharged with all his force such a furious Blow upon the
place where the Shoulder joins to the Neck, that the Sword passing through the
Neck, to the right Shoulder, took that and part of the Breast clear off; the
Head, and that Arm and Shoulder falling to the Ground, whilst the other
remained a Spectacle of Horror, for some time, upon the Horse. The Turks,
amazed at this frightful Blow, immediately fled, and saved themselves in the
Town, leaving all the Fields and the Rivers free to the Christians, who
immediately encamped upon the Banks, and in the Gardens, with mighty
convenience, both for the Men and Horses. This Victory brought such a Despair
among the Turks, and the Inhabitants of Damascus, that knowing well that they
were in danger of losing the place upon the first Assault which should be
given, there being on that side no other Defense beside the Gardens, which were
now lost, they began to think of nothing but how to save themselves by
retreating. For this purpose they barricadoed all the Streets which opened that
way, to the end, that while their Enemies were busy in breaking the
Barricadoes, and removing the great Beams which they had laid cross the
Streets, they might have the more time to save themselves and their Families by
the opposite Gates, and so retreat with more Security to such neighboring
Towns as were in the Hands of their Friends. Thus had Damascus most assuredly
fallen into the Power of the Christians, if Covetousness, Hatred and Envy;
three furious Passions, which at this time wrought more deplorable Effects than
the Arms of the Infidels, had not suddenly precipitated their Affairs, by a
most infamous Treason, from a certain Hope, and a flourishing Condition, into
the very Gulf of Misfortune and Confusion, from whence they were never able to
recover again.

Those of Damascus seeing themselves thus just upon the Eve of their Ruin,
after they had barricadoed the Streets, they advised themselves again of
another Means to save themselves, which did not fail of the wished Effect.
After that the French had conquered the Holy Land, many Persons of both Sexes,
not only of the Common People, but also of the Nobility, were married in
Palestine and Syria, with the Ladies of that Country; and many of the great
Lords who were in Baldwin's Army, were such as were born of those Marriages,
and consequently Syrians by Birth, French, half Syrian Lords retained the Vices
of the Country, and particularly, Greediness of Riches, and Avarice, which to
this day is the domineering Vice and Passion of the Orientals. The Turks, and
principal Men of the City, who being of the same Country, very well knew their
Feeble, secretly sent some of the most dexterous and cunning of their Citizens,
to these Motley Lords and Barons, whom they knew to be of the most covetous
Dispositions, and consequently most capable of being brought into Treason: To
these they gave all imaginable Assurances that they could desire, that they
should have certain Payment made of most considerable Sums of Money, provided
they could induce the Besiegers only to change their Attack, and remove the
Siege to the other side of the City. Now he to whom they principally trusted
the Management of this Affair, found amongst those to whom he addressed
himself, Inclinations favorable as he could desire, to entertain his
Propositions. Prince Raymond, who mortally hated King Lewis the Seventh, after
the Affair of Antioch, had, as it is said, beforehand corrupted some of his
People, and obliged them underhand, to do all that possibly they could against
him, that so he might not acquire any Glory from this War. There were others
who could not, with Patience, think of permitting the Earl of Flanders, as they
understood it was concluded between the Emperor and the two Kings, to enjoy the
Principality of Damascus; and they had rather that it should continue in the
Possession of the Turks, than fall to the share of a Man, whom they looked upon
as a Stranger, in regard he was not born in Syria. Thus the Envy of some, and
the Hatred which Raymond had inspired into others, being joined with the
Avarice which reigned equally in both the one and the other, produced the most
infamous and most cowardly Treason, that it was possible for Lords of great
Quality, not to say Christians, to be capable of: For, counterfeiting a
mavelous Zeal for the public Good, they remonstrated to the Council, That
hitherto they had taken very false Measures; That they had too long permitted
themselves to be deceived with vain Appearances of a commodious Encampment upon
the Banks of the River, among the Gardens and Orchards; not considering that
this was the main Obstacle, which had hitherto hindered the Taking of the City;
for that the River, one part whereof served for the Ditch upon that Quarter,
rendered the Access more difficult, and the Attack most dangerous; That the
Gardens hindered the disposing of the Machins to such convenient Distances as
were requisite for the Battery; and that the Siege being spun out to a greater
length than had been promised to the Soldiers, there was great danger that
being disgusted, and the great Heats beginning now to become insupportable,
they would quit the Siege. That for this Reason they were in the Opinion, that
they ought to remove the Camp to the other side of the City, between the South
and East, in regard that there being no Gardens, nor Rivers, nor Ditches full
of Water, which could hinder them from descending to the very Foot of the
Walls, which were low, weak, and without Terrasses on that side; and where the
Besieged, having not expected to be attacked, had made no Retrenohments, there
was all the Appearance imaginable that they should carry the Town at the first
Assault, without so much as making use of any Engines against it.

There is a great deal of Room for Wonder and Astonishment, to consider the
Conduct of these three great Frinces upon this Occasion; who at other times
wanted neither Spirit, nor Judgment, nor Experience in Martial Affairs, in
which it commonly happens, That no Man fails twice; the first Fault that is
committed being for the most part irreparable. But whether it was the Eagerness
of their Desire to become Masters of the Town in a little time, which blinded
them; or that they believed that it was impossible to act more prudently, or
more safely than by the Counsels of those who who had the greatest Interest in
the Taking of the Place; and who being Natives of the Country, must needs be
much better acquainted than any others, with the Strength or Weakness of the
City, they fell immediately into the Trap that was so artfully prepared for
them: For, without enquiring into what might be the Consequences of so
precipitate a Resolution, and without so much, French and Germans seeing
themselves so ignominiously betrayed by those very People, for whose assistance
they had undertaken so tedious a Voyage, and ran through so many horrible
Dangers, instantly raised the Siege and returned to Jerusalem, openly
reproaching the Syrians with their detestable Treachery.

After this their Spirits being too much exasperated to hope that there should
ever be a firm Union or accord among People, who entertain nothing but
Jealousies and Distrusts against each other, the Siege of Ascalon which was
proposed in a General Assembly, was in little Probability of succeeding; for
though it was strongly urged, that something of Importance ought to be
undertaken, and that so brave an Army ought not to go away with the Infamy of
having to no purpose consumed the Season of the Year for Action, or return
without performing any thing memorable; yet the Great Lords, both French and
German stiffly and resolutely opposed it, protesting openly, that they would
never trust such a sort of People, who had neither Conscience nor Honor; but
contrary to the Faith which they owed to God and Man, would for a little Money
basely sell their Christian Brethren, whom with earnest Solicitations they had
to their great Cost and Danger brought so far to their Assistance, and betray
them into the Hands of the Infidels against whom they pretended to sight. The
Emperor Conrade therefore taking his Leave of the Young King Baldwin, who was
altogether Innocent and who abominated the Treason of the Confederates,
re-imbarked upon the Ships of his Brother-in-Law Manuel, and sailed into
Achaia, and from thence by the Adriatic, he landed upon the Territories of the
Venetians, and so returned into Germany, where about three Years after he died,
leaving the Empire to Frederick Duke of Suabia his Nephew, who had generously
taken a part with him in the ill Fortune and the Fatigues of this second
Crusade.

Jerusalem till after Easter, as well to satisfy his Devotion, as to wait for
some Opportunity of rendering any considerable Service to God, when he perceived
that his Longer Stay was like to be altogether unprofitable, in Regard that the
Count de Dreux his Brother, and the greatest part of the Princes and Lords were
already gone he resolved also immediately to return into his own Kingdom. He
was also obliged by the pressing Solicitations of his Faithful Abbot Sugerius,
who writ to him to return, in the most pressing and yet most Tender and moving
manner in the World, representing to him the Danger to which he exposed his
Person and his Realm; where his Brother, who had not been too dutiful during
the Voyage, had not made such have to return before him; but to execute his ill
Designs in his Absense. taking shiping therefore at the Port of Ptolemais; July
in Calabria, where he was magnificently received by the Officers of Roger King
of Sicily, who were ordered to entertain him; for there is little Credit to be
given to the Continuer of Sigeberts History, who reports that the King was
taken at Sea by the Fleet of the Emperor Manuel which besieged Corfu, and
afterward delivered by the Admiral of the King of Sicily. For how is it
possible this should be true, since the King in his Letters yet Extant, who
writes so exactly, even to the least particulars of his Return to the Abbot
Sugerius, makes not any kind of mention of this Accident? he stayed three Weeks
in Calabria, attending the coming of the Queen, and diverse of the Nobility, who
did not happen to meet with such pleasant Weather at Sea as he had in his
Voyage; but at last being arrived after three days longer Stay, and a great
Conference with King Roger, who came to pay his Respects to him, he parted for
Rome, where having likewise for three days treated with the Pope Eugenius, he
at length arrived in his own Kingdom, bringing nothing with him after so long a
Voyage, as to what concerns this present Life, besides the Regret to have lost
one of the fairest Armies that ever was raised in France, without doing any
thing worthy of Consideration.

There was nothing to be heard in all Places now, but the Pitious Complaints of
such as lamented their deplorable Loss, nor was there a Family in all France
and Germany almost, but had an Interest and Share in the Suffering; above all
they were cruelly Exasperated against poor St. Bernard, whom they publicly
reproached, calling him false Prophet, and charging him with abusing so many
Princes, and so much People, whom, he had never been so Zealous, they said, to
draw out of Europe but with a Design to make them perish most miserably in the
Deserts of the lesser Asia, by Famine, Pestilence, and the Swords of the
Infidels. And in Truth as this admirable Abbot, who was only the Preacher not
the Author of this Crusade, had according to the Order which he received from
the Pope not only published it, but also, as he himself avows, by particular
Command and Direction, had undertaken, more then could be performed by man, to
promise to those who took up the Cross, that they should meet with prosperous
Success; this was to him a sufficient Subject of Mortification, in Regard it
seemed to have some reasonable Foundation to establish this ill Opinion of him
in the Belief of the World, and the Judgment of most men. But being a man, he
was so touched to the quick with these cutting Reproaches that he was not able
to dissemble the Affliction which they gave him; and though he was a Saint, and
an able man, yet not able to bear this Cross himself, he made use of all the
Strength of his Reason and his parts to Apologize for himself, addressing that
Discourse sometime after to Pope Eugenius, which may be seen at the Beginning
of his Second Book of the Considerations. There it is that appearing perfectly
loosned from himself, and solely fastened unto God by an Ardent Love and mighty
Zeal for his Glory, he says, That it must of Necessity happen, that men who
generally make their Judgment of things in Proportion to their Events, must
upon this sad Occasion fall into Discontents and Murmurings, but that it was a
Satisfaction to him, to have them repine rather against him then against God;
That he looked upon it as a very great Happiness, that God was pleased to
condescend so far as to make use of him as a Buckler, by exposing him to the
furious Arrows of wicked men, and that he willingly received the Wounds of
those envenomed Darts, of Curses, which in Reallity were shot against the
Divine Providence; and that he was not at all displeased to have his own
Reputation covered with Dishonor, so long as it might in any measure redound
to the security of God's Glory; that he wished with all his Soul that he might
glorify God with David, in saying as he did. For thy Sake have I suffered
Reproach, Shame has covered my Face. And in short that it was his Glory to be
made like the Son of God, who says to his Father by the same Prophet. The
Reproach of them that reproached thee is fallen upon me.

See here the Temper of the Heart of this great Saint under the Persecution of
Men's Tongues and for his Parts and Wit they appeared most admirable in his
Defense, of which I will recite one Instance, the Application whereof is easy;
and which he did in some measure make use of for his own Justification. Moses,
says he, to persuade the sullen People of Israel to depart out of Egypt, where
they were mightily in Love with the Onions and the Fleshpots though attended
with insupportable Slavery, Moses to be accused either of Temerity or Malice,
in Regard he acted by the Command of God, who was pleased by Miracles, to
consirm what he had promised by Moses; how came it to pass then that the Event
was so different from the Promise to those People, who came out of Egypt to die
in the Wilderness? All the World knows that the Reason was from the People
themselves, who committed a thousand Offenses against God, during their
murmuring Passage through the Desert: and it must not be said, that the
Punishments which befell them were contrary to his Promises, for those being
only Conditional and the perfect Effects of his Goodness, could not in the
least prejudice the Almighty Prerogative of his Justice. It is no more but
making Application of this Example to St. Bernard, and there is his
Justification. He preached the Crusade by the Command of God, since he did it
by the Express Command of his Superiors, which was all that he contributed to
it. He promised them happy Success, and he promised it on Gods behalf. If,
says he, it be demanded what Miracles I did to prove my Authority and Mission,
it is a Question which my Modesty will not permit me to answer, and my
Bashfulness in being unwilling to be my own Herald, ought to procure my Pardon.
It is your part, adds he, speaking to the Pope, It is your part, Holy Father,
to answer for me, according to what you saw, and according to what you heard.
And the natural Conclusion which he draws from the whole Discourse is, that the
unhappy Success of this Enterprise was wholly to be imputed to the Crimes of
the Crusades, and that it was no way repugnant to the Promises of God, which
being Conditional could no more deprive him of the right of his Justice then
the promise of a King to one of his Subjects to bestow upon him one of the
Chief Offices of his Crown, can indemnifie him from the Rigor of the Laws, if
he shall before he obtains it be found guilty of High Treason against his
Sovereign.

And certainly Otho Frisingensis, who in this unfortunate Voyage accompanied
the Emperor his Brother, avows upon his Reputation, that there were mighty
Disorders committed by the Crusades, and such as well deserved this terrible
Punishment. And others affirm that the Christian Army was blackned with so many
Vices, and especially most brutal Lust, that it is no wonder if they drew upon
themselves the heavy Vengeance of Almighty God. So that if it be considered
that the Crimes of these Christians were so great, and that the Punishment
inslicted upon them was just, it must be great Injustice to St. Bernard, that
the World should accuse him either of Malice or Treachery in preaching up the
Crusade. But this has ever been the Destiny of Great Men, to suffer as well as
do great things, that so their Virtue which is above the Praises and
Recompenses of men, may expect them only from God himself.

Christians in the East, after the Departure of the French and Germans whom
they had so basely betrayed, were reduced into a most pitious Estate. For
Noradin laying hold of that fair Occasion, having entered into the Principality
of Antioch with a powerful Army, overthrew Prince Raymond, and slew him in the
Field; after which he took the strong Fortress of Harene and in Consequence
made himself Master of the greatest Part of that Principality He also took
Josselin Earl of Edessa, in an Ambush, Alepo, where shortly after he miserably
died, siezing upon all his Dominions, chasing out by force, the Greeks to whom
King Baldwin and the Countess had resigned it. He also conquered Damascus,
Baldwin with all the Forces of his Realm besieged Ascalon, which after seven
Months Siege was surrendered to him. It is true that this young and Valiant
King, always opposed himself conrageously against the Conqueror, and more than
once most gloriously vanquished him: But at length the Wise Conduct and the
good Fortune of this Turkish Prince overcame all the Attempts that were made to
stop the Course of his Victorious Arms. He pushed on his great Designs
afterward with more Ease by the Taking of Paneas, after the deplorable Death
of this unfortunate King, who was poisoned by his Physician, and died in the
two and thirtieth Year of his Life, Reign. Noradin himself: Insomuch that the
generous Sultan openly protested, that he would never draw any Advantage from
the Grief and Consternation into which his unexpected Death had put the
Kingdom; saying with as much magnanimity of Soul as Modesty, That he thought it
decent to have a Share himself in the Grief and Respect which was due to that
Prince, who ought by all Men to be Lamented, as having not left another like
himself in the whole Earth.

Baldwin dying without Issue, his Brother Amauri Succeeded him, a young Prince
of about twenty seven Years of Age, who with a great many admirable Qualities,
had also a great number of no less Vices, and above all, his Avarice was the
most Predominant, and which, after he had with Success enough, made War against
Egypt in the Beginning, in the Conclusion occasioned the Loss of Jerusalem, and
the entire Ruin of the Christians in the East. Egypt had for a long time been
under the Dominion of the Sarasins, of the Sect of Ali, and the Sovereign
Monarch was called the Caliph, who led an easy and voluptuous Life in his
magnificent Palace of Grand Cairo, leaving the Administration of his Affairs to
one, who under his Authority Commanded all his Subjects, and was called the
Sultan of Egypt. He who had been Sultan, was one Sanar, and he being thrown out
by his Rival Dorgan, went to implore the Assistance of Noradin, then the most
Powerful among the Turks; who besides that he Possessed all Syria and
Mesopotamia, had also extended his Conquests even into Cilicia as far as
Iconium, having vanquished that Sultan in Battle. Now this Conquering Prince,
who believed that Fortune, pleased with his Ambition, presented him a fair
Offer, to Seize also upon Egypt, failed not to send a great Army under his
General Syracon, a little Man, but a great Captain, whose Merit, and the
Justice of his Master, notwithstanding the lowness of his Birth, had from a
Slave, advanced to the greatest Charge in his Kingdom. Dorgan, who perceived
the Tempest coming, that he might get Shelter, had Recourse to the young King,
who dazzled with the Promise of a great Tribute, Marched into Egypt with all the
Troops he could raise, but something with the latest for Dorgan, who after he
had had the better of his Enemies, was unfortunately slain by a Traitor,
leaving his Place to his Rival Sanar, who instantly went to take Possession of
it at Grand Cairo. In the mean time the dextrous Syracon, who was resolved to
make his Advantage of this Alteration, Seized upon Pelusium, now called
Belbeis, fully Resolving, if it were possible, to make himself Master of all
Egypt. But Sanar enlarging the Promises which Dorgan had made to King Amauri,
was so Iucky as to gain him to his Party, and joining their Forces against
Syracon, who had not had time sufficiently to Fortify Pelusium, Damascus.
Egypt, and for a Sum of Money undertook the War against Syracon. The Success was
much to his Advantage at that time also, for Syracon was Defeated in a great
Battle, and despairing to Defend Alexandria, which he had taken, Egypt.

This did not however hinder but that at length he made himself Master of it,
by the Avarice and Infidelity of that same King, whose Arms had twice, with so
much Glory chased him out of it. For Amauri, blinded with the ardent Desire
which he had to possess the Treasures of Egypt, after he had treated upon this
Design with the Emperor Manuel, whose Niece he had married, contrary to his
solemn Faith given, broke the Peace which he had made with the Sultan, Pelusium
by Storm, and giving the Plunder of it to his Soldiers, he went and presented
his Victorious Army before Grand Cairo, which doubtless, in the Consternation
and Confusion wherein the Surprise had put the Egyptians, must have fallen into
his Hands, if the same Avarice, which made him undertake this unjust War, had
not also, together with his Honor, made him lose all the Profit of it. For
fearing if he took the Town by Force, the Soldiers would have all the Booty as
they had at Pelusium, he thought it his wisest Course to treat of a Composition
with the Sultan; and he knowing the Covetous Disposition of the King, Noradin,
which he expected, had time to Arrive to his Succor, conducted by the same
Syracon, who before had been his Enemy. Amauri, Surprised at this unexpected
News, marched imediately to give him Battle, before he should join with the
Egyptians. But he found that this Captain, as Politic as himself, had wheeled
off, and taken another Way than he expected, and was joined with the Egyptians,
who now assembled from all Quarters against him. And therefore finding that he
had nothing to say to two such potent Enemies, he was forced to return without
the Money into his own Kingdom, having lost his Labor, his Honor, and the
yearly Tribute which the Egyptians paid him.

But it was quite otherwise with Syracon, who by his Retreat, finding himself
in a Condition to Execute his first Design, made Sanar be Assassinated as he
came to do him the Honor of a Visit; after which, forcing the Caliph to
Establish him in that Place, he easily possessed himself of all Egypt, where
Noradin, whose Creature he was, willingly permitted him to Reign. But it was
not long that he rejoiced in his Crimes, for he died the very same Year,
leaving for his Successor his Nephew, the mighty Saladin, who besides his Age,
which was pretty well advanced, and the great Experience, which under his
Uncle, he had gained in War, possessed all the great Qualities, and all the
Accomplishments of Body and Mind, which could be wished in a Captain, to render
him, as they did, the greatest, and the most glorious Conqueror of his Age. But
Ambition, which especially among Infidels, does think nothing Criminal, that
may advance their Designs, and judges all things Lawful which seem necessary to
obtain Dominion, being his predominant Vice. This Prince, who was not able to
endure so much as the apparition or Shadow of Sovereignty, that was above him,
Massacred the Caliph, and all that he could find of his Relations, making this
his Pretext, That he had discovered a Plot of the Caliph and his Friends, who
had the same Intention toward him. After which, he gratified the Soldiery with
such prodigious Largesses out of the Treasures of that Prince, that they became
his perfect Idolaters, and resolved to expose all they had for his Service and
Glory: And having thus established himself in the independent Sovereignty of
Egypt, which he looked upon as the first Stage of his Greatness, and the
Carrier of his Ambition, he began now to entertain the lofty and aspiring
Thoughts of Conquering all the East.

And now it was that the Christians found themselves wedged in between two most
potent and redoubtable Enemies, Noradin upon the East, North, and West, and
Saladin upon the South. The Apprehension therefore of the extreme Dangers with
which they were Surrounded, made them begin to think of doing all that possibly
they could for their own Security: For this Purpose they sent Frederick
Archbishop of Tire, to implore the Succors of the Princes of the West, and to
attack Saladin by Sea and Land with all their Forces, Amauri, though Assisted
by a mighty Navy from the Greek Emperor, laying Siege something too late to the
City Damiata, which lies upon the second Branch of the River Nilus over against
Pelusium, was constrained by the excessive Floods, and the want of Provisions,
to raise his Siege; and the Navy was miserably lost, partly burnt by the Fires
which the Enemies threw among them, and partly drowned by a fearful Tempest
which wracked the greatest part of them in their Return. And the Archbishop
Frederick, after having unprofitably Toiled more than two Years in the West,
where the Affairs were too much embroiled by civil Dissentions, returned
without any other Effects of his Embassage, than fair Words, and fruitless
Promises.

In this time, Saladin who was resolved to make use of this Advantage,
Christian Army offered him, entered into Palestine with forty thousand Horse,
and took Gaza, which was the Key of the Country on that Side toward Egypt and
the Sea. And not long after having levied a great Army both of Horse and Foot,
he Marched on the right Hand by Idumea, that so he might secure another
Passage, and fell upon the Country on the other side of Jordan, where he made a
most horrible Devastation. On the other side, the Army of Noradin, Antioch, and
in Phoenicia, where the terrible Earthquake, which was felt throughout the
whole East, had made such fearful Disorders, overturning the Towers, and
throwing down the Walls of the greatest part of the Cities, as if it were to
facilitate the Conquests of Saladin, who was the Scourge of God, the Attila of
those Times, who was destined to Punish the Crimes of the Christians of Syria
and Palestine. In short, to perfect the Misfortune, the King, who opposed
himself with an invincible Conrage against all the Attempts of so many potent
Enemies, died in the eight and thirtieth Year of his Age, just in the very
Instant, when he was about to make considerable Advantages of the Death of
Noradin, who was carried off by a Fever a little before. And this deplorable
Accident which happened in so critical an unlucky Minute, occasioned so many
Domestic Troubles in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, as were the concluding Causes
of its Ruin.

This Prince left for his Successor his only Child Baldwin the Fourth, who
besides the Impotence of his Age, being not above three years old, was also
tainted with a scurvy Distemper, which in Conclusion, became a Leprosy. Raymond
Earl of Tripolis, his nearest Kinsman, being Cousin-german to the late King, by
the Mother, had the Regency during his Minority; and in that time Saladin, who
never missed any Occasion to advance his Power, Siezed upon Damascus by a
Correspondency which he had with the Widow of Noradin, whom he married, and in
short time after he took most of the considerable Places in Syria, dispoiling
the young Prince the Son of Noradin, after he had Defeated his Uncle the Sultan
of Nineveh, who came to Assist him, of all his Dominions. At the same time he
entered into a League with the Earl of Tripolis, who engaged not to Assist his
Enemies, provided that for the remainder of their Ransom, he set at Liberty
certain Prisoners of Quality, which he kept in the Castle of Emessa, who had
been taken by Noradin some eight Years before. Thus this Infidel Prince rendered
himself more Potent than ever, by the Advantage of this Treaty, which gave him
entire Liberty to Conquer the whole State of Noradin, both on this and the
other side of Euphrates and Mesopotamia, Nineveh Possessed in Syria. It is
true, that King Baldwin after he came out of his Minority, did what was
possible for him to do in the Intervals of his Distemper, to oppose the
Progress of the Conqueror, and that he obtained many considerable Advantages
against him. But at length, his Distemper increasing, he was obliged to choose
some of the Nobility to Govern under him, and this Choice occasioned those
Emulations and Divisions in the Realm, which at the last completed its Ruin:
For as when once a Sovereign Prince becomes unable, by Diseases, to manage his
own Affairs; he usually grows very Jealous and Suspicious, and full of Fears to
be Betrayed by those to whom he is obliged to trust with so great a Charge;
Baldwin seeing himself reduced to this piteous Condition, and fearing least,
Bohemond the young Prince of Antioch, and Raymond Earl of Tripolis, should
attempt something against him, under pretext of his Distemper, which rendered
him unable to Govern in his own Person; he therefore, without that just
Deliberation, which an Affair of that Importance required, gave Sybilla his
Sister, who was the Widow of William Longsword the Marquis of Montferrat, in
Marriage to Guy de Lusignan, a young French Lord, the third Son of Hugh the
Brown Earl of March, and Lord of Lusignan, who had made the Voyage by Sea with
King Lewis the Young; and creating him Earl of Jaffa and Ascalon, Baldwin the
Fifth his Nephew, Sybilla by the Marquis of Montferrat, her first Husband,
leaving the Government of the Kingdom to the Earl of Tripolis, the Man whom he
had before most disgraced, and who was the declared Enemy of Earl Guy, against
whom he was so incensed, William Archbishop of Tire, great Chancellor of the
Realm,

Then it was Resolved to send with all speed a great Embassage into the West,
to desire a quick and powerful Assistance against Saladin, who now began to
push his Conquests even into Palestine. For this Purpose, Choice was made of
Heraclius the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the two great Masters of the Temple
and the Hospital, who were then the two most considerable Men of the Holy Land,
both in regard of the Number, and the Valor of the Knights of these two Orders,
who were now become most Powerful and most Famous throughout all Christendom.
These Ambassadors Arrived happily at the Port of Brindes; but their Negotiation
was not answerably happy to that of their Voyage: For the different Interests
of the Christian Princes at that time, were such as would not permit them to
engage in an Enterprise of such Difficulty, as was the Leading of an Army of
Crusades into Palestine, as the Ambassadors desired. William King of Sicily was
engaged in a War against the Cruel Andronicus, to take Vengeance upon that
Tyrant, who had horribly Massacred all the Latins that were at Constantinople,
that so he might with greater Facility usurp the Imperial Throne, by putting to
Death the young Alexis, the Son of Manuel. Having therefore been able to
procure nothing more from this Prince, besides great Promises for the future,
they crossed through Italy to Verona, where Pope Lucius, and the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, held a great Assembly of Princes and Prelates, to
determine the Differences between them, and to settle the Affairs of Italy. The
Emperor, who was absolutely resolved to re-settle his Authority, which the
Wars, during the Schism, which had been made with the Papal See, had so much
weakened, gave them nothing but fair Words and great Hopes; and for the Pope, as
he ever distrusted the Romans, who not long before had Revolted from him, he
was able to do no more than to give the Ambassadors his Letters, to the Kings
of England and France, wherein he exhorted them to this Enterprise, as
Alexander the Third his Predecessor had before to little Purpose done. The
Patriarch therefore, and the great Masters of the Hospitallers, after having
performed their last Duty to the Master of the Temple, who Died at Verona,
passed into France. There they were most magnificently Received and Treated by
the Order of the King Philip Augustus, at Paris, to whom they presented the
Keys of the Holy City, of the Tower of David, and the Holy Sepulcher, with the
Royal Standard, in token that they put themselves under his Protection, and to
oblige him to Succor the Holy Land, as if it were his own Kingdom, now that it
was reduced to such extreme Danger by the Infidels. Whereupon a general
Assembly of all the Prelates and great Men of the Realm, was called at Paris,
to Debate this great Affair; and they considering that the King was not above
eight and twenty Years of Age, and had no Issue, were of Opinion, That he ought
not in Person to undertake such a dangerous Voyage; only Philip promised the
Ambassadors, that he would move his Subjects throughout the whole Realm to
inrowl themselves for this War, and that he would at his own Cost, furnish all
those liberally for their Maintenance, who would take up Arms for so Just and
Holy a War. This Answer was not at all to the Satisfaction of the Patriarch;
however he contented himself as well as he could, upon the Hopes which he had
that the King of England, upon whom they did particularly rely in Syria, would
make himself the Head of the Enterprise.

That King was Henry the Second, the Son of Geoffry Earl of Anjou, who had
married Maud the Empress, the Widow of the Emperor Henry the Fourth, she was
Daughter to Henry the First King of England; so that this Henry the Second was
Grandchild both to Henry the First, and to Fowk d' Anjou, King of Jerusalem,
who was the Father to Geoffry Earl of Anjou, and to Amauri King of Jerusalem;
and by reason thereof he was Cousin German to Baldwin the Fourth, who was the
late King of Palestine; so that doubtless he was more particularly Obliged than
any other Prince, to Defend that Realm which might one Day descend to him by
Inheritance. He was also more especially Obliged to it for the Expitation of
the Crime which he had Committed, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, to Murder
him in his own Church; and he had accepted it as a Penance from the Pope,
within three Years to lead an Army in Person to the Holy Land. More than ten
Years were already slipped away since the Term prefixed, and he had not done any
thing toward the Accomplishment of his Promise; of which he was by a Letter
from Pope Lucius, reminded in Terms sharp enough, who told him plainly, that it
was impessible for him to escape the severe Judgments of God, who would not
permit himself to be mocked, and whose Vengeance he would have cause to Fear,
if he persisted wilfully in the breach of his Promise. All these
Considerations made the Patriarch hope for more happy Success to his
Negotiation in England, in regard, that in this pressing Necessity, it was
probable, either that the King would go in Person into Palestine, for the
satisfaction of his Promise; or at least, that he would send one of his three
Sons to command the Army; and bigg with these Expectations, he crossed the Sea
with his Colleague, and in the beginning of the Year following came to London.

Henry, who was beforehand resolved not to grant what the Ambassadors came to
desire, would nevertheless save his Reputation, and therefore he did them all
the Honor imaginable, and took the most plausible Courses to justify his
Conduct. He therefore sent for them to Reading, where the Court then was, and
gave them a most favorable Audience; He very graciously, and with great marks
of Goodness and Compassion, heard the Patriarch Heraclius, who in a most
passionate Discourse, after he had presented him with the Keys of Jerusalem,
and the Holy Sepulcher, represented the piteous Condition to which the Affairs
of the Christians in the East were reduced, who he said, stretched out their
beseeching Hands to him, who above all others, had so many powerful Reasons,
both Divine and Humane, to oblige him to take them into his Protection. The
King gave him Hopes, that he should in a little time receive Satisfaction in
what he had proposed, assuring him with all the appearances of a great
Sincerity, that with God's Help all should go well, and that this Affair should
succeed to his Contentment: And in the Interim he conducted the Amhassadours to
London, there to attend the more particular Answer, which he promised to give
them, after he had first, according to the Custom, taken the Advice of the
Prelates and Lords of his Parliament upon it, which he had ordered to be called
against the first Sunday in Lent. And accordingly, he did not fail to call a
Parliament, where, besides the great Men of England, there were also present,
William King of Scotland, and David his Brother, and the Lords of that Realm,
which then was held of the King of England. Now the Patriarch, as the Pope in
his Letter, and himself in his Speech had done, principally insisted upon the
Promise, which the King made, when he obtained his Absolution, to go in Person
to the Holy Land; the King consulted the Bishops and the Abbots in the Case, to
know whether, considering the present Circumstances of his Affairs, he was
obliged to aquit himself of his Promise, by accomplishing that part of his
Penance which was imposed on him by the Pope, and to which he had so solemnly
obliged himself. This certainly was a most nice and curious Case of Conscience,
and which ought in the first place to be decided; in regard, that if his
Promise was binding, there was no longer place for Deliberation, and that he
had but one Choice to make, which was, to acquit himself of it by undertaking
the Voyage: If he was not obliged to that Condition of his Penance, then it
must fall under Examination, whether of these two was most Expedient, either
that the King should assist the Orientals without going in Person out of the
Kingdom, or that he should himself conduct the Succors into Palestine. As for
the King, to show that his Proceedings were clear and with good Faith upon the
matter, he would by all means, that the Patriarch and the great Master, should
themselves Assist at the Debate, while this Question was under Deliberation,
with full and entire Liberty, there to offer what they should judge Convenient.
And withal, he strictly required of all that assisted at that Assembly, that
they should faithfully give their Opinions, without any sort of Complaisance to
him, and declare their Judgment upon their Consciences, which of these two was
most expedient and necessary for his Souls Health and Salvation;

The more severe Opinion assuredly was, That the King should abide by his Word
and Promise, that he should accomplish the Penance which he had accepted of,
and that he should go in Person to the Succor of the Holy Land: and this the
Patriarch failed not to support with all the Reasons and Arguments which could
be alleged: For, urged he, What is there in all Civil Society, which ought to
be more sacred and inviolable, than the Word of a mighty King? Can there be any
thing that ought more religiously to be observed, than a Promise made upon
receiving the Holy Sacrament, at the Absolution given for an Offense, which was
granted upon the Condition of accomplishing the Penance which is accepted to
satisfy God Almighty? And supposing that there could be a Dispensation, so as
to change it to another; Who could give that Dispensation, or make that
Exchange, except the Pope, who had imposed the Penance; and who was so far from
being willing to grant any such Dispensation, that he presssed the Performance
of it in the most pressing Terms, and with the most terrible Menaces of the
Judgments of God, if the Satisfaction was longer deferred? These Arguments,
without doubt, appeared very strong: Nevertheless, all the Bishops and Abbots,
among whom there were many extraordinary knowing, and very good People; among
others, Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, a Man of most wonderful Merit;
concluded with one common Consent, for the more mild Opinion; and maintained,
that the King was not only not obliged at present to undertake this Voyage to
Palestine, but also, that it was more conducing to the Health of his Soul, that
he should stay to govern his Dominions; in regard that the Promise which he had
made in accepting the Penance, was not only in its own Nature dispensable, but
ought to be dispensed with, because nothing could oblige a Prince to the
prejudice of another Promise which was made before it, and which was
indispensable, and by which the King, by his Coronation Oath, had obliged
himself to govern his Subjects, and defend them against the Attempts of all
their Enemies, both Foreign and Domestic; which it was impossible for him to
do in his Absence, in a Government where his Presence could not be wanting. And
for what concerned one of the Sons of the King, which was desired in default of
the King's going in Person, they all agreed unanimously with the Lords
Temporal, that the Parliament had no power to determine upon it, in regard they
were absent; and that therefore the Resolution which was to be taken upon that
Matter depended absolutely upon their own Will and Pleasure. And, in short,
they judged all together, that though the King had, of himself, a mighty desire
to go this Voyage, yet he ought not to undertake it without first consulting
the King of France, who, in respect of the Estates of Normandy, Guienne, and
other Provinces which he held in the French Monarchy, was his Lord and
Sovereign: But that notwithstanding, he might give liberty to his Subjects to
take up the Cross, and undertake that Voyage upon the first Occasion; and that
the King should advance a Sum of Money for their Support who should undertake
this War, who it was promised, should follow shortly after.

This was the Resolution which was taken in the Parliament of London, and with
which the Patriarch Heraclius, who was of a very violent Humor, was so
exasperated, by thinking all his Hopes and Endeavors were lost, that he
instantly threw off all manner of Respect which was due to so great a Prince,
and treated him after so rude a fashion, that it is impossible to excuse it
under the soft name of Zeal, as he endeavored to persuade the World. For the
King, that he might sweeten what seemed so harsh in this matter, was resolved
himself to remonstrate to the Ambassadors, whom he sent for, the Reasons which
had moved the Parliament to come to that Resolution, which they esteemed so
prejudicial to the Hopes of their Embassage: He informed them, that it was the
fear they had, that the French, with whom they never continued long in Peace,
would draw some advantage from his Absence; as also, that they were not without
Jealousies and Suspicious, that his own Sons, of whom they were not too well
assured, might occasion some disturbance in the Realm: but that for his own
particular, he would with all his heart, give fifty thousand Marks in Silver
for the maintaining of the War, That they had no occasion for his Money, but
for his Person; that they had more Gold and Silver than they desired; and that
they were not come so far, but to search for a Man who wanted Money, as he did,
and who therefore might, to his advantage, make a profitable War against the
Infidels; and that they did not seek for Money, which stood in need of a Man
who was skilled in Military Affairs, and knew how to employ it in that War. And
for you, Sir, added he, speaking to him with an Air, as offensive and
disobliging as was imaginable; You have hitherto reigned with abundance of
Glory: But know, that God, whose Cause you have now abandoned, is about also to
abandon you; and he will let you see what will be the Consequence of repaying
him with Ingratitude, for all those Riches and Kingdoms which you have not
obtained, but by your Enormous Crimes. You have violated your Faith to the King
of France, who is your Sovereign; and you make that your Excuse to refuse this
War, that you are afraid he should make War upon you: You have barbarously
caused the holy Archbishop of Canterbury to be murdered; and yet, in Expiation
of your Guilt, you refuse to undertake this Holy War, for the Defense of the
Holy Land, to which you had engaged your self most solemnly upon the blessed
Sacrament. And then seeing the King change Color, and blush with Madness and
Anger; Never believe, pursued he, thrusting out his Neck; Never believe that I
have the least Apprehension of the Effects of that Fury which glows about your
Cheeks and Eyes, and which the truth of what I have spoken, which you cannot
endure, has kindled in your Soul; there taking Head. Treat me as you have done
St. Thomas: I had rather die by your Hand in England, than by that of the
Sarasins in Syria, since I esteem you little less than a barbarous Sarasin.

In truth, this extravagant, raving Language in a Patriarch, and a
Patriarch-Ambassadour, was both inexcusable and insupportable; but the King,
whose Age and Experience, and the dangerous Consequences which had followed
upon the death of Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury, had rendered more
moderate, made a great Attempt upon himself, and generously surmounted his
Passion, though the Patriarch went on, still vomiting out of indecent
Reproaches, worse than before, which I am ashamed to relate. And when the
Transport, into which the old Prelate had put himself was over, and that he
began again to be in a tolerable Humor, the King did not, for all this, fail
to treat him with abundance of Sweetness and Civility, till such time as he
carried him over in his own Ship to Roan; where, after the Celebration of
Easter, he went with him to the Frontier, that so he might be a Witness of the
Conference which was held for three days with King Philip, upon the Subject of
this Holy War. But for all that, the Patriarch was no more satisfied than he
had been before; for the two Kings remained fixed in their Resolution, and both
together informed him, that their Affairs would not permit to be so far and
long absent from their Dominions, but that they were both willing to assist him
with such Stores of Men and Money, as might defend them against all the Power
of Saladin.

And thus it happened at the last, that Heraclius, who had made no scruple
while he was in Palestine, but he should bring along with him, either the King
of England, or one of his Sons, was forced to return, not only without them,
but without the Succors also which were offered him, which out of madness he
foolishly despised, contrary to all the Rules of Prudence and Reason, and to
the mighty prejudice of the declining Affairs of his Master. So much does it
import Princes, not to abandon their Affairs and Interests to the Discretion of
those who have so little themselves, as to suffer their unruly Passions to
govern them so absolutely, as to lose even that little which they have. It is
true indeed, that after all this, the Archbishops of Canterbury and Roan, and
the greatest part of the Lords of England, Normandy and Guienne, and the other
Provinces which the English possessed in France, took up the Cross, as soon as
the Soldiers which Philip Augustus had levied, in order to the sending them to
the Succor of the Holy Land. But this beginning of a Crusade turned to no
great account; not only because the two Kings did not at all engage in it,
Richard, the Son of the King of England, to do the Homage which he ought to
have rendered to King Philip, for the Earldom of Poitou, which he held of the
Crown of France by that ancient Tenure: as also, by reason that King Henry
refused to restore the Earldom of Gisors, after the death of the young Henry,
his eldest Son, to whom it was given in Dowry with Margaret of France, his
Lady, the Sister of Philip Augustus, upon Condition that it should revert to
that Crown if Henry should dye without Issue, as he did three Years after his
Marriage.

Thus the Holy Land, which was so furiously attacked by an Enemy so formidable
as Saladin, remained destitute of all Assistance; and that which was still more
deplorable was, that this sad Relation being reported throughout Palestine, by
the Indiscretion of the Patriarch, struck the whole Country with such an
universal Consternation, as produced a most dangerous Effect; for an Enggish
Knight of the Temple, one Robert de St. Alban, a good Captain, but an ill Man,
who had neither Religion, Honor, nor Conscience; believing, upon this Report,
that all was lost as to the Christians, and that he could no longer hope to
establish his Fortune amongst a ruined People, he began to think of making it
among the Sarasins; and to make himself considerable, in meriting well of
Saladin, though by the blackest of all Crimes. This infamous Man therefore
rendered himself to that Prince, offering him his Service against the
Christians; and promised him, that in a little time he would destroy them, and
also take the City of Jerusalem, with the Weakness whereof he was perfectly
acquainted: And that he might give him such Assurance of his Truth as was
unquestionable, he also added, That he was ready to renounce his Religion, and
turn Mohammedan. Saladin, who very well knew him by the Reputation which he had
acquired, and which had given him the Fame of one of the ablest and most
valiant Knights of his Order, accepted his Offers; and to engage him the more
strongly to his Party, gave him his Niece in Marriage, and in consequence, a
very good Army, with which this infamous Apostate committed most horrid
Discorders in Palestine; but as he approached to Jorusalem, which he believed
he should be able to surprise with the third part of his Troops, whilst the
other desolated all the Country as far as Samaria, or Sebastia, even to
Jericho, the small number of Soldiers which were in the City, with the
Inhabitants, sallied out at the Postern-Gates so luckily, that the Traitor, who
expected no such matter, was himself surprised, and most of his Companions
being cut in pieces, he was constrained to sly with all the haste his Spurs
could help him to, thereby to escape the just Punishments which he knew he
deserved for his detestable Perfidy. This was some little Consolation to poor
King Baldwin, who had tasted little in his Life, but went out of the World some
few Days after, with this small Satisfaction; dying in the twenty fifth Year of
his Age, and the twelfth of his Reign; not less with the Violence of his
Disease, than with the Grief which he had, to see his poor Kingdom destitute of
all hopes of Succor, and left in the hands of a feeble Infant, betwixt eight
and nine Years of Age; and which was in extreme danger to be miserably torn in
pieces, by the Factions and Ambition of the Great Men.

And indeed, presently after the death of this Prince, Tripolis, and Guy de
Lusignan: But this Fire became a mighty Blaze by the death of the little King,
which happened about seven Months after that of his Uncle, by a slow Poison
which, it is said, was given him either by Count Raymond, his Governor, who had
some Pretensions to the Throne; or as others believed, by his own Mother
Sybilla, an ambitious and unnatural Woman, who was not able to suffer this
little Infant to take from her the Hope of being a Queen. But let it be as it
will, that the Malignity of Men's Natures, and the Liberty which they give
themselves, to publish their own Suspicions, and the idle Reports of the
People, for undoubted Truths, which has often given Rise to the Belief of such
supposed Crimes: This is certain, that the death of this Infant King gave the
fatal Blow to this unhappy Kingdom, Jerusalem. King Baldwin the Fourth had two
Sisters; Sybilla, the Mother of this little Baldwin the Fifth, which she had by
her first Husband, William, Marquis of Montferrat; his second Sister was
Isabella, the Daughter of Mary, the second Wife of Amauri, and Niece to Manuel,
the Emperor of Constaminople; who was married to Alfred de Thoron, Son to the
late Constable of Jerusalem. Now Raymond, who was the nearest Relation to the
deceased Kings, pretended that, in the present Condition of their Affairs, he
ought to succeed to the Kingdom, to the Exclusion of the Females; and he was
supported in his Pretensions by the Militia, the People, and the Judgment of
King Baldwin the Fourth, who had entrusted him with the Minority of the young
King, his Nephew; excluding from it Guy de Lusignan, the second Husband of his
Sister Sybilla. On the other side, all the great Lords of the Realm, who were
for maintaining the Succession to the lawful Heirs of the Sisters of Baldwin
the Fourth, were resolute to recognize the Princess Sybilla for their Queen;
but with this Condition, that some Expedient should be found out to break her
Marriage with Count Guy of Lusignan, with whom they would have nothing to do,
both in regard that he was not reputed either brave or able, as also, that they
could not endure that a Stranger, newly come among them, should possess the
Throne, to the prejudice of so many Lords of the Realm, who might sill it more
advantageously. Nevertheless, Sybilla, who was altogether as dexterous as she
was ambitious, having for some time concealed the death of her Son, knew so
well how to gain the Patriarch, and the great Masters of the Temple and the
Hospital, who made the most powerful Interest, that she procured her self and
Husband to be crowned, almost at the same time that the death of the little
King was divulged, before the other Pretenders could have the leisure to
enterprise any thing against her. It is true indeed, that they were so
transported with Madness at this surprising Artifice, that they offered to
declare Alfred de Thoron King; but whether it were that he had little Ambition,
or little Courage, he rejected the Tender, and went himself immediately to
recognize the new King, by doing him Homage; the others thereupon, being
astonished with his Action, yet followed his Example, though they detested in
their hearts this Cowardly Submission of his, as they termed it, and reserved
themselves for the future, by some Opportunity or other, to overthrow that
Throne, to which they now submitted only in Appearance, and Compliance to the
present Necessity. But it was far otherwise with the Earl of Tripolis; for he,
neither able to suffer, nor to dissemble the Injury, which he thought he
received by preferring his Rival, was so transported with Rage and Fury, that
he immediately retired into his own Estates; and presently after, to accomplish
his Revenge, committed a Fact, the most black, dishonorable and detestable,
that ever was recorded in any Story. This Count Raymond the Third was descended
in the Right Line from the famous Raymond Earl of Toulouse, who was his third
Grandfather, and who, after he had done so many fair Actions in the first
Crusade, died in the Year 1105. in the Fortress of Mount Pilgrims, about two
Miles from Tripolis, which he then besieged. Bertrand, his Son, who took that
City, succeeded his Father in the Earldom, which he held of the Realm of
Jerusalem; and he left for his Successor, Pontius de Toulouse, his Son; who
married Cecilia, the Widow of the valiant Tancred, the Daughter of Philip, the
King of France, which he had by Bertrada de Monfort; who had also had by Fowk
d' Anjou, her former Husband, the young Count Fowk, who was afterward King of
Jerusalem. From this Earl Pontius and Cecilia, descended Raymond the Second,
Nephew to King Fowk; and who was also his Brother in Law, by the Marriage of
the younger Sister of Queen Melesintha, the Daughter of King Baldwin the
Second, and Wife of King Fowk. So that Raymond the Third, of whom I now speak,
who was the Son of Raymond the Second, was, by his Father, second Cousin; and
by his Mother, Cousin-german to King Amauri, the Father of Sybilla, and Uncle
to the little King deceased. Being of this Illustrious Blood, he had also
Qualities answerable to the Greatness of his Birth: for he was wise and
judicious in Counsel; prudent, moderate, grave, serious, and extreme sober;
speaking little, and very reserved, though he had a Spirit quick and piercing,
and was of a mighty Courage, and undaunted Boldness: Harenc, which he and the
Prince of Antioch lost to Noradin; wherein he was taken Prisoner, and carried
to Alepo; where he continued in Captivity for eight Years, paying for his
Ransom twenty thousand Pounds, the greatest part whereof he received from the
King Amauri. As for the rest, he was wonderful cunning, civil, popular, and
artificially complaisant to those with whom he had to do, but sierce and ruggid
to his Domestics, where he acted without Constraint, according to the Dictates
of his morose Temper, which made it self known for Saturnine and Melancholy, by
the Habit of his Body, which was thin, large and meagre, his Visage melancholy,
his Complexion swarthy, his Hair black and lank, his Nose hooked, his Eyes
quick and fiery, his whole Phisnomy sierce and gloomy, which, in despite of
all the Art which he made use of to sweeten it, made too visible Appearances,
that he had at the bottom of his Soul, those untamed, tumultuous and violent
Passions, which were capable of transporting him to the last Extremities of
Rage and Wickedness, as made themselves manifest in that fearful manner which I
am about to relate.

For Saladin, who was diligent in watching how to make his Advantage of these
Divisions among the Christian Princes, the noise of the Rupture being come to
his knowledge, secretly sent to Earl Raymond, with whom he had before had some
Correspondency. He solicited him to join their Forces together against Guy de
Lusignan, and promised him to set him upon the Throne of Jerusalem, and to
assist him with all his Power, to maintain him there, provided that, for the
Security of his Fidelity, he would renounce Christianity, and embrace the Law
of Mahomet. There are few Examples in History which make it more apparent, into
what a fearful Abyss of Blindness and Madness the violent Passions of
Jealousy, Ambition, Hatred and Revenge precipitate a Man, who has once so far
abandoned himself to them, as no longer to give ear to Reason, Honor and
Conscience, which oppose them. Raymond, who was resolved, at any rate, that his
Rival should perish, and who had no other Thoughts, but how to gratisie his
importunate Passions, though at the Expense of the greatest Crimes in the
World, and the Damnation of his Soul; without further weighing the the Shame,
or the Danger, into which, in all senses, he was plunging himself, in giving
Credit to an Enemy, and an ambitious Infidel; promised all that Saladin
desired, provided that he would follow his Direction, and enter into the Realm
with a powerful Army when it was a convenient time, by the Way which he should
advise. He therefore acquainted him only with his Design; which, that it might
prosper, was to be enterprized in this manner, as he had before contrived in
his Imagination: There was a necessity that he must for the present dissemble
the Change of his Religion, of which nevertheless he assured him, that he would
turn Mohammedan; as also, that it was necessary that he should conceal his
implacable Hatred to his Enemy, by pretending a perfect Reconciliation with
him, that so he might more easily destroy him, when he should not have the
least suspicion of him. And therefore Saladin, who also had his design to
deceive him, after he had made use of him for his own Project, having highly
applauded and approved of his Artifice; this Traitor, seeming to have recovered
his Transports, and now to be a true Penitent, acted with so much Cunning, and
so deep Dissimulation, that by the Mediation of some of the principal Lords who
were of his Confederacy, and not in the least suspected by the King, he made
his Peace with that poor Prince, who was ravished with Joy to think that now he
had nothing more to fear from an Enemy so potent and dangerous; who, being now
reconciled, and returned to his Duty, might make him also hope to receive
considerable Services from him.

Thus did he, as it were, deliver himself bound, Hand and Foot, into the Power
of his mortal Enemy, who had sworn his Ruin, and who had already sold him to
Saladin: For Raymond, who had married Eschina, the Princess of Galilee, the
Widow of the Count de Bures, the Constable of the Kingdom, which was the
Daughter of Hugh de St. Omer, to whom King Baldwin had given that Principality,
was by that Marriage, possessed of it; and having for the purpose, after his
secret Treaty with Saladin, May, in a Combat wherein the Master of the Hospital
and sixty of the bravest Knights sell upon the place, he easily scized upon the
greatest part of the considerable Towns, which were left in a manner wholly
desenceless. And following the Advice which he received from Count Raymond,
after his Accommodation with the King, he besieged Tiberias, since called
Tabary, with an Army of above fourscore thousand Horse, and a great number of
Foot. This was a sair and great Town, anciently called Cenerth, situate upon
the West of the great Lake of Cenesareth, or the Sea of Galilee, which Herod
the Tetrarch, after he had magnificently rebuilt it, and sortified it with
strong Walls, and good Towers, had given to it the Name of Tiberias, after the
Name of the Roman Emperor then reigning. Now the Earl having left a very
slender Garrison there, Saladin attacked it without any difficulty, and took
it; all that the Princess Eschina, who knew nothing of the Treason of her
Husband, was able to do, being to save her self by retiring into the Fortress,
with those sew Soldiers which she had to defend it, in Expectation of the
Succors, which she sent instantly to desire from the King.

Upon this News, the Council was divided in their Opinions. The more Wise and
Prudent were utterly against attempting to relieve the place by main Force, in
regard, That this could not be done, but by drawing the Garrisons out of the
other Cities, to reinforce the Army, which, without them, was too weak to
undertake so great an Enterprise; and that this was, in effect, to expose the
whole Realm to inevitable Ruin, in case they should lose the Battle. But the
Earl of Tripolis, who would not lose so fair an Opportunity to accomplish his
Treason, vehemently opposed that Opinion; and maintained, That there was an
absolute necessity to endeavor the Relief of the Fortress of Tiberias: That it
was to lose all, to lose their Honor, by suffering the Princess, his Wife, who
so bravely defended it, to perish, whilst they stood cowardly looking on: And
that all the other Cities despairing, after such an Example, to be relieved,
would instantly surrender to the Conquerors, and follow the Fortune of
Tiberias, if it should be taken. And for any thing else, in drawing out the
Garrisons from the Cities, they should thereby have so good an Army, and so
numerous, that there could not be any room for Fear, but that they should beat
that Enemy, whom they had so often vanquished with far less Forces. The four
Sons also of the Princess Eschina; which she had by her first Husband, made a
mighty Noise; and with repeated Instances, demanded Relief to be sent to their
Mother. The Queen Sybilla also employed for this purpose, all the Power which
she had over the Spirit of the King, her Husband, who was indeed her Creature.
So that, in conclusion, the greatest part of the Lords inclining to this
Opinion; some out of Complaisance to the Queen, others out of Service to the
four Princes of Tiberias, and diverse out of the design which Count Raymond had
secretly communicated to them; it was resolved, that they should march directly
against the Enemies, with all the Forces which they could draw out of the
Garrisons; where none were to be lest, but such as were incapable of bearing
Arms. And thus with these Troops, which were composed of a great many Men, and
a few Soldiers; the Army consisting in twelve thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot, besides the Citizens, who were compelled by Force to serve in
the War, they advanced toward Tiberias.

Now as Raymond, who in Right of the Princess, his Lady, was Prince of Galilee,
was better acquainted with the Country than the rest; and that he was not only
esteemed a great Soldier, but that he seemed also to have the greatest Interest
in the Victory, which was to deliver the Person which ought to be the dearest
to him, the Conduct of the Army was unanimously committed to him. That
perfidious Traitor, who gave secret Advertisement of all things to the Enemies,
unfortunately, or rather maliciously engaged them in a rude and steril Country,
among the Straits of the Rocks and Mountains, where there was neither Water nor
Forage. The Enemies, who only waited for this lucky Minute, failed not to
encompass them with their Troops, which were far more numerous, after the same
manner that the Romans had some time been enclosed in the Furcae Caudinae,
Christian Army, which was betrayed into the Hands of the Infidels by the
baseness of their Perfidious Conductor.

It was now high Summer, in the beginning of July, when the Heats of that
Burning Climate are most insupportable: and there was not one Drop of Water to
be found among those Rocks, so that the Men and Horses died with Thirst, and
were able to do no more; there was therefore a Necessity of resolving
immediately to sight the Enemy. For though the Disadvantage was very great by
reason that it was impossible to draw up the Army in Battalia, in a Post which
was so uneven and so strait and broken with Rocks, that they could not attack
the Enemy, but by filing off, yet it was impossible to avoid that Choice; the
Army was divided into a great many Bodies commanded by the Principal Lords, who
were to follow one another, who were to sustain there Companions, and who were
reciprocally to be sustained by those which followed them. The Enemies expected
them in good Order to cut them off, as they marched in these long Files, before
they should have Leisure to form themselves into Squadrons upon the Plain, to
give them Battle. The great Master of the Temple who chose to have the Van with
his Noble Knights, advanced first, and charged so furiously upon those Enemies
which opposed him, that overturning them upon those who followed them he put
them into Disorder, insomuch that these Gallant men, who fought most Valiantly
after the Example of their Captain, killing, overturning, or putting to flight
all that durst oppose their first Fury, had they been sustained by the other
Bodies, who had Order to follow them, the whole Army might with little
Difficulty have been drawn from that disadvantageous Post, and have had the
Liberty of sighting in the Plain Field, where they would doubtless have been
able to have hoped or however disputed for the Victory; but here it was that
the detestable Treason of the Perfidious Earl of Tripolis made it self most
infamously Visible; For he had so ordered the Matter, that he himself commanded
that Body which was to follow the Templers, and he had also disposed the other
Troops in such manner, that all the Lords who were of his Party were to follow
him. Now these Traitors would not advance, alleging that this was to lead
their Soldiers to a perfect Butchery, to quit their advantageous Post and to
march them thus in Files into the Plain, which was all covered with the
Battalions and squadrons of the Enemies, who must needs cut them all in Pieces,
taking them thus without Trouble one after another: So that these brave
Knights, infamously abandoned by their Reserves, and on every side surrounded
by an innumerable Multitude of Sarasins were all either slain upon the Place,
or taken Prisoners, not so much as one of them escaping.

After this Defeat, Saladin seeing that no more durst advance to the Combat,
approached to the Camp of the Christians, which yet he would not adventure to
attack; but that he might complete their Despair by taking from them all
Appearance of a Possibility to draw themselves out of that wicked Strait, he
caused Fires to be made in the Woods, which environed the greatest Parts of
those Rocks, and set strong Guards upon all the other Avenues, that so he might
sight them with greater Advantage if they should endeavor to Retreat, But six
Fugitives, who run to his Army, and to gain Credence with him, offered to
become Sarasins, as they presently did, having assured him that the Christian
Soldiers were half dead with Hunger and Thirst, and under the greatest
Consternation, so oppressed with their Misfortune, Weariness and Despair that
they were scarce able to stand or go; upon this Advice he instantly resolved to
Charge them; which he did with that Success, that his Army powering in upon
them by the Straits which the Christians had abandoned, they fell upon these
miserable People, who were crowded together, and who had neither Courage to
defend themselves, nor Power to fly cross the Flames and the Rocks, that it was
no longer a Combat, but a Horrible Butchery and Slaughter: So that almost all
the Captains and Christian Soldiers, either perished in this miserable Day, or
were taken Prisoners. Few there were who saved themselves by Flight, Raymond
and his Accomplices, whom the Turks permitted to escape. The King seeing that all
was lost, thought to have saved himself by flying, but Tokedin the Nephew of
Saladin pursued him so quick that he took him Prisoner, as also the true Cross,
which Rufin the Bishop of Ptolemais, according to the Custom, carried that Day
in the Battle. That Bishop was armed with a Curiass contrary to the manner of
all the other Prelates, who before him had carried that Holy Wood unarmed, not
so much as one of them having even been wounded, whereas he notwithstanding his
Armor, was shot quite through the Body with an Arrow, wherewith he lost both
his life and the Cross which he carried. Tokedin, who took it, when he brought
the King a Prisoner before his Uncle, presented that also to him as the most
Glorious Trophy of his Victory.

There never was any Victory, more sad and deplorable to the Vanquished or more
complete and advantageous to the Vanquishers; a Victory which made the
Conquerors Masters of all the rich Equipage of so many Princes and great Lords,
as were either Slain or taken in that Battle. And as Saladin had a mortal
Hatred to the Knights of the two Orders, of the Temple and the Hospital of
Jerusalem, he caused the Heads of all of them who were found among the
Prisoners to be cut off in his Presence, excepting only the great Master of the
Temple; so that he almost extinguished the whole Orders of them that were in
Palestine, for not one of these Valiant men had once offered to fly, and the
greatest part of them perished Nobly with their Swords in their Hands during
the Combat. He also with his own hand slew the Brave Renaud de Chattillon, who
after having a long time governed the Principality of Antioch, the Heiress
whereof, the Princess Constantia, he had married, was since that Governor of
the Countries beyond Jordan, where he had so often arrested the Course and of
Saladin's Victories. This Prince who otherwise was a Person of great Humanity,
when his Anger did not transport him beyond his Reason, yet could not bear with
this Valiant man, who being by him briskly and with a little insulting over his
Misfortunes, demanded some Questions, answered him with an Air as Fierce and
Haughty as the other spoke to him, insomuch that the Liberty which he ought to
have admired in a man, whose Courage neither his Misfortune nor his Chains
could abate, provoked him to that Degree that forgetting himself, he cut of his
Head with a Blow of his Cimiter, dishonouring his Victory by that Brutal
Action, which was so altogether unworthy of so great a man as he otherwise was.
And thus by this unmanly Action he made it appear, that it was more difficult
to vanquish himself than to overcome his Enemies. As for the rest, whether it
were that he repented of so shameful and cruel a Transport, or that his Avarice
opposed his Cruelty; the Fear that he had to lose so many great Ransoms, which
he might expect from such considerable Prisoners, made him treat them with
extraordinary Civility, especially the King, the Great Master of the Temple,
and the old Marquis of Montferrat, the Father-in-Law of Queen Sybilla, who
being come a little before to Visit the Holy Places would needs make one in
that unfortunate Battle.

But this was the smallest Fruit which Saladin drew from the gaining of this
Memorable Day; for being a great Captain, as able, dexterous and diligent in
making the best of a Victory, as he was Valiant and happy in gaining it; and
that he knew that the greatest part of the Cities were in a manner destitute of
Garrisons, and without Defense; he therefore immediately marched and presented
his Victorious Army before Ptolemais, a fair and flourishing City whose Haven
was Necessary to receive the Fleet which was to come to him from Egypt. There
were no Soldiers in the City, all those which had been in Garrison having been
drawn out to recruit the Army, where they perished in that fatal Battle, and
after so great a Loss, there was no Expectation of any Succor for them; so
that though it was a mighty strong Place, yet it was surrendered to him in two
days, upon the Assurance which he gave to the Native Inhabitants, that he would
treat them most favorably, and that the Latins should have Liberty to retire
whither they pleased, and that there should not be the least Injury offered
either to their Persons or Goods, which they might carry away with them. He did
most exactly keep his Word with them; and the Reputation which he had gained,
of being a just, merciful and Generous Prince, Tire, Ascalon and Jerusalem
yielded and submitted themselves to the Will of the Conqueror. He made some
little Offer to besiege Ascalon; but seeing that Place, which was as the
Bulwork of the Realm against Egypt, was extraordinary strong and well defended,
he was in the Opinion, that if he must employ his Forces against these three
Cities which remainded yet untaken, it was much better to begin with the
Capital City: For he well hoped that after the taking of that the two others,
seeing themselves separated from one another, at the two Extremities of the
Kingdom, would quickly follow the Fortune of Jerusalem.

It was then about the middle of September that Saladin came to encamp before
Jerusalem, with the most powerful and numerous Army that he had ever before
had; sierce with his Victories and rich with the Spoils of the Vanquished, and
despising the pitiful Remainders of those who were shut up in the Capital City,
which he looked upon as the End of his Labors and the Subject of his Future
Triumph. There was in the City, the Queen Sybilla, the patriarch Heraclius, and
Renaud Lord of Sidon or Sajetta, who escaped from the Battle, and was suspected
to be a Accomplice in the Treason of Count Raymond. And that which without
doubt was a very unlucky Presage to this poor City, was, that besides the
frighted Citizens who trembled to see such a formidable Enemy at their Gates,
there were but a very inconsiderable Number of Soldiers who had escaped the
Defeat; and the Inhabitants of the little Villages and Neighboring Buroughs
who were come thither for Refuge. Saladin immediately caused the Besieged to be
summoned to surrender the City, proposing to them Examples of others, who had
experienced his Clemency, Equity, and that inviolable Fidelity with which he
always kept his Word and Promise. He promised them also, that besides those
advantageous Conditions which he had granted to others, and which he offered to
them, he would confer greater Favors upon them, he would maintain the
Privileges, the Honors and the Dignities which they enjoyed under their
Kings. These were honorable Terms, and though the Defendants had not overmuch
Courage, yet they had some Shame left to prevent their yielding so soon. So
that an Answer was given like men of Bravery, that they were resolved to defend
the Place to the last Extremities. But this Courage was not lasting being but
counterfeit. For Saladin having for ten days together made continual false
Attacks upon the West, to draw thither the greatest Number of the Defendants,
did at the same time batter the Walls, where they were weakest and almost
ruinous upon the North Part of the City: So that having made a large Breach,
and that they saw he was now preparing for a General Assault, the Besieged sent
out to him to capitulate upon the Fourteenth day of the Siege. Saladin, who was
determined to take, not to ruin the City, admitted the Treaty and at last it
was finished though with Conditions much less favorable and advantageous then
those which they were offered before. For now he was resolved that every own
should redeem his Liberty, by paying a certain Imposition or Poll-Money
according to the difference of Ages and Conditions. That all the Franks and
Latins with such as were descended from them, should depart the City, and not
be suffered to carry away any more of their Goods then what they could bear
upon their Backs. And that no Christians except Greeks, Syrians, Armenians and
Jacobites, should for the Future be permitted to inhabit there.

There never was a Spectacle more moving or more lamentable, then to see so
many People of all sorts of Conditions constrained to quit the Holy City, which
their Fathers had so gloriously conquered; and for which they never before had
that Tenderness and Passion as now that they must leave it: But this is the
usual Folly of Mankind, that they rarely perfectly know the Good things which
they possess with Ease, till they are upon the Point of relinquishing them for
ever. During the whole Night, which was to usher in that Gloomy day of parting,
nothing was to be heard, but the Groans, the Lamentations, and the Howlings of
Despair, Infidels, and their one Exile, which in those sad Moments, they could
not but look upon as the greatest of their Punishments. Above all it was the
Greatest Difficulty for them to leave the Holy Sepulcher, which they bedewed
with their Tears, and gave it those last Kisses, which were to bid it eternally
farewell. Then was to be seen the weeping Mothers laden with their little
Infants, who must now march out before they could go; the Husbands supporting
them with one Hand, and with the other leading those which were but just able
to go; the stronger carrying on their Backs, those whom either Age or Weakness
had made impotent; and the Remainder every one carrying the Money and the most
portable of their best Movables which they had, in this Order marched out of
the City, every one laden with something which either Nature or Piety,
Necessity or Charity obliged them to take Care of.

In this time Saladin, who would not make his Entry into the City till all the
Franks and Latins were departed, obliged them by his Presence to make the more
have; for such was the Vanity of this Proud and insulting Conqueror, that he
would himself assist at this deplorable Spectacle, which he considered as one
of the fairest Flowers in his Triumphant Gerland. The Patriarch with all the
Clergy of Jerusalem marched first, in a Condition far different from that
wherein he was accustomed to appear upon the solemn days, with the sacred Wood
of the true Cross, which the Emperor Heraclius had formerly recovered from the
Infidels, and which was now unhappily newly fallen into their Hands again,
under this unfortunate Prelate Heraclius, according to the Remark which was
pubickly made by one upon him, who justly reproached him with the Disorders of
his Life, so little conformable to the Sanctity of his Character. After him
came the Queen Sybilla, accompanied with the two little Princesses, her
Daughters, and all the People of Quality. Saladin who was Civil and Courteous,
much above what could be expected from one of his Nation, who generally were
not guilty of being over polished in their Manners, descended from his Throne,
and receiving her with abundance of Honor and Respect, gave her all the
Consolation she was capable of in her great Misfortune; by the Hopes which he
made her entertain of the Liberty of her Husband, upon a reasonable
Composition. He also, according to his Promise, gave her a good Convoy to
conduct her and her whole Retinue to Ascalon, whither she resolved to retire.
After this he saw the Common People pass bye, whose sad Equipage and miserable
Condition, and above all the Woeful Cries of some Women, touched him so nearly,
that the Generous Compassion which he had, made him in this Rencounter, do an
Action, which the Roman Historians would have judged worthy of the Virtue of
the Heroes of Ancient Rome.

For as in this general Grief and Sorrow, which sadly appeared through the
whole Company of these poor afflicted Exiles, he observed that the Women and
the young Ladies of Quality, as well as the rest, who had nothing of the noble
Air, beheld him after a manner infinitely touching, whilst with piteous Cries,
and their Hands stretched out toward his Throne, they seemed in that posture
of Suppliants to beg some Favor from him; whereupon he commanded all the
Company to stop, and sent to know of these Ladies, what it was which they
desired of him. They returned in Answer, that besides the Subject of their
Sadness and Affliction, which was common to them, with the rest of their
Nation, who were turned out of their Habitations, and this beloved City, they
had something which was more particular, having lost in the Battle of Tiberias,
some their Husbands, others their Fathers or near Relations, who possibly might
be in the number of the Captives: They therefore most humbly Requested of his
Majesty, that he would not deprive them of that last Refuge which they had,
after the loss of their Estates, in the Persons of those who were so dear unto
them, and so necessary to them in that Extremity of Misery and Poverty, to
which they now found themselves reduced. Whereupon that generous Prince, who
had nothing Barbarous except his Birth, when his Choler, to which he was too
much a Subject, permitted him to be himself, was so nearly touched with the
Words, and the Tears of these poor afflicted Ladies, Tripolis, which cannot be
sufficiently detested; for having lost all manner of Sentiments of Virtue and
Humanity, which he seemed to have renounced with his Religion, he by the most
barbarous Avarice, so soon as these poor Exiles were arrived at Tripolis,
caused to be taken from them all that little which the Turks had left them;
which reduced them to that furious Despair, that a Woman among the rest, from
whom he had Ravished by this horrible Robbery, all that she had, except a
little Insant which she carried upon her Shoulders, took the poor Babe, and to
secure it from the Jaws of inevitable Famine, transported with Rage and Fury,
she threw it into the Sea, in the Presence of this Apostate and unnatural Earl,
upon whom she discharged a thousand terrible Imprecations, to draw down from
Heaven the just Vengeance of God upon him. Nor was it long deferred, for
presently after, this unfortunate Prince met with the Punishment due to his
horrible Crimes, to the Load of which he had now added this last. The manner
was thus; presently after the taking of Jerusalem, finding that his Subjects
had a Horror and Detestation of him, and that Saladin, was so far from
bestowing upon him the Kingdom of Jerusalem, as he had promised, and made him
hope, that he would now take Tripolis also, from him; he fell into such a
Grief, or rather Rage, that running stark Mad and Distracted, he presently
after his Wits, lost also his execrable Life. A rare and fearful Example, which
plainly instructs us, that though Treason may be for some time advantageous to
those in Favor of whom it is committed, yet it never fails to render the
Traitors Odious and Insupportable; and that God himself, where Men either
cannot, or will not punish it, commonly makes the Effects of it fall by some
extraordinary and remarkable Stroke of his Justice, upon the persidious Heads
of those who are guilty of that abominable Crime, which in effect, while it
strikes at his imediate Vicegerents upon Earth, is an Affront to his supreme
Majesty, who has entrusted them with the Government of the World.

Saladin, after the departure of the Franks, was resolved to enter into
Jerusalem in Triumph, which accordingly he did, with all the Pomp and
Magnificence, which he believed was most proper to heighten the Luster of his
Victory, and the Conquest over all the East. He therefore entered it in the
middle of his Army, which was enriched with the Spoils of the Vanquished, and
the Rewards with which this Conqueror, who gave away almost all to his
Soldiers, was pleased to honor them. He was followed by the captive King, who
by a strange Reverse of his Fortune, appeared a Slave in the same City, where
but a few Months before he had commanded upon the Throne; then came the great
Master of the Temple; the old Marquis of Montferrat, and the Constable, with
other great Lords of the Realm, who were taken Prisoners at the Battle of
Tiberias; and last of all, by twenty thousand Prisoners which he had taken in
diverse Rencounters, and which after his Triumph were sent in Fetters to
Damascus. The first thing which he did, after he saw himself Master of
Jerusalem, was to abolish all the Marks of Christian Religion in the Temple of
Solomon, where, after he had caused it to be washed with Rose Water mingled
with common Water, Mahomet, to return Thanks to God for his Victory. The other
Churches were most horribly pro^^^ed by the Soldiers, who after having plundered
them, turned them into Stables, and committed a thousand Outrages against the
Cross, which they sacrilegiously dragged through the Streets, from the Temple
to the Tower of David. It is said however, that Saladin had no share in these
Disorders, and that he seemed not to know of them, in regard it was difficult
for him to have hindered them: But he absolutely prohibited any manner of Injury
to be done to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, either because he had a real
Veneration for Jesus Christ, whom the Mahometans acknowledged for a great
Profit; or that he was not willing to deprive himself of so great a Gain as he
hoped would redound to him from the Devotion of the Pilgrims, who undertook
that Voyage, to pay their Duty at the sacred Monument of their Lord and God.
For he obliged the Syrians with a great sum of Money to redeem that Holy
Church, to whom he left it entirely, after he had first despoiled it of all the
rich Ornaments, and the precious Vessels, which the Christian Princes had there
offered. He also afterward published an Edict, by which he forbid all Persons
to disturb the Christians in their Devotions, or to do any thing contrary to
the Honor which was due to that Church. He further set at Liberty abundance of
Captives, and commanded that all the Infirm and Sick Persons which were in the
famous Hospitals of Jerusalem, should be entertained and attended there as
formerly, where he also left all the Friars Servitors of the Hospitals to take
care of them; which ought to render the Name and Memory of this Insidel Prince
Glorious, whether it were that it proceeded from the natural Goodness of his
Soul, or that he made use of it as a certain kind of Policy to win upon the
Hearts of the Christians his new Subjects.

Thus Jerusalem, which had been so happily delivered from the Tyranny of the
Sarasins by the Princes of the first Crusade, under the Pontificate of Urban
the Second, and governed by nine Christian Kings, all French either by Birth or
Extraction, for the space of fourscore and eight Years, from Godfrey of Bullen
to Guy of Lusignan, was again taken by the Barbarians in the Popedom of Urban
the Third, and reduced under the Power of Saladin. And not long after, Queen
Sybilla surrendered unto him the strong City of Ascalon, for the deliverance of
the King her Husband, and the great Master of the Templers. After which, as the
Conqueror believed that he could with ease, when he pleased, make himself
Master of Tripolis, which had put it self into the Hands of the Prince of
Antioch, he went and laid Siege to the famous City of Tire, which by the Virtue
and good Fortune of one Person, happened to be preserved, in the manner which I
am about to relate.

The most illustrious House of the Ancient Marquisses of Montferrat, which was
descended from the Dukes of Saxony, was at that time one of the greatest in
Europe, and the strongest in Italy. William the Third, surnamed the Old, who
was the Head of it, held the most considerable Rank among the greatest Princes
of his time for his Virtue, for his Estate, his Alliances with the Emperor and
the King of France; but above all, for the extraordinary Merit of four Princes,
his Sons, which he had by the Marchioness his Lady, who was the Sister of the
Emperor Conrade. His eldest Son Boniface, received the Crown of Thessaly as
the Reward of those famous Actions which he did after the taking of
Constantinople. William Longsword, his second Son, was designed to be the King
of Jerusalem, by Baldwin the Fourth, who married his Sister the Princess
Sybilla to him; but he died about five Months after his Marriage, leaving her
with Child of the little King Baldwin, who soon after died. Reynier, which was
his third Son, made also a Voyage to the Holy Land, where he died two or three
Years before the loss of Jerusalem. And the last, who was after the Name of the
Emperor, his Uncle, called Conrade, was he of all the Brothers who gained the
greatest Reputation by the Glory of his Arms. This young Prince, in whose
Person Nature had joined with a mavelous Beauty, a most extraordinary
Strength both of Body and of Mind; and who with the heroic Courage, incredible
Heat, and ready Resolution of undaunted Youth, had also acquired the Address
and Prudence of an old and experienced Captain, and most perfect Understanding
in the Military Art; insomuch that the old Marquis his Father, Frederick his
Kinsman, at the Solicitation of Manuel, who extremely, as well as the Pope,
feared the growing Power of that Emperor; The young Conrade, so well managed
this War, that in Conclusion, he vanquished the German Army, which was
commanded by the Archbishop of Mayence, whom he there took Prisoner: and this
high Reputation which he so well merited, was the occasion, that about seven or
eight Years afterward, Isaac Angelus being come to the Constantinopolitan
Empire, gave him his Sister Theodora in Marriage, together with the Dignity of
Caesar, and the Hopes that he should succeed him in the Empire: And truly he
made it appear by a most illustrious Action, that he well deserved it: For
Branas the General of the Imperial Army, having caused himself to be proclaimed
Emperor, Isaac, who had not expected any thing less, and who had neither Men,
nor Money wherewith to raise them, and being also of a cowardly Spirit,
believed that all was lost; and therefore instead of running to his Arms, he, as
his last Remedy, had Recourse to the Prayers of the Monks, whom he assembled at
the Palace to implore the Succor and Assistance of God: But the young Caesar,
drawing him from among the Religious, whom he sent to pray to God in their
Monasteries, remonstrated to him so powerfully, that he ought to join other
Arms to those of his Prayers, to combat and oppose his Enemies, that by little
and little he raised up his Spirits, till at last he brought him to the
Resolution of acting, and dying, however at the worst, like an Emperor:
Thereupon he made him engage all that he had, his rich Furniture of Gold and
Silver, that so he might have wherewith to levy Men; and therein the young
Conrade acted with so much Diligence and Readiness, that in a few days he
raised in Constantinople, a very considerable number of Troops, composed of
Greeks, and all manner of Asiatique Strangers, Latins, and even Turks and
Sarasins, who happened to have Business there. These being joined with those
that belonged to the Court and the City Militia, made up a very good Army, with
which he lead the Emperor against Branas, who was advanced within View of
Constantinople, on the side of Blaquerness; and in the Plain which is on the
other side of that Suburb, it was that he gave Battle to the Rebels, with so
much Vigor, and such admirable Conduct, that he entirely defeated them; and
having slain Branas with his own Hand, he cut off his Head and presented it to
the Emperor.

But he presently after perceived that this Prince, according to the Custom of
great Men, who rarely love those Persons sincerely, to whom they stand
extremely obliged, was so far from rewarding his Services, that now he despised
him, and that he would give him no other Portion with his Sister, but the vain
Title of Caesar, and the Honor of wearing purple Shoes. Being therefore of a
good fierce Temper, and besides, not over delicate as to matter of Conscience,
he resolved to take hold of the first Occasion to abandon him, which he also
did, but in a manner, which certainly neither became him as a gallant Man, nor
as a Christian. He had taken the Cross for the Holy War when he came to
Constantinople, and there he understood the great Progress which the Arms of
Saladin made in Palestine: Now the Emperor, who was advanced with a few Troops
toward the Danubius, to begin the War against the Wallachians, had left him at
Constantinople, to gather up the rest of the Army, and pressed him according to
his Promise, to make have to join him with them: But he, resolving to delude
the Emperor in his turn, as he had been deluded by him, instead of going to
join with him, he went aboard certain Ships, which he had caused upon some
other Pretext to be rigged out, with all those Troops in whom he consided;
making no Scruple either to forsake the Emperor or the Princess his Lady; but
as if his Marriage had been null and void, he left her, and weighed Anchor for
Palestine, without knowing any thing of the defeat of the Christian Army, or
the Captivity of his Father.

As he approached to Ptolemais, a few days after it was Surrendered to Saladin,
he was something surprised that he did not hear the Bells, which were
accustomed to be rung out, when any Christian Vessels were ready to enter the
Port, Sarasins, by which he knew that the Town was reduced under the Dominion
of the Insidels. This made him take a sudden Resolution to sail to Tire, which
was not distant above eight Miles from thence to the Northward. This City, so
flourishing, and so celebrated for its Antiquity, for its Riches, and for the
famous Seige which was enterprized against it by Alexander the Great, who from
an Island, which it was before, made it a Peninsula, joining it by a prodigious
Bank of Earth, to the firm Land of the Continent, was now under the utmost
Consternation, finding it self without Defendants, and just upon the Point to
run the same Fortune with Ptolemais. The brave Marquis who landed in the
Critical Moment, and who had abundance of Courage, Resolution, and Conduct,
failed not to lay hold upon so fair an Occasion to purchase, not only Glory,
but so considerable a Fortune in Phoenicia, by saving this renowned City. He
therefore offered to defend them against all the Forces of the Sarasins, with
those which he had brought, provided they would Obey him; and as a Recompense
for preserving of the City, which was so visibly exposed to the extreme danger
of falling under the Power of the Infidels, that they would receive him for
their Master and their Lord. All this was imediately consented unto; and
therefore to secure the City, the next day he caused diverse of the Earl of
Tripolis, his Accomplices, who were discovered to have a Design to seize upon the
Fortress, to be hanged for their Treason: And in short, he labored with so
much Diligence in repairing the Fortifications, by the help of the Inhabitants,
and those who were retired thither from Ptolemais, and furnished it with all
things necessary to sustain a Siege, that he saw himself in a Condition to
resist all the Forces of Saladin. And that crafty Prince, fearing to receive an
Affront before a City so well fortified, offered Conrade to give Liberty to the
old Marquis his Father, and if he would put the Place into his Power, to
recompense him with so great a Sum of Money, as should exceed all that he could
reasonably hope. But when he saw the Marquis so firm, that neither Pity, nor
Interest were able to work upon him; he then resolved to carry the Place by
Force, and therefore attacked it by Land with all manner of Engines, and
blocked it up by Sea with a mighty Fleet, to prevent the landing of any
Supplies by the Shipping of Genoua and Sicily. But all his Attempts became
fruitless by the Valor and good Fortune, and strong Resolution of the Marquis,
who by two or three stout Sallies, which he made with great Success, obliged
the Turks to remove to a greater Distance: He also fitted out all the Shipping
in the Port, and joining with the Fleet of Margaritus, Admiral of the Royal
Navy of Sicily, he attacked the Fleet of Saladin, ad defeated it so entirely,
that scarce a Ship escaped, but either taken, burnt, sunk, or constrained, to
avoid being taken, to run ashore in the View of Saladin himself, who saw, but
could not prevent the Misfortune; and now began to despair of Success, since it
was no longer possible for him to hinder the Succors which came from Europe,
to enter at Pleasure into Tire. And there entered such considerable Numbers of
them, who expected the arrival of the Army of the Crusades, that Conrade had
thereby the Means, not only to establish his Dominions, but also to carry the
War among his Enemies, and to meet with the good Fortune in one Encounter,
among many others to take one Prisoner of great Quality, who was exchanged for
the old Marquis his Father, to whom he restored his Liberty by his Valor, much
more honorably than he could have done by a foolish Pity of his Captivity. But
Saladin, who had a great Soul, and who was not much astonished with an
Accident, which he had in some measure foreseen, nor surprised with this little
Reverse of his Fortune, to which the Prudence and the Success of the greatest
Captains must sometimes submit, quickly repaired this Loss by throwing himself
into the Principality of Antioch, which he totally reduced in less than three
Months under his Power: For he took more than twenty Places, and constrained
the Capital City to come to Terms, by which they promised to surrender to him,
if in a certain time they were not relieved by an Army of the Princes of
Europe, more potent than his. Thus of all the Conquests which the Franks had
made with so much Glory to the Christian Name in Syria, Palestine, and
Mesopotamia, there remained nothing but these three Cities, Amioch, Tripolis,
where the King, who had nothing more left of his Kingdom, was retired after his
Deliverance, and Tire, which the Marquis Conrade had so unexpectedly preserved.
And that which was yet more Deplorable, was the Division which happened between
the King and the Marquis, who pretended to retain Tire, as having justly
acquired it; all the Men of Spirit were upon this divided into these two
Parties, so that it was of great Advantage to Saladin, that he had delivered
this unhappy King, who by this new Disturbance, was the cause of the Loss of
all the rest. Strange Revolution of Fortune, which in so small a time made such
a prodigious Change in the Condition of the Christians and the Insidels! which
though it may give one some Astonishment, yet to me it does not seem mighty
Difficult to assign the Causes, which therefore for a little we will endeavor
to find.

For first; The Crusades who founded the Realm of Jerusalem, and those who
after them achieved those glorious Conquests, although they had their Passions,
and their Failings, and were as other Men, subject to humane Infirmities, yet
for the most, they were good in the main, Men who had a great Fond of Honor
any Honesty, solidly Devout, and strongly inclined to the good of Religion,
fearing God, and above all, most zealous for his Glory. Whereas, whether the
Manners of their Successors were by little and little corrupted by the
contagious Commerce which they had with the Insidel Nations, with which they
were Surrounded; or that great Numbers of wicked People, who passed into the
Holy, to save themselves from the Pursuit of Justice, carried thither, and left
by their pernicious Examples, those Crimes to their Posterity, which they had
escaped the just Punishment of. Most certain it is, that some small time before
the Fall of that Kingdom, the Lives of the Christians of the East, and even of
the Clergy themselves, were so horribly Desolute, that it is impossible without
Horror, to represent the frightful Picture, which the Writers of those Times,
and those who have Copied after them, have drawn of their Crimes. And I wish
with all my Soul, that it were possible to efface and abolish the Memory of
them, rather than with a kind of Scandal to expose them to the View of such
honest People, whose Modesty may recoil at the reading of them. For this
Reason, as God punished the Offenses of the Israelites, whom himself had
conducted by so many Miracles into this same Holy Land; and that the Punishment
which they had so justly merited, was the depriving them of their Empire, and
delivering them into the Hands of the Philistines, Chaldeans, and other Infidel
People, who were the Executioners of his Justice; so did he punish the horrible
Crimes of the Christians, whom he had brought into Palestine by the victorious
Arms of the first Crusades, by depriving them of that Kingdom, and abandoning
them to be Slaves to those People whom their Ancestors had with so much Glory
so often vanquished.

But farther, to give some natural Reason for this Change, the first Conquerors
of Palestine were warlike and most valiant Men, accustomed to Fatigues, and
such as frankly exposed themselves to all manner of Dangers, and were never
known to recoil, let the number of their Enemies which they were to encounter,
be never so Prodigious; they esteemed it a Happiness to dye Martyrs in
combating gloriously for the Faith, and for the Name of Jesus Christ: And the
Orientals, against whom they fought, were at that time little skilled in Wars,
cowardly, undisciplined, and half-armed People, who were not able to abide
above one Shock, as having nothing to trust to but their Bows and Arrows, which
they shot at Rovers, and commonly rather slying than fighting: Whereas on the
contrary, the Christians having exchanged with the Infidels for all their
Vices, had also gotten their Cowardice, their esseminate and idle way of
Living; loving Repose and Pleasure, and hating the trouble of War, and the
Severity of that Discipline, which is so necessary to a Soldier, and which they
wholly neglected. The Turks and Sarasins on the other hand, were become mighty
Warlike under their victorious Sultans, Sanguin, Noradin, Syracon, and Saladin,
who having learnt at their Cost to arm themselves like the Europeans, with good
Curiasses and strong Lances, had also taught them to follow their Colors,

And in short, The Conquerors of the Holy Land, under the first Kings, were
under one sole Head, who uniformly governed the whole Body of his Estate and
Army, which acted according to the Measures which he prescribed, with a perfect
Unity, without Division, without diversity of Interests, Inclinations and
Opinions, as if the whole Army had been as one Man, according to the Expression
so frequent in the Scripture. Whereas the Turks and Sarasins, were then divided
almost into as many particular Estates as there were Cities in Palestine and
Syria, and therefore could raise no great Armies, but what must be commanded by
many Chiefs, who, for the most part, never accorded very well, by reason of the
diversity of their Opinions and Interests, which made them almost continually
be overthrown, though they were incomparably the stronger in number of Soldiers
than their Conquerors. But upon the falling of the Realm, the Christian Army
was composed of the Troops of diverse Chiefs, those of the King of Jerusalem,
the Prince of Antioch, the Earl of Tripolis, and the great Masters of the
Temple and the Hospital, who all of them had different Prospects and Designs,
which did not at all agree one with the other. On the contrary, all the Estates
of the Infidels, bordering upon the Christians, Egypt, Arabia, Mesopotamia, the
Realms of Damascus and Cilicia, were at that time united into one single
Monarchy, under the great Saladin; and so their Army had but one Captain and
Head, who being most Wise and Valiant, gave one Impression, and a constant
regular Movement to this great Body, which did not act but according to his
positive Orders.

And certainly it is most particularly this Unity which has always made great
Armies Victorious, as may be seen in all Ages and Histories, but was never more
manifested than in this last Campaign, which was so glorious and so
advantageous to the King of France. For on the one part, the Emperor and the
Spaniards, and great part of the Princes of the Circles of the Empire and the
Hollanders, being leagued and confederated against him had raised very strong
and numerous Armies to invade France, both by Sea and Land. On the other side,
that King alone, without employing any other Power but his own, and giving out
himself, those Orders which were with Fidelity Executed, always prevented them,
I do not say, from entering, but so much as approaching France: Beat them
thoroughly to the very Islands; and in Person, by main Force conquered one fair
and large Province; and his Army alone in Flanders, under his auspicious
Fortune, commanded by the famous Prince of Conde, having to oppose them three
great Armies of the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Hollanders, joined in
one Body under three Chieftains, yet cut in pieces their Rere, took their
Baggage, ravished from them more than one hundred Colors, and shamefully
chased them from before Oudenard, and pursued them beyond the Scheld. And there
it was, that their Commanders, having at last the Leisure to take Breath, and
to complain one to another, were constrained to avow, by their Flight, which
they disguised under the name of a Retreat, that as there is but one Soul in
one Body, to give it Life, Movement, and the Power to perform those admirable
Operations of a Man; so there ought to be but one absolute Monarch in a
Kingdom, and one General in an Army, to procure the Felicity of the People, and
to enable them to triumph gloriously over all the Enemies which go about to
trouble their Repose, or rob them of their Happiness. But after these
Reflections which I have made, according to my little Art in Politics, which
possibly will not appear altogether Useless, or at least Indivertive, it is
time to return to my Subject, and pursue this History of the Crusade.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land. PART II.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book.
The Death of Pope Urban III. upon the News of the Loss of Jerusalem. The
Decrees of Pope Gregory VIII. and the Rules of the Cardinals, to move God
Almighty to Mercy and Compassion upon the Christians. Gregory makes Peace
between the Pisans and the Genoese. Clement III. his Successor, sends his
Legates to the King of France, and to the King of England. The Conference at
Gisors, where the Archbishop of Tire proposes the Crusade, which is received by
the two Kings. The Ordinances which they made for the Regulation of it. The War
re-commences between the two Kings, which hinders the Effect of the Crusade.
Richard, Duke of Guinne, joins with King Philip, against his own Father. The
Death of Henry II. King of England. His Elegy and Character. The Legates
propose the Crusade at the Diet at Mayence. The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
there takes upon him the Cross; as do many other Princes and Prelates of the
Empire. The Description of that Emperor. His March to Thracia, where he is
necessitated to combat the Greeks. The Character of the Greek Emperor, Isaac
Angelus. The Reason why this Emperor betrayed the Latins. The History of the
false Dositheus, who seduced him, and of Theodore Balsamon. The Victories of
Frederick in Thracia. The stupid Folly of Isaac, and his dishonorable Treaty
with the Emperor. The Passage and March of Frederick into Asia. The Treachery
of the Sultan of Iconium, and the Defeat of his Troops by a pretty Stranagem of
the Emperor's. An Heroic Action of a certain Cavalier. The first Battle of
Iconium. The Description, Assaulting and Taking of that City. The second Battle
of Iconium. The Triumph of the Emperor. The March of the Army toward Syria.
The Description, and the Passage of Mount Taurus. The Death of the Emperor and
his Elogy. Frederick, his Son, leads the Army to Antioch; after that, to Tire;
and from thence, to the Camp at Ptolemais or Acon. The Description of that
City, and the adjacent Country. The Relation of the famous Siege against it,
begun by King Guy de Lusignan. The Succors of two fair Naval Armies. The
Description of the famous Battle of Ptolemais. The manner of the Christians
Encampment. The Reason of the Length of the Siege. The Death of Queen Sybilla,
and the Division between Guy de Lusignan and the Marquis Conrade, who marries
the Princess Isabella, the Wife of Humphrey de Thoron. A general Assault given
to Ptolemais upon the Arrival of Frederick, Duke of Suabia. A brave Action of
Leopold, Duke of Austria. The Death of Frederick, and his admirable Virtue.

Jerusalem, and the deplorable estate, into which the fortune of the Christians
was reduced in the East, made a mighty Change upon the Spirits, and a strange
Revolution of all the Affairs of the West. Pope Urban III. who was then at
Ferrara, was so strangely surprised with it, that in a Moment he found himself
seized and pierced with such an excessive, and, as it proved, a mortal Grief,
which, in a little time after he had heard it, carried him to his Tomb. Gregory
VIII. who succeeded him, and was chosen the very next Day after his Decease, at
the same time writ most pressing and passionate Letters to all faithful
Christians, exhorting to take up the Cross for the Recovery of the Holy Land;
promising to them the same Graces which his Predecessors, the Popes, Urban II.
and Eugenius III. had granted to those who were enrolled upon the two first
Crusades. And to appease the Wrath of God by Humiliations, and by the
Sufferings of voluntary Penitences, he ordained, That throughout all
Christendom, for the space of five Years, the Fast of Friday should be observed
with the same Austerity that it was in the time of Lent: And besides the
Abstinence upon Wednesdays and Saturdays, he obliged himself, and all his
Brethren, the Cardinals and Bishops, exactly to observe the like Abstinence
upon every Monday. By which Method he made, upon the sudden, such a wonderful
Reformation in the Court of Rome, that the Cardinals did not only voluntarily
submit themselves to the Rigor of this Penitence, but did of themselves,
without any Command from him, which certainly must strangely surprise my
Readers, oblige themselves to very strict Rules for their way of Living, and
the Reformation of their Manners, such as certainly could not proceed, but from
Hearts perfectly contrite, and humbled before God; thereby to satisfy his
Justice, and to implore his Mercy and his Pity. For being, with the Pope's
Consent, assembled, to deliberate among themselves, upon what ought to be done
for the Service of the Church in this pressing Necessity, they resolved, and
most religiously promised, one to another, to observe these following Articles.

That they would retrench in their Families what soever was superfluous, and
whatever had too much of the Pomp and Vanity of the present World. That they
themselves would, for Example, be the first who would take up the Cross; and
not only preach it by their Words, but by their Actions. That for this purpose,
they would neither make use of Horses, Mules, or Litters; but that they would
constantly go on soot, so long as the Feet of the Turks and Sarasins defiled
that Holy Land, which Jesus Christ had sanctified by his Presence and sacred
Steps. That they would go in Person themselves before the rest into Palestine,
without any other Equipage except the Cross, and the Poverty of Jesus Christ;
living upon Alms. And lastly, at their Return, that they would no more receive
any Presents from those who had Affairs in the Court of Rome, but content
themselves with what was strictly necessary for their living in that modest Way
which was conformable to their Condition.

These were their great Resolves: And truly I am of Opinion, that without doing
any Injury to the Memory of these good Cardinals, one may lawfully say, that
their Devotion, in the Transports of its first Heats, carried them something
further, than the Limits of a holy Discretion would have prescribed to them.
Nor is it to be found in History, that these brave Resolutions produced those
Effects which they seemed to promise, and which might have been expected from
them; possibly because whilst they would do too much, they did too little, by
that Weakness, which is so commonly incident to Mankind to fall very much
below, when they come to repent themselves of having gone too high above those
just Measures which a wise Man, after he has once taken, will be sure in all
things to observe most exactly.

After this, Gregory seeing that it was impossibly that the Design of
Succouring the Holy Land should prosper, so long as the Christian Princes of
Europe were engaged in Wars among themselves, he resolved to send his Legates
to bring them to an Accord; at least, to conclude a Truce for certain Years:
And that he might do something on his part toward such an excellent Work, he
went in Person with the Deputies of Genoua, to accord the Differences which had
occasioned a War between them and Pisa: But as he labored very happily in
re-uniting these two potent Republics, who in conclusion, embraced that Spirit
of Peace, wherewith he endeavored to inspire them, he was seized with a
Tertian Ague and Fever, which in a few days carried him off, in the second
Month of his Pontificate.

Clement III. who in twenty days after succeeded him, confirmed all that he had
done, and pursued the same holy Enterprise, with the very same Zeal. He was
admirably seconded by the Negotiation of William, Archbishop of Tire, who was
come to implore the Assistance of the Christian Princes. This is that great
Man, who with so much strength of Judgment, writ the History of the Holy War,
which he continued till a little before the death of Baldwin IV. and who, after
he had so often managed the greatest Affairs of that Realm, whereof he was the
Chancellor, was at last sent Ambassador into the West, upon the hope that he
would negotiate in a different manner than the Patriarch Heraclius had done,
whom he much surpassed in all manner of Abilities. He came into France at the
same time that Cardinal Henry, the Bishop of Albano, Legate from the Holy See,
arrived there: And there are some Authors who assure us, that Pope Clement
honored this Archbishop with the same Character, and joined him in Commission
with the Cardinal, to treat a Peace between the two Kings of England and
France, to the end they might unite in the Resolation of undertaking the War
against Saladin.

That War which Philip the August had declared against Henry II. King of
England, for the Restitution of the Earldom of Vexin, had been terminated by
the Undertaking of Pope Urban, upon condition that the King of England, as a
Dependant for those Estates upon the Crown of France, should in a time
prefixed, submit himself to the Judgment of the Court of France. That Term
being expired, Henry not only still retained the Earldom, which he was obliged
to restore; but also the Princess Alice, the Sister of Philip, who was designed
to be married to Richard, the Son of the King of England. Philip resolved to do
himself Reason for such a visible Injustice, Normandy with a potent Army, where
Henry also was expecting him with considerable Forces, when the Archbishop of
Tire arrived very opportunely to suspend, at least, for a time, the Anger of
these two Princes. And so it was, that by the force of his Genius, and his
Eloquence, he procured an Interview between them, in a Plain between Try and
Gisors; where they were used to meet, when they treated, one with the other.
The two Kings met there, about the middle of January, accompanied with the
Princes, Prelates and great Lords of both the Kingdoms: And there it was that
the illustrious Archbishop employed all the Power of his Eloquence, and of his
Wit, to represent in that August Assembly, The deplorable Estate into which the
fatal Divisions of the Christian Princes of the East had reduced the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, which the first Crusades had, from so many barbarous and Infidel
Nations, so gloriously conquered with their victorious Arms. He then
remonstrated, That of four puissant Estates, which they had established upon
the Ruins of the Mahomitan Empire, and which extended the Dominions of the
Christians, from Cilicia to Egypt, and from the Sea to the River Tygris, there
remained nothing to them now, more than three Cities. That Antioch, dispairing
to be able to preserve it self by its own Forces, had already promised to
surrender, if it were not immediately relieved by those of the West. That Tire,
without necessary Succors, was not in a condition to sustain a second Siege,
having in the first lost the greatest part of its Defendants. That Tripolis was
too weak to endure one; and could no longer remain in Freedom, than it pleased
Saladin to present himself before it, to add it to his other Conquests. And
that further, after so lamentable a Loss as that of Jerusalem, and the rest of
the Holy Land, there was great danger of losing also the very Hopes which
remained to the Christians in those places, from whence they might take a
Beginning to re-establish the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, if those two Kings, the
most potent of Christendom, did not unite their Hearts, and their Arms, to run
to the Relief of Christ and his Cause, of whose only Grace and Goodness they
held all which they did possess. And, in short, he said upon that Subject so
many pathetick things, and in a manner, so powerful, and so touching, that the
two Princes, whether they had in a former Conference, which they had, agreed
this, as one of the Articles of the Peace; or that God, in whose Hands are the
Hearts of Kings, to change them in a Moment, by the extraordinary Working of
his Power; it is certain that they embraced one the other mutually, in the
Presence of the whole Assembly; and did it with all the Marks of a perfect
Reconciliation, and a sincere and cordial Friendship, as if there had never
been any Subject of Discontent or Difference between them.

And at the same time might be heard on all sides the confused Voices of a
Multitude of People, who broak out into great Cries of Joy; and from every
Quarter was to be heard, Long live King Philip; Long live King Henry: Let us
go, Let us go to this War against the Infidels, under the Conduct of these two
mighty Kings. Let us deliver Jerusalem, and extirpate the Enemies of Jesus
Christ. The Cross, the Cross; let it be given us; the Sign of our Salvation,
and the Ruin of the Sarasins. These Acclamations were also presently followed
with that happy Success, which attended the Legation of this brave Archbishop
of Tire, that the two Kings first presenting themselves, to receive the Cross
from the hands of the Legates, they were followed by Richard, the Son of the
King of England, Duke of Guienne, and Earl of Poitou, who had voluntarily taken
it before the Loss of Jerusalem, but would now anew receive it from the hands
of the Legates: As also did Philip Earl of Flanders, the Duke of Burgundy, the
Earls of Blois, Dreux, Champagne, Perch, Clermont, Bar, Beaumont, Nevers;
James Lord of Avesnes, and almost all the great Lords of France, England and
Flanders, who were present at this Assembly. And to distinguish the one from
the other, it was ordained, that the French should take a Red Cross, being the
same they bore in the first Crusade; the English, a white one; and the
Flemmings, one of Green. It is said that at the same time there appeared one in
Heaven, bright and shining, which helped to inflame the Devotion of those who
took up the other; as if God himself had manifestly called them to this Holy
War by a sacred Signal from above. And to render the Memory of so great an
Action Eternal, a Cross was erected, and a Church built in the midst of the
Field of this Conference; which was ever after called, The Holy Field.

Crusades, resolved to publish these following Ordinances: That all Persons who
had not undertaken the Cross, of what Quality soever, even the Ecclesiastics,
except the Chartreux, the Bernardines, and the Religious of Fontevraud, should
pay one Tenth of their Revenues, and of their Movables, except their Arms,
their Habits, Books, Jewels, and consecrated Vtensils and Ornaments; which was
afterward called by the name of Saladin's Tenth, by reason that it was raised
upon the Occasion of making this War with Saladin. That the Crusades should
have liberty to raise a Tenth of all their Subjects who did not go to this War.
And that the Husbandmen who undertook to go and take the Cross, without the
Leave of their Lords first obtained, should not be exempted from this Impost.
That all Interest upon Money lent, should cease for all the time that the
Debtors were upon Service in the Holy Land. That all Persons might mortgage
their Inheritances, or their Benefices, for three Years; during which time, the
Creditors should peaceably enjoy them, whatever happened to the Owners. That
all unlawful Games of Chance, all Swearing, Blasphemy and Disorders should be
severely punished. To which were also added very admirable Orders for the
Regulation of Excess in Apparel, in the Tables, and the Retinues of the
Crusades; and above all, that except some old Landresses, there should no Women
be suffered to go along with the Army, as had been permitted in the former
Crusades, and which had occasioned great Disorders.

These Ordinances were received, and solemnly published in both the Kingdoms,
where an infinite number of People enrolled themselves for the Cross; some out
of Zeal, and true Devotion; others to be exempted from the Tax, which though it
was consented to by the Bishops, in the Parliament of Paris, which was held
this Year about Mid-Lent, yet there were some Ecclesiastics, who declared
themselves against it tartly enough: Among the rest, Peter de Blois, one of the
most knowing Men of his Age, writ against it to Henry de Dreux, Bishop of
Orleans, the King's Nephew, in very hard Terms; pressing him to oppose this
Ordinance of the King, which, he said, was a Breach of the Liberties and
Privileges of the Ecclesiastics; from whom, he pretended, no other Aids ever
were or ought to be exacted, besides their Suffrages and Prayers. But this
Advice of this Archdeacon of Bath in England, though otherwise an able Man,
prevailed nothing upon the Bishops of France, whom he something too liberally
accused of following too gentle and easy a Conduct: For they, as well as the
Bishops of England, with great Justice and Reason, as well as Piety, believed
that such a part of the Goods of the Church might very lawfully be employed,
upon such an holy Occasion, for the Deliverance of the Sepulcher of Jesus
Christ, and so many poor Christian Slaves, and in a manner, all the Oriental
Churches from the Oppression and Tyranny of the Infidels. See now how Zeal,
when it is a little overheated, easily becomes so false and foolish, as to
blind Men to that degree, that they are not able to see that for good Sense,
which common Reason alone, without other Theology, discovers so plainly to the
whole World. Thus then all things were disposed for a happy Beginning to this
Crusade, if the Division which, in a little time after, broke out again between
the two Kings, had not turned those Arms against Christians, which they had
before prepared, to fight against the Sarasins.

Among other Articles which were agreed upon at this famous Conference in the
Field of Gisors, it was ordained, That all Matters in difference on one part,
and the other, should remain in the same Estate wherein they stood before; and
that no one should enterprise any thing against his Neighbor, till such time
as the Holy War were determined. In this time, Richard Duke of Guienne, and
Earl of Poitiers, to the prejudice of a Treaty so solemnly made, concluded and
ratified, renewing the ancient Quarrel betwixt him and Count Raymond of
Toulouse, threw himself suddenly into that Count's Territories, and presently
took from him Cahors and Moissack. Philip, in mighty Indignation for this
Action, and moved with the Complaints of the Count, who came to implore his
Succor, as his Sovereign, immediately made a powerful Diversion in the
Provinces of the English; where he took Castle-Roux, Busencais, Argemon,
Levroux, Montrichard, and all the places which the English at that time
possessed in Avergne and Berry. Henry, on his part, did not fail to make haste
to his Son's Assistance, who went to join him in Normandy. also marched thither
with his Victorious Army, where he obtained great Advantages against the
English, till at length, a Conference for Peace was held near Bonmoulin, at
which the Earls of Flanders and Champaigne, with diverse other Princes,
continually importuned the King to conclude, protesting to him that otherwise
they would desert him, for that they were resolved to accomplish their Vow in
going to the Holy War. There never was any Conference managed with greater
Dexterity and Policy, than this was by King Philip: For knowing perfectly the
Humor and the Interests of the King of England and his Son, he only demanded
that the Princess Alice, his Sister, whom the late King, his Father, had
designed to be married to Richard, and who was kept in Custody by Henry, should
be put into the hands of her intended Husband, since they were now both of Age;
and that Richard should be declared joint King of England with his Father, as
the deceased Prince Henry had been, who had married Margaret, the eldest Sister
of the Princess Alice. Henry, against whom the Prince, his eldest Son,
supported by the French, had formerly made a most cruel War, fearing lest
Richard, who was no less ambitious than his Brother, should create him the same
trouble; or possibly, having his Soul pre-possessed with another Passion, less
excusable, but more strong than either Fear or Policy, would by no means agree
to these two Articles. So that this Conference produced no other Effects, but
only a Truce of a few Months during the Winter; and that which Philip had
foreseen, did not fail to happen, to his advantage, as well as according to his
Expectation; for Richard, who was of a Temper extreme ambitious and turbulent,
was so exasperated with this Denial, that he instantly abandoned his Father,
and passed into the Party and Interests of Philip, did him Homage for all the
Lands which he held in France, and promised him an inviolable Fidelity, and to
serve him against all Persons whatsoever, even his own Father; as he did.

And indeed, as soon as the short Truce which had been made, came to be
expired, which it did the next Spring, the King, with all his Forces, joined
with those of Richard, who had drawn to his Party, besides the Gascons and
Poitenins, his Vassals, many Angevins and Bretons, marched against Henry, who
lay with a very few Troops at Saumur. But the Cardinal d' Anaigne, the Pope's
Legate, who succeeded in the place of the Cardinal d'Albano, who was dead not
long before, negotiated so happily with the two Kings, that they promised to
meet in Whitsun-Week, near Ferte-Benard; and there amicably to treat before
him, and the Archbishops of Reims, Bourges, Rean and Canterbury; who were to
decide all their Differences. Whereupon these Prelates instantly pronounced an
Anathema against all those, of what Quality soever, except the Persons of the
two Kings, who should any way go about to obstruct the Conclusion of a Peace so
necessary to all Christendom; and without which, the Crusade would become
wholly ineffectual. The Kings, and Richard Duke of Guienne, and Earl of
Poitiers, accompanied with all the Great Men of both Realms, being come to the
place designed for the Conference, Philip demanded as before, That his Sister,
the Princess Alice, who was affianced to Duke Richard, should be delivered to
him by King Henry, who, contrary to all Justice, had kept her from him: And
that John, the third Son of King Henry, usually called Sans-Terre, Without
Land, to whom it seems the King, to take off that ignominious Name, had given
his Interest in Ireland, should also take up the Cross. Henry, on the contrary,
persisted obstinately in his Protestations, that he would never suffer this
Marriage, although he said he would give his Consent, or at least, made that
Pretense, that the Princess should marry John, the youngest Brother of Richard;
knowing well that that fierce and haughty Prince would never suffer tamely that
Indignity to be put upon him. Whereupon Philip seeing there was nothing further
to be expected from that Conference, broke it up, and protested that he would
do himself Justice by his Arms, since he was refused it by Reason.

But the Cardinal d' Anaigne, without considering that the Injury proceeded
from him, who obstinately refused to accomplish a Treaty so solemnly sworn;
whereas he ought to have pressed the King of England to keep his Promise, and
to restore the Princess Alice to her designed Husband, Philip the August, and
spoke to him with a surprising Confidence, in such Language as, without doubt,
Pope Clement had made no part, either of his Commission or Instructions: For he
told him plainly, That if he did not entirely accord Matters with the King of
England, he would put the whole Realm of France under an Interdict. To which
Philip, who had a great Soul, and who was perfectly acquainted with the Extent,
both of the Bounds of his own Power, and that of the Church, which are two
Orders very different, and which have both their just Limits, answered him very
readily, That he did not in the least stand in fear of that Sentence; and that,
being most unjust, as there could be no doubt but it was, it must therefore be
mill and void. That Rome never had any Right to make any Judgment against the
Realm of France, whether the King should take up Arms or not, either to oblige
his Enemies to do him Reason, or to chastise his Rebellious Subjects. And for
any thing more, the Sentence seemed to be the Product of English Sterling, and
not to proceed from a dis-interessed Legate; whose Duty was to perform the
Office of a common Father, in the place of the Pope, whom he was sent to
represent. This was to speak like a great King, who, without Emotion, knew how
to maintain the Rights of his Crown independent from any other but God alone;
and to preserve his Sovereign Authority, without shocking that of the Church,
whose Kingdom is wholly spiritual, and which it holds from Jesus Christ; and
therefore, as he has assured us, is not of this World. But Prince Richard, who
though he had seen as many Years as Philip, was not by far so moderate; nor so
much Master of his Passion, as to be able to contain himself in such reasonable
Terms: For finding himself particularly interessed in this Procedure of the
Legate, which wholly ruined all his Pretensions, he was so transported, that
running furiously upon him with his Sword in his Hand, without considering
where he was, or what he was about to do, he had undoubtedly run him through,
if the Archbishops and Lords, who assisted at the Conference, had not all
together rushed upon this violent Prince, to stop his Fury, and thereby given
opportunity to the Legate, half dead with Fear, to secure himself by Flight
from the greatest Danger that ever he had run in all his Life.

The Preliminary Discourse of the Peace being thus broken, Philip, who was
powerfully armed, pursued his Point so vigorously, that he took Ferte-Benard,
Montfort, Beaumont, and some other places; and afterward attacked, and by
Force carried Man's, from whence Henry, who was retired thither, did, not
without great difficulty, escape to Chinon, after having lost the greatest part
of his Men in that Retreat, which was little better than a Flight. His Son John
also, whom, among all his Children, he loved the most tenderly, abandoned him,
to join with Philip, who, at the Head of his Army, passing the first over a
Ford upon the Loir, took Tours by Assault. After which, the King of England,
being in fear of his own Person, and having no assured place of Retreat, was
forced to submit to the Law of the Vanquisher, and accept such a Peace as he
would please to give him; which was upon these following Conditions:

That Henry should pay to Philip twenty thousand Marks in Silver, for the
Expenses of the War. That he should put the Princess Alice into the Hands of
such as should be appointed by the King and Prince Richard, who was to marry
her after his Return from the Holy Land. That the two Kings and Prince Richard
should Rendesvouz in the Mid-lent of the Year following at Vezelay, to begin
together the Voyage which they were obliged to by their Vow. That the Vassals
of the King of England should take an Oath of Fealty to Richard; and that those
of them who had followed him in this War, should not be obliged to render their
Homage to Henry, till such time as they were to go this Voyage to the Holy
Land. That the Great Men of England should promise to abandon the King, in case
he should fail in the performance of any one of these Articles; and that in the
Interim, Philip and Richard should hold certain Towns in Hostage, till such
time as he should fully and truly have performed what was comprehended in the
Treaty.

It is reported, that as the two Kings were in a Treaty in the open Field,
toward the end of June, between Tours and Chinon, concerning the Articles of
this Peace, Henry, there happened, two days successively, two most terrible
Claps of Thunder, although the Heavens were so serene, that there was not the
least speck of a Cloud to be seen in the Sky; at which Henry was so dreadfully
amazed, that if some of his Followers had not instantly run to him, to support
him, he had fallen from his Horse: and that being thereupon struck with mortal
Apprehensions of some terrible Punishment from Heaven, if he persisted longer
to retard the Crusade, by refusing the Peace, he accorded to Philip whatsoever
he demanded, and immediately signed the Treaty. He had, nevertheless, a few
Moments after, so many terrible Assaults of Shame and Grief upon his Soul, and
was, in particular, so sensibly touched with the undutiful Actions of his own
Children, who had, from being one of the greatest and most glorious Princes in
the Universe, reduced him into that piteous Estate, to comply so meanly and
tamely to what was imposed upon him, that he presently fell desperately sick,
and in three days time dyed, in the sixty first Year of his Age, upon the
Octave of the Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, at the Castle of Chinon,
bestowing his Maledictions upon his disobedient Sons, which he would never be
persuaded to revoke, notwithstanding the repeated Instances which were made to
him by the Bishops who waited on him in his Sickness. He did, however, receive
the Sacrament, and Extreme Unction, with great Devotion; giving manifest Tokens
of his Repentance, in submitting to the Divine Justice, which he acknowledged,
had justly laid this great Change of Fortune upon him, as a Punishment for
those Crimes which he had committed in his Prosperity. He had also the
Misfortune, that his Domestics, every one seizing upon something, left him
without any thing else but a poor Sheet to cover him. But his Son Richard, who
had so furiously opposed him in his Life, gave all the Testimonies of an
excessive Sorrow for his Death, and caused him to be carried, most
magnificently adorned in his Royal Robes, to be interred at the Nunnery of
Fontevraud, where he had a desire to be buried. This new King himself assisted
at the Funerals, where he testified, by the abundance of his Tears, that he was
unfeignedly touched with Sorrow and Remorse for his Father's Death. But it is
reported that, to his other Grief, he had the Displeasure to be afflicted with
an odd and unaccountable Accident; for, as he approached the Corpse of the
deceased King, as he lay in the Coffin, the Blood which gushed out of his
Nostrils seemed to reproach him with his Ingratitude, and unnatural Rebellion,
and even, as the Discourse went, the Parricide of his Father; whom his
Disobedience did, in some measure, seem to have hastened to his Tomb sooner than
Nature, which was yet strong and vigorous in him, had intended. He,
nevertheless, stayed out the whole Ceremony, till such time as the Royal
Defunct was interred in the Quire of the Church of those Religious Nuns; which
verified the Revelation of a Monk, who praying, upon a certain time, for the
Prosperity of the King, heard these words, which he then did not understand,
but which were explained by the Event; He shall take up my Sign, and in
carrying it, shall be mightily tormented: The Belly of his Wife shall rise up
against him; and at the last, he shall be hid among the Veils. For, as he took
the Cross for the Holy War, he carried the Sign of Jesus Christ; and he was
immediately after cruelly tormented by the Persecutions of his Sons, which
continued till his Death; after which, he was covered with the Veil of Death,
being interred in a Quire of Veiled Nuns.

We must however, do Justice to the Memory of this Prince, who was one in this
Crusade, though it so happened, that he never had his part in any Action, in
regard it was so long deferred by the War, whereof he was the Occasion. He was
a French Man by Nation, born in the City of Man's, which he therefore used to
call his Darling: and most assuredly, he was one of the greatest, and most
potent Kings that ever sat upon the English Throne; and certainly, had been the
most fortunate, if either he had never been a Father, or if, toward the latter
end of his thirty and five Years Reign, he had not met with the Opposition of
the young and invincible Philip the August, whose Fortune, supported by his
Courage and admirable Prudence, was as a fatal Curb, which, according to the
Prediction of the famous Morling, was to tame this fierce and haughty Leopard;
or like a strong Dam, which stopped short, and broke that impetuous Torrent of
his Power and Ambition, France, whereof Henry already possessed a very great
part: For, besides England, where he reigned as Sovereign Monarch; and Ireland,
which he had conquered; Scotland, which was Tributary to him; he also possessed
Normandy in the Right of Inheritance, descending to him by his Mother Maud, the
Empress, Daughter of Henry I. King of England; and by Geoffrey, Earl of Anjou,
his Father, who was Son to Count Fowk; he had Anjou, Maine, Touraine, a great
part of Berry and Avignion, where he pretended to be Sovereign: And, in Right
of Queen Eleonor, his Wife, whom Lewis the Young quitted to him, by a Canonical
Sentence, he had Gascon, Guienne, Poitou, and the other Countries which
depended upon them: Besides that, Britanny fell to his third Son Geoffrey, by
the Marriage of the Heiress of that Country. So that he was as potent on this
Side the Sea, where he was a Homager to the Crown of France, as he was on the
other side, where he was King of England, and Lord of Ireland. He was of a
middle Stature, but of a Shape no way handsome, by reason that he was extreme
gross and corpulent, notwithstanding that he was, not only very temperate, but
amidst the great Affairs in which he was always employed, and which he managed
with wonderful Application, in continual Action; either traveling, or Walking,
or making use of the more violent Exercises of Riding the great Horse, or
Hunting; that thereby he might abate the growing unwieldy by his Fatness, to
which his Sanguin Complexion had condemned him. As for any thing else, he was
of Temperament, robust and sound; having a large, full Breast, and a big Head:
His Eyes were blew, handsome, and full of Fire: His Hair yellow and soft,
inclining something too much toward the red: His Voice hoarse, his Speech
rough, and his Mind very fierce and Martial. For his Mind, he was very
dexterous, and of a penetrating Understanding; but something more crafty than
became so great a Prince: He had, however, cultivated his Spirit with the Study
of Ingenuous Learning, which enabled him with a certain Eloquence, very easily
and naturally to express himself. And there was in his Soul such a Stock of
Vices, as well as Virtues, natural Perfections and Imperfections; which were so
blended together, that if they would not permit it to be said of him, that he
was a very exceeding good Prince, yet they very absolutely prohibit the fixing
the Character of a very ill one upon him: For he was gentle and sweet to every
body, when he was in dangers; but harsh, fierce and severe when he saw himself
out of them: he was complaisant abroad, morose to his Domestics; liberal to
Strangers, and in public, but parsimonious to his own, and too great a Husband
in his private Affairs: A great Promiser, but a slender Performer; above all
things, loving his Liberty, and hating Constraint, to that degree, that he
could not endure to be a Slave to his own Word, or his Faith, which he made no
great scruple, upon occasion, to violate. In matters of Justice, he was too
slow; and sometimes, by the Interposition of Money, which he loved excessively,
he would wholly remit the Execution of it. He drew great Sums from his
Subjects, with which he often chose rather to buy Peace, than maintain War, in
which he did not delight; though when he was forced to make War, he did it like
a great Captain, and an expert Soldier; showing more Tenderness and Goodness
toward his Soldiers, when he understood they were slain, and in lamenting
their Deaths, than he used to show to them whilst they were living: He was
wonderful kind to the Churchmen, and above all, to the Bishops, whom he always
loved to have about him; but yet not concerning himself much with their
Franchises and Privileges, to which he had but very little regard: He was a
passionate Lover of his Children, but he was ever raising Differences among
them, one with another, to prevent their falling into Quarrels with himself;
but this proved an unlucky Project to him, and at last was the occasion that
they all joined together against him. He was magnanimous and generous in his
Enterprises; but withal, so haughtily ambitious, that he was used to say, that
the whole Earth was not sufficient to satiate the Desires of a King like him:
He was equally constant in his Love and Hate, which he did not easily change; a
great Patron of Widows, Orphans, of poor distressed People who were without
Support, of whom he took great care; above all, he was kind to such as had the
Misfortune to be Shipwrack'd upon the English Coasts; Becket.

But all these Virtues, which cannot, without Injustice, be suppressed, were
dishonored by his great Vices; and principally, by his Impudicity and Avarice;
which prevailed so upon him, that, besides the Exactions, which were very
great, which he imposed upon his People, he ever protected the Jews;
dissembling his Knowledge of their Insolences against the Christians, because
of the great Gain which these faithless Usurers made, whereof he had a Share.
He would also suffer long Vacancies in the Bishoprics, to the end he might
enjoy their Revenues; giving a very slender Reason in Excuse; That it was much
better for him to employ that Money for the Service of the Realm, than that it
should be spent in the Prodigalities of proud and pompous Trains, Pleasures and
Delicacies, as the Bishops wasted it, after the manner of the wicked World, and
in a way far different from the Temperance and Virtue of their Predecessors of
the ancient Church. But in talking at this rate, he condemned himself, excusing
one fault by committing another, far greater than that which he reproached; for
he usually bestowed the Revenues upon such a sort of People as, by the
notorious scandalous way of their living, even in his own Judgment, rendered
themselves unworthy of them: Whereas he ought rather to have taken care that
those great Revenues should have been expended according to the Rules of the
Church, by the Nomination of good Subjects, and worthy Men, to those high and
great Preferments: And indeed, he did, in a great measure, toward the end of
his Life and Reign, make a Reparation for this Error; which occasioned him
much Trouble, and raised many uneasy Scruples in his Soul; for he nominated to
the Archbishopric of Canterbury, Baldwin, a Cistertian Monk, a most excellent
Man; and to the Sea of Lincoln, he preferred St. Hugh, the Chartreux, the
Person, of all the Prelates of his time, who took the holy Liberty to represent
their Failings to the Kings, his Contemporaries, by that mavelous Authority
which, by the Sanctity of his Life, he had so deservedly acquired. In short,
The great Medly of Virtues and of Vices in this King, were also accompanied
with that of his good and evil Fortune; but with this remarkable difference;
that his happy State lasted thirty Years, wherein he flourished in all Earthly
Glory and Felicity; whereas he was persecuted by his ill Destiny, but for the
last five Years of his Life; and that too was occasioned by his invincible
Wilfulness, in refusing Peace upon such just and honorable Conditions as were
tendered: Whereby he brought upon himself that War, which, for two Years,
retarded the Effect of the Crusade in France and England; so that it was begun
by the Germans alone, with abundance of Zeal and Courage.

For presently after the Conference in the Field of Gisors, where the two Kings
took upon them the Cross, Henry Cardinal d' Albano, the Pope's Legate, and
William Archbishop of Tire, passed into Germany, to persuade the Emperor to
undertake the Holy War. The Emperor then reigning, was the famous Frederick,
the first of that Name, formerly Duke of Suabia; who after having so gloriously
assisted his Uncle Conrade, in the second Crusade, succeeded him in the
Imperial Throne, which he possessed for six and thirty Years, with much Glory
and Prosperity; leaving throughout all Germany, Poland and Italy, the
illustrious Marks of the greatness of his Courage, his Mind, his Virtues, and
his admirable Actions. And were it possible to obliterate the deadly
Remembrance of the Schism, which, by an unhappy Engagement, he made in the
Church, and which he so long supported with his Arms, Charlemain. He was then
about sixty and eight Years of Age, of a Port extremely Majestic, a Stature
somewhat surpassing the middle, but of a Proportion in all the Parts of his
Body, regular and Exact; and from which his Age which did him no other Injury
but to render him Venerable, had not taken much of that natural Force, which he
had in so great a Measure, and which was accompanied with an admirable Agility
in all manner of Exercises: The turn of his Face was very fine, and the Lines
delicate considering his Age; his Cheeks were plump, his Eyebrows large, his
Eyes very sweet, and yet lively and piercing, his Speech agreeable, his Mouth
smiling, and his Air so engaging that to whomsoever he did the Honor but once
to speak, they found it impossible to defend themselves from his Charms; and
he always left the Image of Majesty so deeply imprinted and graven in their
Memories, that it was impossible to efface it from the Mind, or to prevent its
being continually present to their Remembrance; his Hair by reason of the
Change which so many Years had brought upon it, was perfect white, which still
seemed to add something more Venerable to his Majesty, though the Natural
Color of it had been red, from whence he came to acquire the Name of
Barbarousse, or Red beard, a Name which his fair and glorious Actions, have
rendered as famous among Historians, as those others more beautiful, which have
been given to the most renowned Princes to distinguish them by a particular
Appellation and as an Elogy for their Virtues and Achievements. As for the
Perfections of his Soul, they yet far surpassed those of his Body; for he had a
most Beautiful Mind, a most happy Memory, which being joined with the long
Experience, and the Care he had taken to instruct himself in all things, had
made him acquire an infinite Number of such pretty Sorts of Learning and
Knowledge, as might well rank him in the Catalogue of the most able men of his
Time. He was extreme Wife and Judicious, Liberal and of great Humanity, Affable
and Courteous to all men, condescending even to the meanest of his Subjects;
but terrible to his Enemies, and above all to Rebels, a great Captain,
personally Valiant and fearless in the greatest Dangers, always carrying
himself with mighty Evenness, and Temper in both the one and the other Fortune,
though it was his Happiness not to be much acquainted with the Worse.

Being such as I have now described him, and therefore equally feared, loved
and respected by all the Princes of the Empire, he had called a General Diet at
Mayence to meet the Fourth Sunday in Lont, in the Year 1188. there the Legates
came in Person, where after they had happily composed all the Differences,
which remained between several Princes and Cities of the Empire, they made the
same Remonstrances for relieving the Christians of Palestine which they had
before made to the Kings of France and England. Frederick who for above ten
years had fully reconciled himself with the Church, had before formed that
generous Resolution, for his own Satisfaction, to employ those Arms for Jesus
Christ, against the Sarasins, which by the Misfortunes of the Times, he had
made use of against the Christians. He nevertheless demanded the Advice of the
Assembly thereupon, but in such a manner as made it easily be known, what was
in the Intention of his Soul; for he only proposed whether it was to the
Purpose, not whether he should refuse that Assistance which Jesus Christ
himself demanded of him, which was such a cowardly and shameful Ingratitude,
which he knew the whole Assembly would disdain, but whether he should defer
taking up the Cross, after that the French and English had with much Ardour
embraced it. Whereupon all the Princes and the Prelates, and all the Deputies
of the Cities, cried out with one Voice, as if the Emperor had at the same
instant inspired them all, with his one Zeal and Courage, That without
deferring any longer, they ought to take up the Cross, that all the World might
see that the German Nation, especially under such an Emperor, would never
yield, either in their Zeal, or in their Courage to the English, French, or any
Nation under Heaven. So that now there was nothing more to be done but to
conclude the Holy War and the Crusade. The Emperor at the same instant
descending from his Throne to receive the Cross by the Hands of the Legates,
Godfrey Bishop of Wirtsburgh, and Frederick Duke of Suabia his Second Son, who
had already taken it himself upon the hearing the sad news of the Loss of
Jerusalem, but now would have it also in Ceremony after the Emperor his Father.
The greatest part of those who were present at that Assembly following that
illustrious Example also took upon them the Cross with an incredible Ardour.
The Principal of which were Leopold Duke of Austria, Berthodus Duke of Moravia,
Herman Marquis of Baden, the Counts de Nassau, de Thuringe, de Missen, de
Hollandia, and more than sixty others of the most eniment Princes of the
Empire; the Bishops of Besanson, Cambray, Munster, Osnabrug, Missen, Passau,
Wirzbourg and more then ten besides, all which besides the Legates, went
immediately to preach the Crusade in their several Diocesses, and throughout
Germany, where an infinite Number of People of all Conditions took up the
Cross. But the Emperor, who knew by the Experience of the Second Crusade, that
two great a Multitude occasioned nothing but Cumber, Trouble and famine in an
Army, therefore caused an Edict to be published by which he prohibited, all
those who were not able to expend three marks in Silver to provide themselves
of Necessaries for so long a Voyage, to engage in it or list themselves for
this Expedition; and also commanded those of the greatest Ability, to make the
best Preparation for it that they were able, that so they might have wherewith
to serve themselves in their Necessities. After which he gave Command that all
the Crusades should repair to their Colors at Ratisbonne, in the Month of
April, the Year ensuing, where he promised without fail to be himself upon the
Feast of St. George, and that he would then immediately advance without staying
for the rest.

This being done he sent four several Ambassadors to so many Princes with whom
he must necessarily treat, before he undertook any thing further. Henry Earl of
Diets was sent to Saladin, to summon them to restore the Holy Land which he had
usurped from the Christians, as also the Wood of the Holy Cross which he had
taken at the Battle of Tiberias, and in Case of his refusal to denounce War
against him from the Emperor. I do not here pretend to insert the Letters of
these two great Princes, which pass for Current with many Historians, in regard
that it appears clearly that they are Counterfiets, and the Forgeries of some
Prolifick Scribe, who had more desire to please, than Art in the compiling of
them, so as to render them either probable or Pleasant. Godfrey Baron of
Wisenbach was dispatched to the Sultan of Iconium, who pretended to be a
Wonderful Friend to the Christians, and who made many strong Protestations,
that he and all his should ever be at the Emperors Service, who might at his
Pleasure pass through his Estates with the same Freedom as if they were his
own. Frederick also himself at the same time writ to the Emperor of
Constantinople, and sent to desire Passage through his Territories, and that he
might be furnished with Provisions at the Price Current. To this he agreed but
after a very indecent manner, detaining the Ambassador without any positive
Resolution, till those of the Sultan of Iconium passed by Constantinople, to go
into Germany, there to make the Offers and Complements of their Master to the
Emperor. The Arch Bishop of Mayence was the only man of that Character, who
succeeded most advantageously in his Negotiation, for he obtained of Bela King
of Hungary all that he desired, which was the Princess his Daughter for
Frederick Duke of Suabia Son to the Emperor, and Security of Passage and
Provision for the Army at most reasonable Rates. Thus all things being disposed
to begin this great Enterprise, Frederick, who had passed all the Lent and the
Festivals of Easter at Ratisbonne to attend the coming of the Crusades, parted
from thence the latter End of April with those who were already come, and
descended down the Danubius, as far as Presbourg, whereupon Whitsunday he held
a general Council of all the Princes, Prelates, and high Officers of his Army,
to regulate their March, and to establish that good Order and those wholesome
Laws against all Crimes, and Licentiousness, which were so necessary in an
Army, and which he was resolved should be most exactly obeyed, as they were
afterward during the whole Voyage. In Conclusion after having caused Henry his
eldest Son to be crowned King, of the Romans, he took his March at the Head of
a fair and flourishing Army, Hungary with King Bela, who came to receive him
upon the Frontier, conducted him as far as Belgrade; from whence after a Repose
of eight days he entered into Bulgaria, which he was two Months in passing, by
reason that he was forced so often to combat with those Barbarous People, who
laid continual Ambushes in his Passage, and whom he could defeat no other ways
but by guarding the Passage on both sides of his Army, and as fast as they
could be taken hanging up these Thieves upon the next Trees where they were
seized.

But he had something more to do when he entered upon the Territories of the
Greek Emperor, where believing he should pass as a Friend and meet with all
manner of Refreshments and Accomodations for his Army, as had been promised
him, he found nothing throughout, but Enemies Armed against him by the Perfidy
of the Greek Emperor: but it did not fail at last to fall heavy upon him as it
had formerly upon the two Comnenius's Alexis and Manuel in the two first
Crusades. This Emperor was that Isaacius Angelus, who about five Years before
had been proclaimed Emperor in a Sedition, which himself had raised for the
Destruction of the Cruel Andronicus. He was a man who had little either Soul or
Heart, but the Want of those was supplied with Presumption and Vanity in
abundance, by which he made all his Follies and those Vices most apparent,
which are most capable of rendering a Prince despicable and hated; for he was
sottish even to downright folly, extreme light and inconstant, cowardly,
Voluptuous, Effeminate, most foolishly Prodigal, and infamously Covetous;
taking a Pleasure to receive from all sorts of Persons, though it were but Toys
add Trisles, and making no Difficulty to take any thing that pleased his Fancy,
even to the horrible Sacrilege of robbing the Churches, without any Scruple,
of their Jewels, Plate and Ornaments, and even the Consecrated Vessels, to make
use of at his Public Entertainments, notwithstanding that he seemed even to a
strange Bigottry to make Profession of Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, to whom
he made most Magnificent Offerings and honored her with Images consecrated to
her, the richest in the World, all glistering with Gold, and sparkling with the
fairest Stones that could be procured. As for any thing more, he was aman
without Truth, Faith and Honor, who delighted in nothing but the Enjoyment of
his Riches, and the Sweets of Empire, which he soolishly promised himself he
should enjoy more than Thirty Years; and in the Interim abandoning all the Care
and Trouble of it to some one of his Favorites, which was sometimes a doting
old Eunuch, otherwhiles some young fantastical Boy, scarcely past the
Discipline of a School or got free from the Ferula, who now must manage a
Scepter, and by whom he permitted himself to be lead as if he had been a mere
Child. See what sort of man this Emperor Isaacius was, who after he had
promised to Frederick not only all safe Passage, but all manner of Assistance,
did all that lay in the Compass of his Power against him, and that for these
two more especial reasons.

First for that Saladin, who knew well how to amuse him had made him abundance
of Vain Promises to bestow Palestine upon him; upon Condition that he should
obstruct the Passage of the Occidentals; That he should enter into an alliance
with him, and thereby oblige himself to send his Galleys to his assistance and
that his Ambassadors, which he had at the Court of Constaminople, should be
there treated with all manner of Honor. The Second Reason was, that he
permitted himself most sottishly to be seduced by the Impostures of a
remarkable Cheat, the manner of which I am about to relate. There was a certain
Venetian, who having got himself naturallized a Geeek at Constantinople, took
upon him the Name of Dositheos, and there turned Monk in the famous Monastery
of Studius, from whence he hoped that he should one day be able to Mount to the
highest Dignities of the Church. Now whether this Fellow was really a great
Master in the Art of Astrology and taking the true Horescope or that he was
really acquainted with that which is more Criminal and the black Art, or which
I think was the most easy, that he boldly played the Prophet at all Adventure,
in regard he had nothing to loose but his little Credit, if his Prophecies
should not prove true, certain it is that he predicted to Isaacius a long time
before it happened, that he should one day attain the Empire. That Prediction
had made such an Impression upon his mind, Dosithcos. So that some little time
after having made two Patriarchs of Constantinople be successively deposed
under false Pretexts, he having therefore elevated them to that Dignity, he
took a great Fancy to transferr his Dositheos from the Chair of Jerusalem,
whereof he possessed only the Titular Right as being one of the Imperial
Cities. But he found a great Obstacle to the Accomplishment of his Desire, in
Regard that in the Code of the Oriential Church, there were found certain
Canons of more than one Ages standing which prohibited these kind of
Translations particularly of Metropolitans, and much more of one Partiarchate
to another: To surmount this Difficulty, he had recourse to a very pleasant
Artifice, which was apparently suggested to him by this false Dositheos, and
which succeeded according to his Wish. There was in his Court the Famous
Theodore Balsamon, who of all the Greeks was esteemed the most able and skilful
Canonist, and who has left us a Digest of the Canons of little Fidelity, more
then to enable the Adversaries of the Roman Church, of which he declared
himself upon all Occasions the Implacable Enemy, from thence to draw Arguments
of an Eternal Opposition. This man was Patriarch of Antioch, where he yet
retained not the least Authority, in regard that City was wholly in the Power
of the Latins, who had there a Patriarch of their own. I would by no means
endure the Government of a Schismatic. Now the Emperor who knew his Ambitious
Humor, and that he was capable of doing and saying what he pleased, provided
he were satisfied in that governing Passion, caused him one day to be sent for
in Private, where making to him a pretended Confidence he complained to him
miserably of the small Number of able men that were to be found among the
Ecclesiastics, and in the Monasteries from whence he said Learning and Virtue
seemed in a manner to be banished; insomuch that in all his Empire he could
find but one man, who was capable of filling the Vacant Seat of Constantinople.
So as he wished to do Honor to the Church and to be able to oppose the Latins.
After which he said, as it were opening his very Heart to him, that not knowing
any Person besides himself capable by reason of his merit, to sustain that
great Dignity, he had along time had it in his Thoughts to translate him from
the Patriarchate of Antioch, of which he possessed only the empty Title, to
that of Constantinople where he might have the Opportunity of displaying more
advantageously those Great Talents which God had imparted to him, and
particularly, that profound Skill which he had acquired in the Laws and the
Discipline of the Church: But that hitherto he never durst enterprise it, in
regard that he had always heard it said, that such Translations were not lawful
or according to the Canons; but notwithstanding if he who was far more knowing
than any other, and who was reputed the very Oracle of those kinds of Learning,
was able to demonstrate and persuade the World by interpreting the Canons, that
they might very well according to the Intention of the Church upon certain
Occasions be suspended, as sometimes they had been, it would be the greatest
joy and Satisfaction in the World to him, and that without deferring a Moment
longer, he would name him to the Chair of Constantinople. There needed no more
to make Theodore yield, after the Temptation of possessing of such an elevated
Dignity, which that ambitious man suffered to overcome him without making the
least Resistance against it. He therefore readily answered the Emperor, that
his Majesty should not fail to receive full satisfaction, and that it was easy
to accomodate the Canons to his advantage. See now the deplorable Weakness of
the greatest part of Mankind; who, whereas they ought to regulate their
Passions, by submitting them to the Laws, choose rather on the contrary to rule
the Law by accomodating it to their Passions, whilst they endeavor by their
false Subtileties to persuade themselves, that it is not at all contrary to
what they desir.

The Emperor having thus artificially drawn him into the Snare, the next day
assembled all the Bishops who were in great Numbers about the Court, to the
Church of St. Sophia, where it was in his Presence proposed, whether this kind
of Translation, might be allowed according to the Canons. Balsamon, who had not
been wanting the preceding Night to instruct his Brethren, showed by many
famous Instances out of Antiquity, that the Ancient Canons did not absolutely
prohibit it, Partisans whom, he had gained to his Opinion, and the others who
were nothing so knowing as himself, especially in the Canon Law, were
immediately in the same Sentiment. Thus it passed without Difficulty as their
Opinion and the Translation which might really be made for the greater
advantage of the Church, was also authorized and comfirmed as Lawful by the
Imperial Letters. After which the Emperor who had now all that he desired,
nominated Dositheos Patriarch of Constantinople, and having thus gulled poor
Theodore, left him as he found him, to starve upon his lean Honor of being
still the Titular Patriarch of Antioch. However Dositheos, who made his Entry
into Constantinople with all the Pomp and magnificence of a Triumph, did not
long rejoice in the Enjoyment of his wretched Cheat; for the Bishops unable to
suffer that he had thus abused them ^ entered into so many Cabals against him,
and so wrought up the Hatred of the Populace, to whom he was already odious by
the manner of his Living which was altogether unworthy of that high Dignity,
that the Emperor, who would have supported him by Force, fearing it might
occasion a great Sedition, was at length constrained to abandon him, and to
suffer him to be deposed, about two Years after he had by Fraud obtained it,
Georgius Xiphiline succeeding in his Place; so that he not only lost the Chair
of Constantinople to which he had unlawfully aspired, but that of Jerusalem
also, which upon his Translation was conferred upon another.

But in that time that he was Patriarch of Constantinople, he absolutely
governed the Emperor, and by his Delusions turned him which way he pleased;
then it was that he made him believe, that the Design of Frederick was not with
that powerful Army to make War against Saladin for the Deliverance of the Holy
Land, and the City of Jerusalem, but a pure Artifice to cover the Design which
he had to make himself Master of Constantinople. And to confirm this,
counterfeiting the Prophet, he showed him certain fantastical Figures, which he
said had been drawn by Solomon, to represent the future State of things; from
which he assured that foolish and Credulous Emperor that Frederick was to enter
Constantinople by the Gate Xylocernos, which joined to the Palace of
Blaquernes; that he should commit a thousand abominably things, but that in the
end he should be most severely punished. All these Fooleries he pronounced with
an Air so affirmative and so serious, that this ridiculous Prince, to prevent
the Effects of his Predictions, caused the Port of Blaquernes to be walled up;
then Dositheos, showing him the Windows of the Highest Tower of the five which
beautisie that fair Palace, would needs carry him up thither, where with two
Darts, which he usually carried in his left Hand, he was to stand huffing and
in a menacing Posture, which the filly Conjurer told him, should strike
Frederick with his Germans to the Hearts, so that he should not need to trouble
himself to march out to give them Battle: Thus did he expose him as if he had
been all pure Fool, to the Derision of all that saw or heard of this silly
Adventure.

However he did not fail amidst all his Stupid Vanity, to give out the
Necessary Orders, for obstructing the Passage of the Emperor, to whom at the
same time he offered the most insupportable Affront; For as Frederick
approached the Frontier, he sent the Bishop of Munster, Robert Earl of Nassau,
and Count Walram in Embassage to him, to desire that he might have free
Passage, and Provisions for the Army, according to the Stipulations of the
Treaty; this perfidious, after he had at first received them in a tolerable
good manner, within eight days, threw them laden with Irons into a dark and
loathsome Prison, thereby in a manner wholly Barbarous, violating the very Law
of Nations, to oblige the Ambassadors of Saladin, who used their utmost Efforts
to engage him so deeply in a War with Frederick, that he might not know how to
go back from his Promises to their Master. Then following the Advice of his
Dositheos, who was of Confederacy with the Sarasins; he armed powerfully, and
sent his Cousin Manuel, the Great Master of the Horse, with a numerous Army,
and Orders to dispute the Passes with the Germans; and to cut off all
Provisions from them, But the Cowardice of the Greeks was but a feeble Obstacle
to the Invincible Forces of Frederick; for not being able so much as to endure
the sight of the Duke of Suabia, who with his Sword in his Hand, marched
against them at the Head of the Vanguard, they immediately turned their Backs
and abandoned the Barricades and Retrenchments which they had made at the first
Pass of the Mountains, Thracia: So that all the Army falling into that Country,
the Emperor to punish the Treachery of the Greeks, permitted them to live at
Discretion, as they did, finding in the Fields great abundance of all kinds of
Grain, it being now August, which the Greeks, had not time to carry into the
fenced Towns and Cities according to the Orders which had been given.

But that which finished his Ruin, was the insupportable Vanity of Isaacius,
who sending to treat with Frederick, did it in the most brutish manner in the
World denying him the Title of Emperor; for he sent to him to let him
understand, That he knew no other Emperor but of Constantinople, which was
himself; and that if he would acknowledge him in that Quality for his Lord and
Master, and give him so many Hostages as he demanded, for Security that he
would Enterprise nothing contrary to his Service or Interests, and give him the
Moiety of all the Conquests which he should make upon the Sarasins, then, and
upon no other Terms he was resolved to afford him the Liberty of the Passage
which he desired. Now whether the Greek Emperor was so indiscreet to command in
this kind of Insolent Language, which seems agreeable enough to his Character
and his Genius; or that the Envoys, as Nicetas in excusing it, would assure us,
exceeded the Limits of their Commission, is uncertain; But Frederick though he
was not a little picqued, yet had the Discretion to conceal and smother his
Resentment, till he had procured the Liberty of his Ambassadors: And therefore
he contented himself with returning this Answer with a disdainful Smile, which
manifested a great measure of Assurance, and but little Sharpness, That he
trusted in God, and in all those brave men which accompanied him, that there
was yet no great Necessity for his complying with such kind Terms; that for any
thing more when their Master, speaking to the Ambassadors, had restored to him
his Ambassadors whom he held in Chains, with so much Inhumanity, and so much
against the Law of all Nations, to the Shame of the Christian Name which
thereby he exposed to the Derision of the Sarasins, he should have a Subject
whereupon in some sort to acknowledge himself obliged to him, the Honor of God
and the Empire still excepted. After with advancing daily without staying for
the Answer of the Greek, and seizing without Resistance, upon all the Places in
his Passage, upon the twentieth fifth day of August he encamped within View of
Philioppopolis, a great and rich City upon the Hebrus, situate between three
Hills at the Foot of Mount Hemus.

The Historian Nicetas Acominatus, a person of Quality, and first Gentleman of
the Bedchamber to the Emperor, was then Governor of that Province, whereof
this was the Capital City. Now as he received every Day several Orders, by the
lightness and instability of his Masters Mind, who to Day would command that
all Hands should be at work upon the Fortifications, and to Morrow, that they
should demolish them and quit the Town; he was, before he could do the one or
the other, surprised, in such manner, as to be constrained, with the principal
of the Inhabitants, to seek his Safety in quitting the City: There Frederick
quartered his whole Army, to refresh his Men with the prodigious Plenty of
Provisions which he found there; for the City was very Rich, by the Traffic
which they had with the Armenians, who were a great party of the Inhabitants,
and who loved the Franks extremely. Four Days after this, Manuel, the General
of the Greek Army, being perpetually solicited by the Emperor, who accused him
of Cowardice, advanced within six Miles of Philippopolis, with express Order to
combat the Germans. But he was so little acquainted with War, that some of the
Vancouriers of the Germans, who were abroad to discover the Enemies Posture,
having taken some Prisoners, who were straggling, took a Resolution to assault
their whole Army, which they did with such Courage, that those cowardly Greeks
believing that they had all Frederick's in the Head of them, shamefully turned
their Backs, leaving the Field entirely to those few Germans: Nor did they
after this find any thing that appeared like Body of an Army. After which,
having taken some strong Places which were defended by the Alains, whom Saladin
had sent to aid the Greeks, they were all, for a Terror to the rest, put to the
Sword: So that seizing upon Nicopolis, Adrianople, and all the Cities which are
between the Egean and the Euxine Seas, they enlarged their Conquests on both
sides, Constantinople.

Then it was, that the perfidious Isaacius, finding himself reduced to the last
Extremities, set the Ambassadors of Frederick at Liberty, and in all suppliant
and humble manner, desired a Peace. He offered all the Shipping that was
necessary for his Passage into Asia, entreating that this Passage might be as
quick as could be, and that he might have Hostages for his Security. But
Frederick, who was resolved to pull down the foolish Pride of this feeble, but
presumptuous Prince, who before would not treat with him, but as King of the
Germans, made him now very sensible that he was the Emperor of the Romans; and
therefore, like a Caesar, he answered the Ambassadors, That it was the Right of
the Conquerors to give Laws to the Vanquished, That it appertained to him who
had conquered Thracia, to dispose of it as he thought convenient. That
therefore, the Year being so far advanced, he was resolved to winter in Thracia
with his whole Army, to punish their Master for having so long retarded his
Voyage by his foolish Perfidiousness, and giving him the trouble to beat him,
and to take his Towns, where he had now no longer any Right. But if he expected
any Favor from him, that he must take Care against Easter, in the Year
ensueing, to provide him so much Shipping as was necessary for the
Transportation of his whole Army into Asia, by the Hellespont; and to give him
sufficient Security for his Promises, of which he knew he would be liberal, but
which he had no manner of Reason to repose any sort of Confidence in; That he
was resolved to have in Hostage four and twenty of the principal Officers and
Lords of his Court, and eight hundred others of inferior Quality, whom he must
forthwith send to him, together with the Ambassadors of the Sultan of Iconium,
whom he restrained at Constantinople contrary to the Law of Nations. That upon
these Conditions he would give him the Assurance of his Oath, that he had no
designs upon his Empire, as he had vainly imagined, or at least, made a show of
believing, that so he might have some Pretext, though a very ill one, for the
violation of his Faith.

There is certainly nothing so Insolent as a proud Coward in Prosperity, when
he finds himself extraordinarily advanced by his good Fortune; nor is there any
thing so Low, Mean, and Croaching, when once his Haughtiness is tamed and
brought down by the reverse of Adversity. This Isaacius, who a little before
boasted with insufferable Insolence, that he was the only Emperor, and next to
God, the Lord and Master of other Kings, now thought himself very happy to be
offered a Treaty, which gave him liberty to accept even of these dishonorable
Conditions, which were sufficiently humbling for him. He therefore without
Delay sent the Ratification, with the Ambassadors, the Hostages, and great
Presents to the Emperor, who passed the Winter at Adrianople, till Easter
approaching he went to Callipolis, where he was resolved to pass the
Hellespont. There he did not fail to find far more Shipping than Isaacius had
promised him, for there were of Barks, Brigantines, Galliots, and Galleys,
near upon five hundred; so much have did that poor Prince make to deliver
himself from these dangerous and troublesome Guests, who had perfectly
recruited themselves of all their Fatigues, and very well enriched themselves
at his Expense, in so good a winter Quarter. Thus the Army, to which diverse
new Crusades had come to join themselves, and which was in a Condition as good
or better, than when it first marched out of Germany; Good Friday, the twenty
third day of March, and in seven days were all transported over the Hellespont.
They had so good a Passage, that not one Man was lost, such Care did the
Emperor take, who was continually jealous and watchful over the Greeks; and
fearing least when the first were passed over, they might set upon the last, he
was resolved to embarque with the last himself, as he did upon the seventh Day,
and happily joined the rest of his Army in Asia, near the City of Lampsacus.

The next Morning he began his March, and quitting the left hand Way, which he
had found was so difficult and dangerous, when he accompanied his Uncle the
Emperor Conrade, he took to the Right, by the Sea Coast, crossing over Mysia,
Troas, Phrygia, and Lydia, by the Cities of Thyatira and Philadelphia, to the
Meander, which he passed near Laodicea, where the Army reposed for a few days.
The Inhabitants of this City furnished them with all manner of Refreshments,
Iconium, whose Government extended as far as that side of the Meander, would
inviolably keep his Promise, which he had given him, and which he daily
repeated by his Ambassadors, who followed the Camp. But he was no sooner
arrived at that dangerous Mountain, which is near the Head of the Meander, and
which the defeat of the Rereguard of the French Army, under Lewis the Young,
had made so Memorable, but he found the Enemies in the Head of him, and
presently understood that this perfidious Infidel Prince, had not made him all
those fair Promises, but to draw him into the Snare, which he had artfully had
by his infamous Treachery. Which should instruct Christian Princes, that they
ought to take all imaginable Precaution, and extraordinary Security, when the
necessity of their Affairs obliges them to treat with those People, who wanting
that true Faith which they owe to God, usually take no care of preserving it
toward Men.

This Sultan was Caiscosroes, who about ten years before had been dispoiled of
his Dominions by his Brother Rucratin, and was afterward re-established by the
Greeks. This Prince had a little before concluded an Alliance with Saladin, who
had given his Daughter in Marriage to his Son Melich, who succeeded him. He had
also a secret Intelligence with Isaacius, who corresponded with both these
Sultans against the Latins, whom he mortally hated, as do all the Greeks, but
more especially in those times: So that all the Ambassadors which this
perfidious Infidel had sent to Frederick, and whom Isaacius had apparently by
Force detained at Constantinople, were sent for no other Purpose but to abuse
the Emperor with greater ease, and to draw him from Laodicea, into those desert
Countries, from whence he had caused all the Provisions to be withdrawn, that
so he might destroy that Army by Famine, and by the infinite multitude of
Troops, which he had gathered out of all Asia, continually to molest the Army
in their March, and to attack them at all the difficult Passes. In short, they
found that the Straits of the Mountain were possessed by the Turks, but
nevertheless, they were such miserable Cowards, that would not abide more than
the first Shock of the Germans, who there made a great Carnage among them, and
put the rest to flight. However they rallied the next Morning, and came again
in far greater Numbers, but rather like Thieves than Soldiers, vexing the Army
on all Sides with slinging great Stones, and discharging their Arrows, after
which they would save themselves according to their Custom, by retireing at
full Speed, and then presently return again after the same manner, without
giving the Germans, who were heavily armed, the possibility of coming to Blows
with them; and having thus combated with them all the Day, they in the Night
seized upon the Avenues of another Mountain, which were extraordinary strait,
and through which they knew the Christian Army must necessarily pass the
following Day.

But Frederick, who disposed all things with an incredible presence of Mind,
thought of a pretty Stratagem, which succeeded perfectly to his Wish. He
divided his Army into two Bodies, leaving the smallest Party in the Camp, which
was at the Foot of the Mountain; after which, seeming to be afraid of the
Turks, and to despair of forcing the Pass, he marched in the Morning with the
greatest Party quite another way, as if he designed to find some other Passage.
He was not distanced far from the Camp, when the Turks really believing that
his Fear was the occasion of his Flight, and the have which he made to draw
himself out of such a dangerous Place, had made him abandon his Camp; but that
the desire they had of Plunder, and that Avarice which is the governing Passion
of these Barbarians, blinded them in such sort, that abandoning their
advantageous Post, they tumbled down from the Mountain in the greatest
Disorder, to fall upon the Camp, which they believed they should rifle at their
Discretion, finding it without Defense. But those who guarded it, showed them
their Mistake, and defended it so vigorously, that the Emperor making a short
Turn, upon a Signal which was given him by Fire and Smoke, charged them upon
their Backs; so that being shut in between two powerful Bodies, they were most
of them cut in Pieces, and the rest scattered, leaving the Passage free to the
victorious Army.

Frederick nevertheless found it very difficult to believe that he was betrayed
by the Sultan of Iconium, in regard that his Ambassadors were still in his
Retinue, and they always highly disavowed these to be their Masters Troops; but
it was not long before he came to be disabused; for about the Feast of the
Ascension, which was the third Day of May, the Ambassadors took the Opportunity
of the Night to steal away, forcing along with them Godfrey the Emperor's
Interpreter; and in the same place where the Sultan Chisiastlan, the Father of
this, had defeated the Army of the Emperor Manuel, about fourteen Years before,
he found more than thirty thousand Men imbodied into an Army, to oppose his
Passage in the Straits, which might easily be maintained by a very
inconsiderable Number. The Turks had gathered great heaps of Stones, that so
they might, from the high Rocks, shower them down out of their Slings, upon the
Christians; upon whom also they might with ease tumble down huge pieces of the
Craggs, which they had before loosened for that purpose. But Frederick, very
dexterously drew the Army out of that Danger also; for having promised to a
certain Prisoner, that he would give him his Life, upon Condition that he
should, as he offered for that Favor, conduct the Army by another way over the
Top of this Mountain, which was three Miles in the Ascent, he passed it the
same Day, though not without great Difficulty, and with the Loss of above a
thousand Horses, and as many Beasts of Burden, who tumbled over the Precipices
on the one Side and the other.

As soon as he was descended into the Plain, he encamped there, to refresh his
Army a little in that place, which was very commodious, in regard of the plenty
of Forage: But the Turks, who with their dreadful Multitude filled all the
Country, having run from all parts during the whole Night, the next Morning
fell upon the Rereguard, whilst that another Party of them having cut them off
from the Van, charged them in the Front. This was one of the greatest and most
dangerous Combats which happened in all the Voyage; but the Dukes of Suabia and
Moravia, and the Marquis of Baden, who commanded that Body, combated with so
much Courage and Conduct, that they forced the Enemies to a shameful Flight,
after their having left a great many of their Number dead upon the place, and
without so much as the Loss of one Man, though there were a great many wounded;
and among them Frederick the Son of the Emperor, who had two of his Teeth
broaken out by a Blow from a Sling; a great part also of the Baggage was lost;
the less Valiant among the Turks, having taken the Opportunity of the heat of
the Fight, to fall upon those who guarded it: After this, as the Troops of the
Enemies increased daily more and more, they gave such continual Alarms, that
the Soldiers were forced almost continually to stand to their Arms to defend
themselves against these Infidels, who attacked them Night and Day without
Intermission, though they were continually beaten; and that one time among
many, that they ventured to attack the Camp by Night, there were slain above
six thousand of them, and among the rest, one hundred seventy four of their
most considerable Officers.

But after all, These Victories could not deliver the Army from the most
terrible and dangerous of their Enemies, which was Famine; for all the
Provisions which they had carried with them, being either consumed by so long a
March, or lost with the Sumpters and that part of the Baggage which had been
taken, and all the Country being either Barren or Uninhabited, or desolated by
the Enemies, who made a horrible Wast throughout; the Army was forced to kill
the Mules, and Horses, which would otherwise have been lost for want of
Forage; so that there remained but a few of them, and they so feeble and
meagre, that their Masters were so far from receiving the Benefit of being
carried by them upon their March, that they were forced to walk on foot, and
lead them by the Bridles: Insomuch that I cannot but relate a pretty Adventure
which happened thereupon, and which the Historian Nicetas, as much a Greek all
over as he was, yet thought fit to dedicate to the Memory of Posterity, as a
Prodigy of Valor, comparable even to the Fables which have been invented, to
frame the Heroes of the first Ages. A certain German Cavaleer, of an
extraordinary Force and Stature, being mighty unwilling to part with his Horse,
who by reason of his Poverty was in no condition to carry him, marched on foot,
Turks, who constantly hovered about the Army, and who all together discharged
their Arrows against him; but this valiant Man regarding them with a Look
fierce and contemptuous, received them all upon a Buckler, with which his left
Arm was covered, through which he had put his Bridle, by which he held his
Horse; and holding his Sword in his other hand, he kept still on his Way,
without so much as once stopping or turning, till at last, a Turk more resolute
than his Companions, leaving his Bow, and putting Spurs to his Horse, came
galloping upon him with his Sable in his Hand, and with all his Force
discharged a mighty Blow upon the German, which had no more effect than if he
had struck it against a Rock; whereupon the fierce Undaunted, perceiving that
he could not make a sure Blow at the Rider, who was too high for him, he with a
dreadful Reverse cut off both the Horses Foreleggs at the Knees, and the poor
Animal at the instant sinking upon his Stumps, the Rider still sitting in the
Saddle, he discharged such a horrible Blow upon his Head, that he cut him quite
down to the very Saddle, and wounded the Horse into the Bargain. This so
affrighted his Companions, as well it might, that taking the Soldier for some
Demon, rather than for a Man, they betook themselves to their Spurs, as if the
Devil had drive them, leaving the Hero coolly, and at leisure to pursue his way
to the Camp, where he arrived a good while after the rest.

The Emperor all this time, still advanced toward Iconium, with a Resolution
to Perish or to take that City, and both to punish the Sultan for his Perfidy,
and to refresh his Army after so many Fatigues. For this Reason therefore,
these cowardly Barbarians fearing such an Affront, and believing on the other
side, that they had to do, with Men half dead with Famine, resolved at length,
to expect them in the open Field, and with all their Forces to put it to the
hazard of a Battle. And therefore having mustered up all their Troops, which
composed an Army of more than three hundred thousand Combatants, upon the
eleventh day of May, they appeared in View of the Christian Army, under the
Conduct of Melich, the eldest Son of the Sultan. He extended his Troops to the
right and left upon the Heights which he had possessed himself of all
thereabout, as far as the Sight would reach, that thereby he might strike a
Terror into the Hearts of the Christians; who after having lost so great
numbers of their Soldiers, and the greatest part of their Horses, by the
defect of Forage and Provisions, in such a difficult March of three Months,
appeared but as a handful in comparison of such a fearful Multitude of their
Enemies. The Emperor, who was one of the greatest Captains of the World, took
occasion to draw an Advantage from this Action of the Enemies, who did it for
their own, and to terrify the Christians by the View of all their Forces, which
were to be discovered easily from their Posts; for he put on a counterfeit
Amazement, and after having well dissembled a Fear, by the little Assurance of
his Countenance, and the many Changes which he made in the order of his Battle,
he caused his Troops to move in such a sort of Countermarch, as gave the Turks
a firm Persuasion that he had not the least Intention to Fight, but rather how
to save himself by a Retreat. Hereupon the first Squadrons of the Barbarians,
who believed that the Victory was already as good as in their Hands, and that
they had nothing more to do, but to change this Retreat into a manifest Flight,
descended from the Mountains into the Plain with so much Precipitation, that
they galloped with a loose Rein, and in great Disorder, with dreadful Cries,
according to their Custom, after these supposed Fugitives. But they soon found
their Mistake, for the Germans turning Head imediately upon them, and charging
them with their Swords, quickly made them fly in good Earnest, after having
left a great many stretching upon the place, to save themselves in Have and
Confusion upon the Mountains, with the gross of their Army, which was not yet
come down. The two following Days passed in light Skirmishes, but upon the
third, which was the morrow after Whitsuntide, there was a necessity of coming
to a general Battle.

Melich, who had too many Troops to be able to range them commodiously in the
Ground of which he was possessed, divided his Army into two great Bodies, which
he posted the one behind the other, Suabia, who had order to sustain him, by
instantly following of him, to the end that they might make the more powerful
Effort, by charging both together, almost at the same time, upon the first Body
of the Enemies. Now the Ascent of the Hill upon which they stood in Battalia,
being not very steep, the Emperor, after he had passed the prodigious Discharge
of their Arrows and Stones, which had little Effect, charged upon the first
Squadrons of his Enemies; after which, contrary to their Custom, they made some
Resistance, whereas usually their manner of Fight, was like that of the ancient
Parthians, from whom they were descended, in vaulting about, and returning to
the Charge after they had wheeled off, but this Resistance lasted but a little
time, for these sort of People, who were better acquainted with robbing and
killing, than with this manner of sighting, not being able to sustain the
furious Shock of these Germans, whose very Countenances struck them with
Terror, and who dealt about lusty Blows of Pike, Sword, and Battle-Axes, and
made a dreadful Slaughter among such as either durst abide their Force, or had
not the Opportunity to avoid it, as indeed few of them had, by reason of the
greatness of their Number, which hindered the nimbleness of their Flight; so
that of the boldest of them, who for some time maintained the close Fight,
above ten thousand lay stretched out upon the Place. Melich, who behaved
himself very gallantly, was overthrown by a Blow of the Lance, and four of the
Sultan's principal Noblemen, were slain by his Side; nor was it without extreme
Difficulty and Hazard, that being quickly re-mounted again, and seeing that all
his Vanguard was entirely defeated, he saved himself upon the Hill, where the
Rereguard, commanded by his Brothers, stood in Battalia. But that stood but a
small time; it was already half defeated, by the Fear which seized those
Troops, in seeing the woeful Slaughter of their Companions of the Van; and the
Flight of the General, who in saving himself with the Flyers, carried also the
Terror and the Confusion among the other Squadrons; so that as soon as ever
they saw the Emperor, who marched over the Bellies of all those whom he found
in the Valley, advanced gently, and in good Order against them, they presently
fled at full Speed, toward Iconium, having the Christians still at their
Backs, who pursued them until it was Night.

That which is most mavelous in this Victory, is that the Conquerors obtained
it without almost any Loss; which many attributed to the particular Protection
of St. George and St. Victor, which are the ordinary Names that are called upon
in Battle, and whom some affirmed that they saw combat with the Turks before
the Squadrons of the Christians: which must either be attributed to some
extraordinary Effect of the Divine Commission, as many times happened to the
People of Israel, according to the Testimony of the Scripture it self, which
relates to us the Sun's standing still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of
Ajalon, and that the Stars in their Courses fought against proud Sisera, and
that the Hailstones, of prodigious bigness, the Artillery of Heaven, overthrew
the Enemies of God and his People: Or else it is possible, it might be the
effect of what diverse of them had often heard related of the Celestial
Squadrons which were reported to have been seen in the first Crusade, at the
famous Battle of Antioch, whose Imagination being therefore strongly
pre-possessed with the Impressions of those Ideas, might upon this Occasion
frame to themselves the like Apparitions: Be it as it will, this is certain,
that a Cavaleer of Reputation, and in no sort to be thought an idle or dreaming
Visionary, whose Name was Lewis de Helfenstein, affirmed it positively before
the Emperor, and protested to him before the whole Army, upon his Oath, and
upon the Faith of a vowed Pilgrim of the Holy Sepulcher, and of a Crusade, that
he had more than once seen St. George at the Head of the Squadrons, putting the
Enemies to Flight. This was also afterward confirmed by the Turks themselves,
who related that they saw,

Now as these Barbarians did again, with the same ease as they had fled, rally
themselves, Melich having quickly re-assembled them before Iconium, sent to let
the Emperor know, from the Sultan his Father, that he was ready to permit him
free Passage, and to furnish him with all manner of Provisions in Plenty,
provided, that he would, for Form sake only, pay thirty thousand Crowns, and
oblige the Armenian Christians, to yield to the Sultan those Places which they
held in Cilicia, which the Historians of that time, do for this Reason, so
often confound with Armenia. To this Frederick instantly answered, sweetly and
calmly, according to his manner, but magnificently, and always like Caesar;
That a Roman Emperor, especially at the Head of an Army of Crusades, going to
deliver the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, was not acquainted with the way of
Merchandising for his Passage with Silver, when he knew so readily how to open
it more nobly, with the harder Metal of the glittering Steel, which he wore by
his Side, and which the Sultan should ere long find was a Key, that would not
only let him out of his Country, but open to him the Gates, and give him
Entrance into his Capital City of Iconium. And the following day, without
staying for any other Answer, he removed his Camp, which was already within
View of Iconium, and advanced toward the City to attack it.

Iconium, which at this time is called Cogny, the Capital City of Lycaonia, and
of all the Dominions of this Sultan, which besides this Province, extended into
Pisidia, Cappadocia, Pamphilia, and Isauria, which not long after was called
Caramania, was before this time a very good City, and well Fortified, where the
Pacha Governor of the Province made his Residence. But it was at this time
much Greater, more Rich and Populous, environed with good Walls, and fortified
with a many fair Towers, of a wonderful Thickness, and extraordinary Height;
and besides it had in the fashion of a Citadel, a very great Castle situate
upon a Mountain, which commanded the Town; and in the Opinion of a certain
Writer, who was present at that War, the City was no way less than Cologne,
which is one of the biggest and most considerable Cities of Germany. It was
also very Beautiful without the Walls, there being on the West side a great
Park enclosed with stone Walls, in which the Sultans had built two magnificent
Palaces, for their Diversion during the Heats of the Summer; there were also
round about it abundance of Gardins, which made the coming to it on that part
very pleasing, but withal very difficult, by reason that there was Convenience
for the placing a great number of Soldiers, who might from those Covertures
discharge in great Security their Arrows, against those who approached. The
Emperor nevertheless, having commanded every Horseman to take a Footman behind
him, that so upon their lighting, they might the better attack those who
defended these Enclosures, easily made himself Master of them, and there lodged
all the Army, with a Resolution the next Morning, being the twenty eighth of
May, to Assault the City, though it was defended by a great part of the Enemies
Army; whilst the other part, which was reinforced to the number of two
hundred thousand Men, was in the Field, ready to charge upon the Backs of the
Christians, in case they attempted any thing against the Town.

So soon therefore as the Day appeared, the Emperor without deferring upon the
Propositions of Peace, which the Sultan made only to amuse him, divided the
Army into two Bodies. He gave the Command of the first to the Duke of Suabia,
his Son, accompanied with Florent Earl of Holland, with Order to attack the
City: And the other he commanded himself, to oppose the Enemies, if they should
attempt to fall upon them behind, during the Attack. Germans pursued them so
briskly, as not to give them liberty to shut the Gates before they also were
entered with them into the City. And no sooner were they gotten in, but they put
all to the Sword whom they met in the Streets and Marketplaces, without
distinction, thereby to oblige them to retire into their Houses, and leave the
Streets free. The Sultan, with great difficulty, saved himself in the Castle,
with his Children, and that which was most considerable in the Court, being
hotly pursued by the Duke of Suabia, who chased them with the Sword at their
Backs, killing and slaying all that opposed him, or stood in his way, to the
very Gates of the Fortress. Thus this great City was taken, by the fearful
Disorder occasioned by the Cowardly Timerousness of one Man: And the Victors
made themselves Masters of it, without almost any Loss; rather owing it to the
fear of the Vanquished, than to their own Valor, since they found no Enemy
that would give them occasion to exercise it, in the Execution of a generous
Enterprise.

All this time the Emperor, who knew nothing of the Success of those who
attacked the City, was at hard Blows with the great Army of his Enemies; for
they knowing that he had only a Moiety of the Army, charged him with more
Resolution than was customary to them, upon the hopes which they had, that they
should easily surround such a little Army, which could not possibly resist two
hundred thousand Men, who assailed him on all sides at the same time. And, in
truth, they assailed him in such good Order, and with so much Vigor, drawing
down upon him on every side, all together, with fearful Cries, and an infinite
number of Darts, Arrows and Stones, which they discharged from their Bows and
Slings: Insomuch, that the Christians, who were so small a number in
Comparison, and so harrassed with the Fatigues of their March, and the Combats
of the foregoing Days, and almost spoiled with the horrible Rain which had
fallen all the Night before, began to despair, not only of the Victory, but of
their Lives. The Bishops themselves, and the Priests, habited in their Rochets,
Surplices and Stoles, who expected nothing the Stroke of Death, and to offer to
God their Lives as a Sacrifice, however exhorted the Soldiers, with great
Cries, to do the same, and expose theirs freely, after their Example. But the
Emperor, ready, as he was, to die for the Love of Jesus Christ, was yet
resolved, if it were possible, to live, and live a Conqueror for the Love of
Glory; and therefore, galloping amongst the Ranks, he animated them by his
Voice and Gesture, and posted to put himself at the Head of the foremost
Squadrons; where regarding his People with Eyes which shot Fire into the very
Bottom of the most frozen Courage, he communicated to them the same Ardour with
which his noble Heart was animated. What do you stand for, said he, my generous
Fellow Soldiers? Let us go, Let us go under the conquering Ensign of the Death
of Christ Jesus, who calls us to the Victory: It is not in expecting Death from
them, but in carrying it among our Enemies, that we must be Victors. And
thereupon, setting Spurs to his Horse, he threw himself into the thickest
Squadrons of the Turks, all covered with Sweat and Blood, as he was; and his
Courage furnishing him with new Forces, he laid about him, cutting, overturning
and killing with mighty Blows of his Sword, on both sides of him, all those
that durst oppose his Fury. All his Soldiers, animated by his Example, and by
seeing the danger to which their Prince exposed himself for their sakes,
became, as it were, new Men; and as if they had but just freshly begun the
Combat, they followed him with so much Heat, Impetuosity and Fury, that those
Squadrons, unable to sustain the terrible Shock, being overthrown upon those
who followed them, the Terror spread it self so among the rest of the Army,
that they presently fell into Disorder, and in a Moment after, Barbarians,
saved themselves in the Mountains, leaving ten thousand slain upon the place.

After this Execution, the Emperor, who was not willing to amuse himself, by
pursuing the Fugitives, lead his victorious Soldiers to the City, of the Taking
whereof he was by this time advertised; where he was received, as it were, in
Triumph by his Son. He gave the Plunder of it to his Army, which there found
Riches, even surpassing Imagination, and a prodigious quantity of all kind of
Provisions, to refresh them, after so many Travels, Toyls and Hazards. The
Emperor had, among other things, for his share, more than one hundred thousand
Marks in Gold and Silver, which was found in the Palace of Melich, and which
was the Money, which Saladin had given him as a Portion with his Daughter. The
next Day the Emperor caused Prayers to be publicly sung in Iconium, and Thanks
to be given for a Victory so great and memorable. The Sultan then, seeing
himself besieged in the Castle, from whence he could not escape, humbly
demanded Peace of the Emperor, upon such Conditions as he should please: And
Frederick, whose great design was to advance as fast as possible toward Syria,
to combat with Saladin, after having publicly reproached this miserable Sultan
with his base Perfidiousness, did him the favor to promise him, that he would
restore the City to him in the Condition wherein it was, provided only that he
should furnish him with Provisions for all the time he marched through his
Dominions; and that for a Warranty of the Performance of his Word, he should
put into his hands, as Hostages, twenty of the greatest Persons of his Court,
whom the Emperor should choose; and that, after the Repose of seven days,
wherein his Army was to be Quartered, partly in the Town, and partly in the
Sultan's Park, he would take his March, and quit the City, as he also did, on
the 30th Day of May, arriving at Laranda, upon the Frontier of Cilicia, at the
Foot of Mount Taurus; from whence, nevertheless, he did not release the
Hostages, in regard that his Subjects had again molested the Army upon their
March.

The Mountain Taurus is the greatest, and the highest, of all those of Asia;
and which, taking different Names in the several Provinces through which it
passes, or which it divides from one another, as well on this, as the further
side of Euphrates, retains particularly the Name of Taurus in Cilicia; which it
separates from Isauria, Lycaonia, Cappadocia, and the lesser Armenia, by a long
Chain of Mountains and Rocks, extreme broken and frightful; where it lifts up
it self upon the Seacoast, toward the Consines of Isauria, in which place it
bends it self in the form of a Crescent: and after having formed this great
Demicircle, it comes to a Butt upon the same Sea, upon the East, near the City
of Issus, so celebrated, for the Battle which Alexander the Great gained
against Darius, in the Straits of these Mountains. They are for the most part,
by reason of their excessive height, covered with Snow, that there is no
passing of them, but in Summer; and then so broken with Precipices, so steep
and ragged, that they are wholly inaccessible, except by three Passes, which
are extreme narrow, and difficult of Access: So that they are called by the
Greeks, Piles, or Ports, by one of which there is a necessity of passing, to
enter into Cilicia. It was by that, of these three, which leads toward
Cappadocia and Lycaonia, that the Emperor, after having reposed some time at
Laranda, began to engage himself in the Passage of these Mountains, which could
not be performed in many days, and with a great deal of difficulty. He
received, during this troublesome Passage, with abundance of Joy, Livon, Prince
of Armenia, the Brother of Rupin de la Montagne, who, with the principal
Persons of that Country, came to wait upon him, and pay him their Respects;
offering all that they had, at his Service, for his Accommodation. After they
had taken their leave of him, leaving six of them to accompany him, he at last
accomplished this difficult Passage, the 10th of June; and dis-incumbring
himself of these tiresom Rocks, he descended into the Valley, which is watered
by the River Cydnus.

This River arises out of Mount Taurus, in the Coast of Cappadocia; from
whence, entering into Cilicia, by one of these Valleys, which are formed by
these Mountains, it rowls its gentle Streams, extreme clear and fresh, upon its
murmuring Bed of clean Gravel and Pebbles; and is not very spacious tiil,
Tharsus, it discharges it self into the Ocean. History has made this River
famous, by the extreme danger which Alexander there run of losing his Life,
whilst in the Heat of Summer, being all on fire with the violence of the
burning Season, he would needs bath himself in these too cool Streams of
Cydnus, being then upon his March against Darius. But an Accident more
deplorable, which here happened to the Emperor Frederick by the very same way,
ought for ever to render the Memory of that fatal River odious. For the very
same day, which was a Sunday, the Eve of St. Barnabas, this great Prince, after
having dined upon the Bank of that River, which he had just passed, seeing the
Water, which to him seemed very delightful, and not able to support the
intolerable Heat of that Season of the Year, without making use of that Remedy
which was so easy, and which he naturally loved, would needs bath himself in
those cool and refreshing Streams, notwithstanding all that was alleged to
divert him from it: but he was no sooner in the River, into the middle of which
he threw himself, but that the excessive Coldness of the Water seized him in a
moment; and penetrating his Pores, which, by reason of the extreme Heat, were
so open, combated his natural Heat and Spirits with so much Violence that, in a
Swound, he sunk down to the bottom of the Water. He was, however, taken up
alive, and so soon as he began to return to his Memory, perceiving his death
approaching, he gave Thanks unto Almighty God, who did him the favor to call
him in his Pilgrimage, and in the Performance of his Vow; and recommending his
Soul into his Hands, and offering his Life in Sacrifice for the Remission of
his Sins, he presently expired. I know that many Writers report the matter
otherwise, and say, that his Horse foundring in the Passage of the River, his
Foot hung in the Stirrup, and so he was drowned, as he was passing into
Armenia, over the River Salef: but as the most ancient Historians, his
Contemporaries, and some of them who were present, positively, some of them,
affirm, it was the River Cydnus: And others of them say, it was a River near
Tarsus, in which he was drowned, swimming after Dinner; and that one of them
informs us, that he died not till the Evening. In my Opinion, there is not the
least place left for deliberation, which of them we ought to believe;
especially considering that it is very easy to reconcile these Historical
Differences, by what was before observed, that it was then very customary to
confound Armenia with Cilicia, and that the River Salef is the same Cydnus, as
the Annalist Roger gives us to understand, by the Description which he makes of
those Countries.

Thus died one of the greatest Princes that ever silled the Throne of the
Caesar's, Frederick the First, in the seventieth Year of his Age, whilst he was
marching to combat Saladin, for the Re-Conquest of the Realm of Jerusalem; to
which important Design, he had levelled the Way, by all those Victories which
he had so gloriously gained against the Greek Emperor, and the Sultan of
Iconium, the Allies of Saladin. The sole Renown of the Actions of this
invincible Prince struck that famous Conqueror with so great a fear, that upon
the very Rumor and Noise of his Coming, despairing to be able to maintain them
against him, he caused the Walls of Laodicea in Syria, of Giblet, Tortosa,
Biblis, Berytus and Sydon to be demolished; and had thoughts himself of
retiring into Egypt, that he might not be obliged to hazard his Fortune against
that of an Enemy so successful and formidable. He was happy in finishing a Life
so illustrious, in the Course of his Victories, and before giddy Fortune, who
never loves to court one Favorite long, had begun to forsake him: but much
more happy in a Death so full of Glory, and of Deserts before God and Men,
since he died in the generous Pursuit of his great Design, in quitting his own
Empire, to re-establish that of Jesus Christ, in that mysterious Spot of
Ground, where he was pleased to work, by his Life, and by his Death, the great
Wonder of our Salvation. For thus it is that we ought charitably to judge of
the Death of this Prince, by those things which we know of him, and not
according to the rash, meddling Humor of some, who will needs pretend to enter
into the incomprehensible Judgments of God, who have had the Confidence to
attribute his Death to the Divine Vengeance, as a Punishment for the War which
he made against the Holy See.

So soon as the general Consternation, or rather the extreme Despair, in which
the Army was, by reason of this deplorable Accident, was a little over, the
Princes and General Officers being assembled, by a common Consent, acknowledged
Frederick, Duke of Suabia, for their General; the Emperor, his Father, at his
death, having recommended the Care of the Army to him, and left it under his
Command. It was with as much Joy as was possibly to be expected in such a deep
Affliction, that the Army took the Oath of Fealty to him, whom they
acknowledged as the true Heir, and the living Image of all the great Qualities
and Virtues of his Father. And this Prince, who in reallity possessed them in a
degree very nearly approaching the Perfections of that admirable Emperor, made
it appear quickly that he was his true Successor, by his Liberality, in
bestowing great Largesses upon the Soldiers, to whom he divided the greatest
part of the Treasure which fell to his Father's share at the taking of Iconium.
After he had therefore divided the Army into two parts, the lesser number
embarked on the Vessels which the Armenians, who then held diverse places in
Cilicia, furnished him withal; and himself with the greater Party, after having
interred the Emperor's Entrails, and embalmed the Body of his Father, at
Tarsus, took his way by Land toward Antioch, where he did not arrive till
after a tedious March of six Weeks, wherein he suffered extremely, both by the
defect of Provisions, and by the continual Ambushes of the Turks. But the
Abundance which he found in this great City, where he was most magnificently
received, was more fatal to his Army, than either all the Want they had
endured, or all the Combats they had undergone, since their parting from
Constantinople; for the Soldiers passing suddenly from one Extreme into
another, there followed so much Sickness, such a Mortality, and at last, the
Plague among them, in such a furious manner, that of a numerous and flourishing
Army, which it was when it entered into Asia, there remained not more than seven
thousand Foot, and five or six hundred Horse; with which, notwithstanding, the
valiant Frederick marched over the Bellies of all that durst oppose him, and
happily arrived at the City of Tire. There it was that he paid the last Duties
to his Father, whom he caused to be interred in the great Church, with all the
Magnificence and Ceremonies of a Funeral Pomp, worthy of so great an Emperor,
the Archbishop of Tire, from whom he received the Cross, making his Elegy in a
most admirable Funeral Oration. After which, Duke Frederick went to join the
Christian Army, which for two years had undertaken and pursued the famous Siege
of Ptolemais, in the manner which I am about to relate.

When Saladin, after a Years Imprisonment at Damascus, gave Liberty to King Guy
of Lusignan, he exacted from him, among other hard Conditions, that he should
renounce all manner of Claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem; and to engage himself
by a soremn Oath, to repass the Sea as soon as it was possible. But after he
was at liberty, the Bishops declared that this Oath was in no sort obliging, in
regard it was forced from him by Compulsion, and in his Restraint; and also
because Saladin himself had first violated his Faith, in not delivering his
Prisoner so soon as Ascalon was rendered to him, as he had promised. And for
this Reason the King, who was retired to Tripolis, began to renew the War,
after he had assembled a considerable number of Troops of those of his own
Realm, who before durst not appear, but flocked in to him upon the Arrival of
the Crusades; who seeing the French and English engaged in War, came along with
Geoffrey de Lusignan, his Brother. Having gained some Advantages of the Turks
in the beginning, he after went and presented himself before Tire, where the
Marquis of Montferrat, who pretended he had justly acquired the Principality of
that City, refusing him Entrance, he was so enraged, that although he had not
half Forces enough for such an Enterprise, yet he encamped before the place,
and put himself into a posture of besieging it. Heraclius, and the great Master
of the Templers, wisely representing to him, that it was impossible for him to
attempt a matter of this nature, without absolutely ruining, not only himself,
but all the Hopes that yet remained to the Christians in Palestine, he desisted
from it; and thereupon, desperate to see that he had not one place left to him
in all his Kingdom; for Tripolis appertained of Right to Raymond, Prince of
Antioch, he took Counsel of his Despair, and turning short to the Left Hand, he
lead his little Army directly to Ptolemais, in hopes to take it, either by
Assault, or by Surprise.

Ptolemais, by some called Accon, or Acre, derives its Name from one of the
Kings of Egypt, who was its Restorer, and was at that time, a fair and large
City, lying upon the Coast of the Phoenician Sea. It was of a Triangular
Figure, the Base of it being toward the East, the two Sides toward the North
and South, and the Point ended in a Rock, which advanced it self a good space
into the Sea, upon the West; where the Town becoming the narrowest, abutted
upon a great, high and strong Tower, which was called the Fly-Tower, because
that formerly, in that place stood a Temple dedicated to Beelzebub, which
signifies the God of Flies. It also served for a Watchtower, or Light-House,
to discover the Entry of the Haven, which lay toward the South, in a certain
Bay which the Sea made in that place, which was very commodious, and capable of
receiving great numbers of Ships. It was encompassed with very strong Walls and
Barbicans, or Out-Walls, with large and deep Ditches and Graffs; as also, with
very good Towers, placed at convenient distances, to defend each other: The
principal of these, which served as a Castle and Fortress to the City, was
called the Wicked Tower, by reason that the People, by an old sottish Fable,
which, according to Custom, was held for an Authentic Tradition among them,
had a Belief that it was built with those thirty Pieces of Money, for which
Judas sold our Savior. The Country adjacent was very pleasant, being a fair
and rich Champaign, which upon the North, was bounded by Mount Saron, distant
about two Leagues from the City; and upon Mount Carmel on the South, much about
the same distance; toward the East it was extended to the Mountains of
Galilee, from whence there arose two small Rivers, one whereof passing through
the City, emptied it self into the Sea, at the Haven: The other, called Belus,
flows about two hundred and fifty Paces from the City, Southwards, and is
famous for having been the occasion of the Invention of Glass, by furnishing
the Materials of which it was first made.

For about the middle of its Course, it forms a kind of a Lake, or Marish,
which Pliny calls, the Lake of Cyndevia, of a round Figure, which may be some
hundred Cubits in Compass, the Bottom whereof is full of a certain Sand which
by the Winds is driven into it from the Tops of the adjacent Hills, where it
obtains a Disposition which inclines it easily to be turned into Glass; for
being boiled and purisied in a Furnace, it turns into a transparent Mass, white
and clear, almost like Crystal: And that which is most wondrous, any small
piece of this Crystal being thrown upon the Banks of this Lake, in little time
regains its former Nature, and is converted into the same common Sand which it
was, before it was blown by the Winds into this Lake. But though this Champaign
about Ptolemais be very equal and level toward the Foot of the Mountains which
inviron it, yet there are two Hills near the Town; the one of which is called
Turon, which some have confounded with the famous Castle of Thoron, situate
some three or four Leagues from thence, upon the Extremity of the Mountains of
Tire, which extend themselves to the upper Galilee: The other is called the
Hill of the Mosquee, on the other side the River Belus; upon which, besides
that Mosquee of the Sarasins, is to be seen an ancient Sepulcher, which they
say is that of Memnon, though without giving us precisely any Foundation
whereupon to establish that Belief. This was the nature of this place, which
proved the Theater of so many brave Actions as were performed at this Siege of
Ptolemais, which one may well say, was one of the most memorable which is
related in any History.

Christians, about the Year 636. by Omar, the Successor of Mahomet, who easily
made himself Master of it, all things in Asia stooping, as it were, to receive
the Yoke of this Conqueror. King Baldwin l. regained it from the Sarasins, in
the Year 1104. in twenty four days, by the help of the Fleet of the Genoese;
and after the unfortunate Battle of Tiberias, Saladin constrained it to
surrender in two days; but the Christians under King Guy of Lusignan, to
re-take it from Saladin, laid Siege to it, which lasted more than three Years;
where the gallant Actions which were done upon one side and the other, with all
the Forces of Europe and Asia, which were there employed, either to attack it,
or defend it, have rendered it most celebrated to Posterity.

The King therefore being resolved to have this Town, that so he might, at
least, have one in his Realm, and one by which he might with Convenience
receive the Succors of the West, began to form his Siege against it about the
end of August, in the Year 1188. with his little Army, which the Sarasins of
Ptolemais looked upon with such Contempt, that they did not think it worth the
shutting of their Gates against him: And, in truth, he had not above seven
hundred Horse, and about eight or nine thousand Foot, comprising the Pisans,
which the Archbishop of that place had brought to the Succor of the Holy Land,
and whom the Marquis of Montferrat had driven out of Tire, by reason that he
espoused the Interest of Guy de Lusignan, as the Archbishop of Ravenna, with
the Venetians and Lombards, did that of the Marquis. There were in Ptolemais
four times the number of Soldiers, under very good Officers, whom Saladin had
placed there, to oppose the Garrison of Tire, and to preserve that Port; which
being in the middle of his Conquests, was most convenient to receive the Fleet
which he was rigging in Egypt. The King nevertheless, who had many brave Men,
and who believed that he might draw some Advantage from this foolish
Presumption of his Enemies, and from the Contempt which they had of this small
number, did not fail to attack the place; and he did it so briskly, some
attempting the Gates, which were open, and others presenting the Scalade at
those places where the Walls were lowest, that they had infallibly taken the
Town at that very time, if that first Fury had not been dashed by an unlucky
Report which was spread about, and which they afterward found salfe; that
Saladin, with a powerful Army, was coming to fall upon their Rear: for without
giving himself the leisure to examine whether the Report were true or false,
this poor Prince, who was accused to be very defective in point of Bravery, was
so terrified with the very Shadow of Saladin, that he immediately caused the
Retreat to be founded, and went and fortified himself upon the Eminence of
Turon, thinking now of nothing but to strengthen his Camp, and expect the
Succors of the Crusades, who, during the War between the two Crowns of England
and France, arrived daily, one after another, in Palestine.

This was the first Error which Guy of Lusignan committed during this Siege,
which was occasioned by the too great Apprehension of Danger, where there was
really none. And at the same time Saladin fell into another, no way inferior
on his part, in that he had not taken sufficient Pre-caution against what might
happen: For that Prince, who then besieged the Fortress of Beaufort, which lay
upon the River Eleutherus, some five or six Leagues from Ptolemais, and which
belonged to the Knights of the Temple; having understood that Guy of Lusignan
had undertaken the Siege of that City, he thanked God, that he had put his
Enemies into his Hands, and that he had now the Opportunity to destroy the
Remainder of the Christians, who were come, he said, to put themselves into
their own Chains. And as those who applauded this brave Speech advised him,
immediately to lay hold of so fair an Occasion to defeat them, as then
presented it self; he made Answer, That the Victory being indubitable, he was
resolved that his Brother, who was to join him within a few days, should not
lose his share in the pleasure of it: but he became instructed by a chargeable
Experiment, something with the latest for so great a Captain, That in Martial
Affairs, the Loss of Time is an irreparable Error; and that, deferring the
Execution of what is to be done in a Critical Conjuncture, which is not to be
fixed according to Fancy and Imagination, is never to be recovered: For
Victory, which usually attends a favorable moment is no more to be recalled
then that happy Minute when once, the Insufficiency, Saladin coming in some
time after with an Army of an hundred Thousand men to attack the Christians,
whom he believed he should defeat without any dispute, found he was in a mighty
mistake and that though he had to do with an Army which was much less than his
own, yet they were far more Valiant and much augmented in Numbers in Comparison
of what they were at the first. And in Fact it was composed of very gallant
men, who having retrenched themselves most advantageously upon the Hill of
Turon, notwithstanding all the Furious Attacks which he made both Night and
Day, he was not able to force their Camp, but was at last constrained to incamp
himself at the Foot of the Hill which he totally surrounded, to besiege these
Besiegers, not doubting in the least but he should have them at his Discretion
in a little time for want of Provisions.

And certainly the Christians who had neither Force enough to fight him in the
Plain Field, no Provisions sufficient to maintain their Camp, for any long
time, must have been reduced to very fatal Extremities, when there appeared in
a sudden a great Fleet of above Fifty Ships who with full Sail bore directly
before the Wind toward the Shore. The Christians who from the Top of the Hill
easily discovered this Navy, were presently under the Apprehensions, that this
might be the Naval Force of Saladin which was daily expected out of Egypt; and
those who were on Board, seeing from far a Camp upon the Top of that Hill, were
reciprocally suspicious, that it was the Camp of the Turks, who having gotten
Intelligence of the great Preparations in Europe, for the Succor of the
Christians in Palestine, attended their Landing there, with a Resolution to
fight them and prevent their Descent. But when the Fleet drawing nearer, both
the Christians in the Camp perceived the Cross in the Ensigns of the Ships
which they wore upon the Poopes, and those who were aboard saw the same
displayed in the Colors of the Camp, they mutually faluted each other with
great Shouts of Joy, which presently informed Saladin of the Arrival of
Succors, which was in a few Moments repeated by an agreeable Surprise, in the
discovery of another Fleet more numerous then the first, which came from the
Coast of Tire to reinforce the Camp of the Christians.

The first was a Fleet of Danes and Frisons, to which were joined such of the
English who were resolved not to stay till the two Kings were accorded to make
their Voyage to the Holy Land. These were all chosen men, resolute to employ
the last drop of their Blood for the deliverance of the Sepulcher of Jesus
Christ; and they did so well accomplish that resolution, that of twelve
thousand Gentlemen who arrived upon this Fleet, there remained not above one
hundred alive at the End of the Siege. Their Passage also was no less glorious
than advantageous to Christendom, for in their Way they took from the Sarasins
the City of Silves in Portugal, which they put into the Hands of the King Dom
Sancho the Son of the great Alphonso: and it happened that they were at the same
time joined by several other Ships, who had on board a great Number of
Volunteers both Nobility and Soldiers under diverse French Lords and Princes;
the Principal of which were Robert Second Count de Dreux, with his Brother
Philip the Bishop of Beavais, the Cousins of the King; Thiband Earl of Chartres
and Stephen his Brother, Earl of Sancerre, Rayoul Count de Clermont in
Beavoise, Thiband Count de Bar, Erard Count de Brienne, and Andrew his Brother,
who was esteemed one of the most Gallant men of his time; William Count de
Chalon upon the Saone, Geoffry de Joinville, Senescal de Champagne, Guy de
Dampiere, Anseric de Montreal, Manasses de Gerland, Guy de Chatillon Upon the
Marne, and his Brother Gaucher the Third, who was afterward Earl of St. Paul,
and who signalized himself under that illustious name by a thousand noble
Actions, which he performed in the War against the Albigenses, and in serving
Philip the August against the Enemies of the Crown, and above all in the Famous
Battle of Bovines, where he commanded the Rereguard of the Royal Army.

Gaucher the Second Grandfather of these two brave Lords, and his Brother
Renaud de Chastillon, had formerly been in the Second Crusade under the Conduct
of King Lewis the Young. Gaucher miserable perished in the unfortunate Combat
of the Mountain of Laodicea, and the Valiant Renaud, who had been Prince of
Antioch, was slain by the Hand of Saladin himself after the deplorable and
fatal Battle of Tiberias; Guy de Chattillon, who was embarked upon this Fleet
with the French Princes, lost his Life at the Siege of Accon: So that there are
to be found few Families in France, which have contributed so many great Men
for the Holy War, as have been derived from this Illustrious House of
Chastillon; from whence some tell us was descended that great Eudes de
Chastillon, Archdeacon of Reims, Prior of Clugny, Cardinal de Ostia, and at
last Sovereign Pope under the Name of Urban the Second, who was the Author of
the first of the Crusades. But we are otherwise informed by Alberick the Monk
of the three Fountains of the Diocese of Chalons upon the Marne in his
Chronicle, which is only a collection of old Contemporary Authors, and of which
I have had a fair Manuscript communicated to me by M. Mabre Craymoisy, Director
of the Royal Printing House of the Louvre, who also printed this History. This
Alberick in his Chronicle, under the Year 1087. which is that of the Exaltation
of Urban, produces not only Guy de Basosches, as the Writer of the History of
the Popes, but another Author called Hugh, who affirms that this Pope was born
at Chastillon upon the Marne, and that he was Son to the Lord de Lageri, whose
descendants from Rodolph, the Brother of Urban, to the fifth Generation he
there gives an Account of; so that Eudes the Monk of Clugny took his Surname
from the Place of his Birth, according to the Custom of those times, and of our
own also in some Monasteries, his Fathers Name according to Panvinius being
Miles; another of our most Famous Genealogists, will by all means have him to
be the Son of a Lord of Chastillon, whom he calls Miles, but who never was in
rerum Natura except in his own prolifick Brain, since it is most evident that
he was deceived, as his own Son a most knowing Person ingeniously confesses,
and is made apparent by comparing what he says with Guibert the Abbot of
Nogent, an Author of that time, who affirms that he was born in the Territory
of Reims where the Seigniory of Lageri lies.

I have been willing contrary to my Custom to make this Genealogick Remark, to
show how easy it is for Writers to be deceived in these kind of Matters, by
mistaking sometimes the place of their Birth for that of the Seigniory; and
that when by such an Equivocal Slip one comes to be persuaded that a man is
descended from such a House, into which Genealogical Stemm having grafted him
they presently find out for him such imaginary Fathers, Mothers and
Grandfathers as never were in being, as they have done for this Pope Urban the
Second. And for this reason it is that I have not given my self or the Reader
much Trouble in discussing the Genealogies of those persons of whom I have
Occasion to speak in this Work, in regard that is not only very troublesome,
but uncertain, unprofitable, Invidious and Vain, and in no sort proper for an
Historian, who ought to leave such Researches to those who make it their
peculiar Design to record the History of some Illustrious House.

To return therefore to my Subject, James Lord of Avesnes, and Guise, one of
the most renowned Captains of his Age, being desirous to imitate the Zeal of
Gerard d' Avesnes one of his Ancestors who was in the first Crusade, joined
these Princes with a good Troop of his Subjects. So that these generous French
all together made more then ten thousand brave men, who burning with an earnest
Desire as soon as possible to combat the Infidels had not the Power to wait
till the two Kings should be in a Condition to accomplish their Vow, but caused
a Fleet at their own Charges to be rigged out at Marseilles, from whence in
thirty five days time they arrived prosperously in the Road of Ptolemais at the
same time, that the Dains Frisons and English came to an Anchor in the same
place; so that together they formed a very fair Army.

The other Fleet was that of the Germans, who had gone to Sea to reinforce the
Army of the Emperor, under the Conduct of the Lantgrave of Thuringia and the
Duke of Guelderland, who coming to ride before the Port of Tire, had at length
persuaded the Marquis of Montferrat, who was before frequently solicited by
such as came from the besieged Army upon the Hill Turon, to join his Fleet with
theirs, so that weighing Anchor with about twenty two thousand Soldiers aboard,
they stood directly for Ptolemais, Saladin perceiving he had two powerful
Armies in the Head of him, whose landing he could not oppose without exposing
himself to be attacked by those who were encamped on the Hill, drew off into
another Eminence opposite to that of Turon and there retrenched himself, in
Expectation of Reinforcements, which were marching toward him from all
Quarters. But the Captains of the Christian Army in a few days, having also
received fresh Supplies of Crusades, French and Italians, and seeing they had
more Forces then the Christians had ever before had since their coming into
Palestine, as also that it would be difficult to force the Town in the View of
such a Potent Army as was that of Saladin, they resolved at last to oblige him
to a Battle, to which that Prince was already sufficiently inclined,

There was between the two Camps a fair and large Plain, where the two Armies
might with case range themselves in Battle, and from the Hills they both
descended as if it had been by concert, at break of day the fourteenth of
October. The Christian Army consisted in forty thousand Horse and a hundred
thousand Foot, which were divided into four Bodies, drawn up in three Lines,
the first which made the right Wing, wherein the King would command was
composed of his own Troops, with those of France and the Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem. The Second which was the left, was commanded by the Marquis of
Montferrat, who besides his own Troops which were the best in all the East, had
also those which Eudes Archbishop of Ravenna, the Venetians and Lombards, who
were of his Party, had brought to him. The Body of the Battle which was the
third was formed partly of the Germans, under the Lantgrave; the Danes and
English, with the Pisans under their ArchBishop, who were of the King's Party.
And the fourth which was the Body of Reserve, was conducted by Gerrard de
Bibesford Great Master of the Temple accompanied with his Knights, and the
Germans under the Duke of Guelderland, as also of the Catalonians, who had
joined the French at Marseilles. Geoffry de Lusignan, and James de Avesnes with
their Troops, remained to guard the Camp, and to defend it against those of the
City who might fally out to attack it during the Battle. The Cavalry was ranged
in the Intervals of the Battallions of the Second Line; and the Light Horse,
being all Archers, were in the Front, followed by the men at Arms, who were
all of the Nobility, who had acquired great Experience in the Wars of Europe,
and in whom consisted the Principal Strength of the Army.

On the other Side Saladin whose Army was by much more Numerous, consisting in
an Hundred thousand Horse, and more Foot, divided this great Army into seven
Bodies; he put six into two Lines which he opposed to those of the Christians,
and the seventh was for a Reserve, besides the Troops which he left for the
Guard of the Camp. Never was there seen greater Ardour or Cheerfulness in any
Christian Army, than appeared upon this Day; there was not so much as one
Soldier who made the least doubt of a certain Victory, and who did not look
upon the Turks as a Booty abandoned to them, to enrich themselves with their
Spoils; and there was one among the Captains, who seeing the Resolution of so
many brave men as composed this flourishing Army, the like whereof had never
been seen in the Holy Land, cried out by a horrible Trusport of his Indignation
and a Presumption too justly to be blamed as Criminala, is tthere hen any Power
in all Asia, which can be capable of resisting us in the Condition wherein we
are? It is impossible for me not to despise this Multitude of Enemies which
face us; and if God Almighty will but stand Neuter without aiding the one or
the other Part, we are most assured of the Victory, since we have nothing else
to do but to march to it over the Bellies of all this Army which opposes us.
Insupportable Vanity of the Spirit of Mankind! which so easily loses it self
in the Foolish Ideas which its frames of its own Strength, which in reallity
without his Help is nothing but miserable Weakness, as too plainly appeared in
the Issue of this Battle. The two Armies being drawn up stood facing one the
other without attempting any thing, till nine of the Clock in the Morning, and
then the first Battallions of the Christians suddenly opened upon the signal
given, the Cavalry advanced from between the Intervals and began the Combat.
Christians now believing themselves with the Place of Battle entirely possessed
of the Victory, sent forth mighty Shouts of Joy, which still the more terrified
their Enemies, who fled at loose Rein; so that Saladin himself unable to stop
them in this horrible Disorder, was also carried along with the Crowd of the
Fugitives. But this Joy did not last long, by reason of a sudden Change of
Fortune, which happened from three or four Causes which altogether concurred in
the disaster which attended the Christian Army.

For first the Soldiers, who ought to have pursued their Point, and have given
Chase to the Enemies to hinder their rallying, immediately fell upon the Camp,
which Fear had caused those who guarded it to abandon, and fell to plundering,
especially the Tents of Saladin, which were replenished with Infinite Riches;
nor was it in the Power of the Captains to prevent this disorder, so much did
the Sight of those magnificent Pavilions, all shining with Silk and Gold,
inflame the Covetousness of the Soldiers, who gave ear to nothing but the
Dictates of their Greedy Avarice. Now Saladin who was a great Captain, and
perceived this Disorder, failed not to make his Advantage of it, and therefore
according to the Custom of these Barbarians so conformable to their
Predecessors, the Ancient Parthians, they were as quickly rallied as they had
been quickly routed; of all the Christian Army, there remained none in the
Field of Battle, besides the great Master of the Temple, who with his Body,
without running to the Spoil, as did the rest, pursued the Victory in very good
Order. Saladin finding himself incomparably the Stronger, after the Rallyment
which he had made, and not doubting in the least, but he should easily deal
with the rest, if he could only defeat this single Body, which was that only
which was in a Condition of fighting, marched instantly toward him and
stopping him in the middle of his Course, obliged him to change his pursuit
into a more regular Combat; the Fight was for a time on both sides maintained
with a most obstinate Courage, and all the Vigor imaginable, the one fighting
to preserve the advantage and the Victory which they had already gotten, and
the other to snatch it out of the Hands of these few who remained in order of
Battle, and who could not expect to be relieved. But at length a new
Re-inforcement, which Saladin did not in the least expect, and who came just in
the very Heat of the Fight, quite turned the Scale of Fortune to his side. It
was five or six thousand men, who during the Battle had issued out of the Town,
and who having made a show as if they would attack the Camp only to amuse those
who defended it, turned short to the left, to fall upon the Rere of those whom
they saw in so small a number combating against their Party. So that this small
number being overpowered by the Multitude of their Enemies, who surrounded them
on all Parts, was at last constrained to give way, and endeavor to save
themselves in the best manner that they could, after having left the greatest
part of their Valiant Companions extended upon the Earth, and among others the
Great Master, and the Steward of the Order, and eighteen or twenty of the
bravest Knights. Saladin without losing any time turned short toward his Camp,
which was full of the disorderly Soldiers of the Christians, who were so busy
in plundering, that they had not so much as perceived this Action of Saladin.
There was nevertheless some Rallyment made by the Diligence of the Captains,
Germans who had been the most greedy of the Booty as they had pillaged the
Tents of Saladin, were endeavoring to get together to secure their Booty
before they returned to the Combat. It happened, that a Horse the most
beautiful of all which they had taken, being broken from them, a great many of
them followed him with all Speed to take him again, thereupon some of them who
were already engaged, seeing them in that have and Precipitation almost
breathless, running in that tumultuous manner, there being nothing so
disturbing as a sudden Fear, imagined that the greatest Part of their Enemies
having invested them, were falling upon their Backs, whilst that Saladin after
having cut the Templers in pieces, came to attack them in the Front. This
Imagination made them instantly face about, and at that Moment seeing a great
many others following the first who cried after the Horse, they made no doubt
but that they fled from their Enemies who pursued them, and thereupon fell to
running also, thereby drawing by their Example those who were next them, to a
shameful Flight.

It fortuned also at the same time, that some demanding in this Tumult and
Confusion What is the Matter? Some others at a Venture made Answer that those
of the Town having defeated the Guard were plundering the Camp, so that this
Report being presently spread through the whole Army all disbanded, and ran
with Precipitation and disorder toward the Camp, some to save that, others to
save themselves, all to lose their Honor and the day, and without doubt all
had been lost, if Geoffry de Lusignan, and James de Avesnes, who came out in
order of Battle with the Body which they commanded, had not stopped the Turks
who pursued with great Eagerness the Flying Christians and constrained them to
take also their Turn of running, and making the best of their Way to their own
Camp. Thus ended the unlucky Day, the Honor whereof both parties challenged as
their own, and endeavored as well as they could to frame some kind of
Appearance of a Victory to themselves. The Christians for having taken and
plundered the Camp of the Sarasins, who were also finally repulsed by them. The
Sarasins for that they had put the Christians to Flight, and beaten them to
their very Camp. the loss however certainly fell much more heavily upon the
Sarasins than upon the Christians; for the Christians did not lose above two
thousand Men besides the great Master of the Temple and his Knights, and Count
Andrew de Brienne, who was slain while he endeavored to stop the Flight of his
Soldiers. Whereas Saladin, beside incomparably a greater Number of Turks, which
were slain in the first Charge, lost also Mirasalion his eldest Son, his Nephew
Tokedin, and his Lieutenant General Migebat, who were slain upon the Place,
with the greatest Part of his Officers, and the most Valiant men of his Army,
who were ashamed to fly as did the rest at the very Beginning of the Battle.

After this having mutually tasted of each others Courage, they did as it were
by consent on both sides forbear fighting, and fell to fortifiing themselves;
Saladin in drawing new Troops from all the Places in his Dominions and the
Christians, by working upon their Retrenchments before the Town, and making
Strong Lines of Circumvallation against the Army of Saladin, Contravallation
against those of the City whom they Besieged very straightly by distributing
their Quarters within the two Lines in this manner: The Marquis of Montferrat
took his Post toward Tire on the North to the very Coast of the Sea; Upon his
left were the Knights of the Hospital, in a fair Estate which they possessed
before the loss of Ptolemais. After them encamped the Genoese, upon a Hill
called Mount Musard. The French possessed the quarter between the North and the
East, having at their Head Robert Earl of Dreux, with the Bishop of Beavais his
Brother, de Blois, de Clermont, de Bar, and de Brienne, Hugh de Gournay, and
the brave Nobility and Gentry, which came upon the Fleet which was equipped at
Marseilles; and to animate them to the War, they had also with them the
Archbishops of Besanson, Nazareth and Montreal, on the further side of Jordan.
The English were posted more to the East, under the Conduct of Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Bishop of Salisbury, and Ranulph de Glanvile.
Next to them were the Flemmings, accompanied by the Bishop of Cambray, Raymond
the Second, Viscount de Turenne, and the Lord of Issodun, who extended
themselves to the Hill of Turon. Upon the Hill was the Quarter of the King, who
besides Queen Sibyl his Wise, Geoffry, and Aimar de Lusignan his Brothers,
Humphrey de Thoron his Brother-in-Law, Hugh Lord of Tabary, Renaud de Sidon,
the Patriarch Heraclius, the Bishops of Accon and Bethlehem, with all the
principal Men of his Realm, had also with him the Viscount of Chastelleraud,
with the Troops of Poiteumes, in whom he had the greatest Confidence, in regard
they were his own Countrymen. The Knights of the Temple encamped next, under
James d' Avesnes with his Hainaulters, over against the Wicked Tower. Lower
toward the South, the Lawgrave of Thuringia, and the Duke of Guelderland were
posted with the Germans, Danes, and Frisons, upon the Hill of the Mosque, on
this side the River Belus. The Archbishop of Pisa, with the Pisans, was lodged
toward the Port, and the Archbishop of Ravenna, with the Venetians and
Lombards, a little lower upon the Brink of the Sea, where the Lines ended upon
the South.

This was the Disposition of the Christian Camp during all the time of this
Siege, which proved very long, for three Reasons more especially. First,
because Saladin, who had reinforced his Army with a prodigious number of
Soldiers, which repaired to him continually, from all the Provinces of Africa
and Asia, attacked the Lines, so often as the Christians attacked the City, and
that way made so great a diversion of their Forces, that they never had a
sufficient Force to take it by Assault. The second was, that the Garrison being
very strong, and consisting in the most valiant Men that Saladin had, under the
Command of Caracos, the most experienced of all his Captains, and under whom,
he himself had served his Apprenticeship in the Trade of War, they defended
themselves so well, and made such furious Sallies, and to so good Effect,
ruining the Works, burning the Engines, the Towers, and the wooden Castles,
which were built by the Besiegers, that after a great deal of Time and Trouble,
and the loss of many of their Men, they were always, as it were, beginning,
which raised so much Despair in some, that quitting the Siege, they returned
into the West; as among others did the Lantgrave, after that the Besieged had
burnt a Tower, which with prodigious Labor he had raised higher than the
highest of the City it self. And without all doubt, this precipitate Retreat,
gave occasion to that false and malicious Report, which was so much to his
Dishonor, spread abroad, That Saladin had beaten him home with a golden Sword,
and that by secret Confederacy, he had suffered that formidable Machin to be
burnt for want of a sufficient Defense. But in short, the third and principal
Reason of the excessive length of this Siege was, that both the one and the
other received great Succors of Men and Provisions by Sea, whereby they still
endeavored to increase their Power. In the beginning the Christians were
absolute Masters; for a few days before the Battle, they received a
Re-inforcement of ten thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, with all sorts of
Munitions; and in the first Year, there came to them above five hundred Ships
from Pavia, Calabria, and Sicily, who after having discharged themselves of the
Men and Provisions, returned to fetch more. But this Assistance failing by the
Death of William King of Sicily, and the Fleet which Saladin had rigged in
Egypt, riding Mistress of the Ocean, the Besieged received all manner of
Refreshments, and the Besiegers were so miserably afflicted with a cruel
Famine, which constrained them to feed on the Carcasses of the dead Animals;
and which became so insupportable, that a Party of the Army threw themselves in
Disorder, and in despite of the Wills of their Officers, upon the Enemies
Camp, that there they might get some Provisions; and in their Return, falling
into an Ambuscade, were all cut in pieces. However this continued not long, in
regard it was remedied by the good Conduct of the Marquis de Montferrat, Tire
with his Fleet, which he went to sit out to Sea, defeated that of Saladin in
the View of the Town, and revictualed the Camp, which in a little time received
a new Reinforcement of excellent Troops, under the Conduct of young Henry Earl
of Champagne, and also all kind of Provisions and Arms, which were now with
Liberty brought in by Sea. Thus, as the Besiegers and Besieged, were from time
to time succored by the Way of the Sea, they were as it were, by turns,
sometimes Weak and Strong, according as they had the Command of that Passage.
On the other side Saladin, who believed always that the best way was to cire
out the Patience of the Christians, or to famish them, would by no means come
to a declsive Battle; so that Matters stood as it were in a continual Balance,
neither Party obtaining any considerable Advantage over the other. But toward
the end of the second Year of the Siege, there happened a new Division between
the King and the Marquis of Montferrat, which endangered the Loss of all.

Queen Sibyl and her Daughter being dead by the Incommodities of so long a
Siege, Humphrey de Thoron, the Husband of Isabella, the Sister of the late
Queen, who had not the Courage to accept of the Realm when it was offered him
entire, before the Victories of Saladin, had now an Inclination to pretend to
it, when it was reduced to the last Extremities. Guy de Lusignan, although with
the Queen his Wife he had lost all manner of Right, which he held only from her
Life, yet protested nevertheless, that being Chosen, Anointed, and
Acknowledged King, he could not be divested of that August Character, which he
was absolutely resolved never to quit, but together with his Life. Hereupon the
Princes were divided into diverse Factions: But the Marquis of Montferrat, who
was the most powerful and most cunning among them, taking the Part first of the
one and then of the other, with an Intention to remove them both, endeavored
upon their Division to establish himself both in the Possession of the Princess
and of the Realm. And though the Enteprise, was both surprising and bold, yet
it did not appear to him to be very Difficult; for being Brave, Rich, Liberal,
fortunate in War, and of a mighty Reputation, it was easy for him to gain a
great Party among the Princes, who knew very well there was no Comparison
between him and his two Rivals. For Guy de Lusignan, had nothing that could
appear in competition of his great Qualities, and Humphrey de Thoron, in his
Face, his Behavior, and his Humor, no way Martial, together with mighty
Boyishness, had more of the Air of a young Girl than of a Man: And besides, the
Marquis had a secret Understanding with the Queen Mother, Mary the Niece of the
Emperor Manuel, and the Princess Isabella her Daughter, who had no Hatred for
his Person. Now as they had all taken their Measures, the Queen Mary and the
Princess, caused Humphrey to be Cited before the Bishop of Accon, the Patriarch
Heraclius being then sick to Death; and upon the Testimony of Balian Lord of
Ybelin, who had espoused the Queen Mary, the Widow of King Amauri, of Payen
Lord of Caiphas, and of Renaud de Sidon, whom the Marquis had gained; the
Marriage was declared Null, upon the Pretense, that the Princess had never
given her Consent; but that being extreme young, she had been compelled to
marry Humphrey; and that she had always disclaimed it, and protested against it
as an Act of Force and Violence. After which the Marquis publicly Married
Isabella by the Ministry of the Bishop of Beavais; and carried himself as
King, to the great Scandal of all good People, who plainly saw and detested
this shameful Collusion, and the horrible Injustice which was done to Humphrey.
It is said also, that Baldwin the Archbishop of Canterbury, was so sensibly
touched with the Displeasure which he took at this abominable Action, and the
Apprehension which he had of the horrible Disorders which were like to ensue
thereupon in the Army, that he fell sick with the Vexation; and in five days
died, as Holily as he had lived Religiously. But the greatest part adhered to
the Marquis, and in regard the public Fortune seemed to depend upon him,
principally for the Provisions which were to come from Tire, even those who
were not at all satisfied, yet were obliged to dissemble their Displeasure; so
that a patched Accommodation was made, by which the one and the other were to
remain in the State wherein they were,

In this Condition it was, that the Affairs of this famous Siege stood, when
News was brought of the Death of the Emperor, and the Arrival of the Duke of
Suabia at Tire, to whom the Marquis immediately repaired, and conducted him on
Board his Fleet to the Camp, where he was received with all imaginable Honor;
He took his Post among the Germans and the Danes, in the Quarter which the
Lantgrave had before possessed, upon the Hill of the Mosquee, extending to the
Bridge of the River Belus: So soon as this considerable Re-inforcement was
come, it was resolved according to the proposition which was made by Duke
Frederick, to make a general Assault: Which was accordingly done both by Sea
and Land, with all the Courage imaginable; and the Soldiers in despite of the
brave Resistance of the Besieged, did in more than one place plant the
Standards of the Cross upon the Walls. It was on this Occasion, that it is
reported, that Leopold Duke of Austria, made his heroic Courage most
Conspicuous, by an Action, whose glorious Marks, which at this day blazon the
Arms of a House, which is since become so August under the Name of the House
of Austria, do eternally publish the Memory, Fame, and Glory of it. He fought
from the Height of a wooden Castle, which was raised at the Entry of the Gate
against the Fly Tower, and which was built upon the Deck of a great Ship. For
being mounted over the Walls, followed by a few of his Men, he was so hardly
pressed by the numerous Infidels, that all his Followers being slain, and being
now Single, he was constrained to throw himself into the Sea, half drowned
already in his own, and the Blood of his Enemies; for he had nothing but Red
about him, except the white Scarf which he wore; whereupon Frederick to
eternize the Memory of such a noble Action, gave him for his Arms, with the
great Applause of the whole Army, in a Shield Gules a Fez Argent, which the
Princes of Austria have ever since that time born. The Combat was not much more
Advantageous by Land, in regard that Saladin having at the same time attacked
the Lines, which he forced in many places, they were obliged to quit the
Assault, to repulse the Enemies, who were at last constrained to retire.
Saladin in this Rencounter, lost the greatest part of his best Men, and did not
without great Difficulty disingage himself, being something too far advanced,
from those who on every side surrounded him, and who pursued him a great way
beyond the Lines.

This was the last military Action of Duke Frederick, who, this being the
second Autumn of the Siege, was by the Distemper which raged in the Camp, in a
few days taken off, to the incredible Regret of the whole Army, who even adored
this brave Prince, whose rare Virtue, which shined at his Death, had rendered
him more Illustrious than he had been all the time of his Life, although a
thousand Actions had made it most Glorious. For the Eastern Physicians assuring
him that his Distemper might easily be cured by the use of Females, he without
a moments Hesitation answered, that he had much rather lose his Life, than
preserve it by such a Remedy as must sully both his Soul and Body, at the same
time that he had obliged himself by the Vow of his Pilgrimage, to do what was
pleasing to Jesus Christ, who is the King, the Crown, and Husband of chaste and
pure Souls, being all Purity and Chastity himself; and thereupon surrendered
his victorious Spirit into the Hands of God, having overcome the two most
formidable Enemies of Mankind, the Pleasures of Life, and the Pains, as well as
Fears of Death, of which, in the middle of a flourishing and verdant Youth, he
chose to receive the cold Embraces, rather than those of Life, which he could
not save but by the loss of his Chastity and Purity. A rare Example, which
having been followed some three hundred Years after, and in a like Age by
Prince Casimir Son of Casimir King of Poland, and Elizabeth, Daughter of the
Emperor Albertus, Archduke of Austria, advanced him to that degree of Sanctity,
as to deserve those supreme Honors, which the Church solemnly renders to those
whom she believes to be in the glorious State of the most Happy after Death.
But this Death, which was so advantageous to Frederick, was most sad and
pernicious to the Army; for the Germans now become desperate by having lost
both their Emperor and their Prince, would no longer acknowledge any Captain,
but quitted that Enterprise, Leopold Duke of Austria. Add to this Accident the
Sickness which daily continued in the Camp, and the Famine which at some times
they suffered, and by which the Army must certainly have perished, if the
Marquis had not taken Care from time to time to supply them abundantly with his
Fleet. This absolutely gained him all the Commanders and the Soldiers, who
took his Part against Guy de Lusignan, who now had nothing left, but the vain
Shadow of Royal Majesty, without the least Substance of Power or Authority.
Thus the Army being extremely diminished, did nothing now but act upon the
Defensive, in their Retrenchments opposing the Assaults of Saladin on the one
side, and the Sallies of the Besieged on the other, till the Arrival of the two
Kings, whose Voyage and Actions it is now time for me, after having given
myself and the Reader a moments Breath, to recount unto him.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land. PART II.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS of the Third Book.
The beginning of the Reign of Richard Caeur-de-Lion, King of England, and his
Preparations for the Holy War. The Preparations of Philip the August. The
Conferences of Nonancour and Vezelai between the two Kings. The Portraict of
Philip the August. The Character of Richard King of England. The Voyage of the
two Kings to Messina. An Adventure of the English Fleet. A Quarrel between the
English and the Messineses. The taking of that City. The Quarrel between the
two Kings, and their new Accommodation. The Relation of the Abbot Joachim, and
his Character. His Conference with King Richard. The Departure of King Philip,
and his Arrival before Acre. The Departure of Richard. The Relation of the
Conquest of the Kingdom of Cyprus by that Prince. His Arrival before Acre. A
new Difference between the two Kings, and the true Causes of it. Their Accord.
The Reduction of the City of Acre. The extreme Violence of King Richard. The
Return of Philip the August. The March of Richard. The Battle of Antipatris.
The single Combat between King Richard and Sultan Saladin. A noble Action of
William de Pourcelets, who saved the Life of that King. Richard presents
himself before Jerusalem at an unseasonable Time, and therefore retires and
disperses his Army into Quarters. The Marquis Conrade slain by two Assassins of
the old Mountain. The Description of that Government, and those People. A
wicked Action of the Templers, which hindered their Conversion. The Cause of the
Marquis his Death. Richard accused of that Crime. His Innocence is proved.
Isabella Marries Count Henry, and is declared Queen of Jerusalem. Guy de
Lusignan made King of Cyprus. Richard pretends a second time to besiege
Jerusalem, defeats the Enemies, takes the Caravan of Egypt, but retires by a
cunning Agreement. A Calumny against Richard, which he clears by a most
memorable Action. The Battle of Jassa; and the taking of that Place from the
Sarasins by Richard. His Treaty with Saladin, and his unfortunate Return. He is
taken and imprisoned; His Deliverance, the Justice which he demanded, and which
he obtains. A new Division among the Princes of the East, appeased by the Count
de Champagne. The Death of Saladin, and his Elogy. Division happens among the
Infidels, which gives Occasion to a fourth Crusade.

Crusade, which had been so solemly sworn in the Holy Field, and which the War
that was kindled between the two Kings, had so long time retarded, had at
length its Effect, by the perfect Understanding, which for some time there was
between Philip the August, and Richard surnamed Caeurde-Lion, at the beginning
of the Reign of this new King. For so soon as he had received the Sword as Duke
of Normandy, at our Ladies Church in Roan, and the Crown of England at
Westminster, with the general Applause of all his Subjects, who saw that he
took quite differing Courses from his Father, who was not at all beloved; he
had no other Thoughts, but of making Preparations for the Holy War. Above all
things, he applied himself to the procuring a good Treasury of Gold and Silver,
but not by charging the People with the rigorous Exaction of Saladins Tenth, as
did his Father, who when he had received it, made use of it in the War between
the two Crowns. For this purpose he took the way of selling all the Dignities
which he could, all Offices, and the Lands of his Demesnes, at a very low rate,
thereby to entice the Avarice or the Ambition of unwary Purchasers, who easily
suffered themselves to be imposed upon with those cheap Bargains, not
foreseeing that he had Design of Reassumption after his Return, as he did,
without any other Reimbursment than by allowing upon the Foot of the Account,
what they made over and above their Charges of the Demesnes, during the time
that they enjoyed them. But he dissembled the matter so well, and on one side
seemed so truly to have a design to sell all that he could, and on the other,
showed so many Marks of a ruined Constitution, which both his constant Fatigues
of War, and his Debauches gained an easy Credit to, that the Purchasers,
without any Difficulty, suffered themselves to be persuaded that he would never
return, and that he had no other Prospect than of the present, as not having
any hopes of living long. And for these Reasons it was, that very many
straightened themselves to lay hold of this occasion of Profit, whereby he drew
from them vast Sums, turning every thing into Money, even to protesting to
those who were astonished at his Proceedings, that if he could find a Chapman,
who was able to buy of him the City of London, he should make no Difficulty to
sell it to him.

But he drew the greatest Advantages from diverse Prelates of his Realm that
were extraordinary Rich, from whom he drew all the Money that they had, by
selling to them temporal Dignities, which they were mighty glad to add to their
Bishoprics or their Abbeys. It was by this Stratagem, that he drew into the
Net the Bishop of Durham, Northumberland, gave him for that Title, all the
Riches which he had for a long time been hoarding up, out of the Revenue of his
Bishopric, as well as those other less honest Markets which he had made. And
to this, he threw in also all the Money which he had reserved, purposely to
defray his Expenses in the Voyage which he had undertaken to make to Jerusalem;
thereby renouncing his Vow, his Conscience, and his Honor, that so he might
become great in this World, out of which, his old Age was even now ready to
chase him, which made the King very pleasantly to say, when he had gotten all
his Money, That he was about to work a kind of Miracle, and to make a young
Earl out of an old Bishop. He also seized upon all the Estate of Geoffry Ridel
Bishop of Ely, for appearing before him with the Train of a King, at the City
of Winchester; but all this magnifick Pomp could not prevent the Triumph of
Death, which seized imediately upon him, by this Surprise, and divested him of
this stately Vanity, so unbecoming the Sacred Character of a Bishop. For this
Prince believed, that these great Riches might to much better Advantage be
employed in defraying the Expenses of his Coronation, than so foolishly
lavished in the Pageantry of worldly Pomp; and that he might thereby spare his
own, which he endeavored to keep as a Reserve to support the Charges of his
Voyage to the Holy Land. He also surrendered to William King of Scots, for ten
thousand Marks Sterling, the Castles of Rocksborough and Berwick, which he had
been constrained to yield to King Henry the Second, for his Ransom, he being
taken Prisoner in the War between them. He also acquitted him of the Homage
which he was obliged by force, to pay as one part of the Price of his Liberty.
And in short, as on one hand he was resolved not to be encumbered with the
multitude of the Crusades, the Multitudes of which had done more Hurt than
Service in the other Expeditions; and on the other, that he knew very well,
that diverse of the richest of his Subjects, who had engaged themselves two
Years before to undertake that Voyage, were willing enough to be dispensed
with; he therefore obtained Permission from the Pope, to discharge all such
from their Vow, upon Condition that they should proportionably to their Estate,
contribute a sum of Money toward the Charges of the Holy War.

All this joined to the Treasure of his Father, which he had at first seized
upon, and which amounted to more than nine hundred thousand Livers in Gold and
Silver, gave him the Ability to live after the best manner, and in a far more
Royal Way than any of his Predecessors had ever done. So that he caused to be
equipped in all the Ports of England, Normandy, Bretany, Poitou, and Guienne, a
great number of Ships, to compose one of the fairest Fleets, which had ever
before been put to Sea. For when he weighed from the Road of Messina, where he
had passed the Winter, he had one hundred and fifty great Ships, fifty three
Galleys, besides Barks, Tartanes, and other small Craft, which attended the
Navy with Provisions, and Munitions of War. He gave the Command of the Fleet to
Gerrard Archbishop of Ousch, and Bernard Bishop of Bayonne, to whom he joined
in Commission, Robert de Sable, Richard de Chamville, and William Fortz, Earl
of Albermarle, three excellent Men in Sea Affairs, who had order, without
sparing any, to put in Execution those admirable Orders, which were proclaimed
for preventing of Disorders, and Punishment of Offenses in the Fleet. He could
not for all that, stop those which were at the same time committed almost all
over England, upon the Jews, of which himself was the Occasion, tho he did not
command it. For as the Jews, whom his Father had always favored, were upon his
Coronation Day, contrary to his express Command, entered into the Palace, from
whence they were thrust out, and some of them treated very severely, the
People, who imagined that it was the King's Inclination that they should
exterminate that perfidious Nation, who for their Extortion, Avarice, and other
enormous Crimes, were extremely hated, fell upon them with such Fury, that it
was impossible to appease them: And this Example spreading it self, occasioned
a most horrible Massacre among those miserable People, in many Cities, where
the young People, who had undertaken the Cross,

In this time, Philip the August prepared for this Enterprise, in a manner more
regular, and did not to procure Money, take those Methods of selling Offices
and temporal Dignities, to the Prelates of his Realm, who were more regular and
modest than those of England: Neither did he raise any Taxes or Contributions
for the Expenses of this Voyage; in regard that all the French Lords, who had
taken the Cross, were resolved to accomplish their Vow; and he believed that he
should have enough out of his good Husbandry, of that Tenth which was given for
this War, and which still remained in Bank ever since the last Year. For this
Reason therefore he caused an Edict to be published, and all concerned to be
sworn in the Parliament which he held at Paris, that they should render
themselves at Vezelay in the Week of Easter, from thence together to take the
Voyage. And this being done, he sent Rotrou Earl of Perch into England, to
advertise King Richard of his Proceedings, who on his side, made those who had
taken the Vow, swear the same thing upon the Holy Evangelists, in the
Parliament at London. After which, the King having recommended the Care of the
Realm to Queen Eleonor his Mother, having delivered her from the Confinement in
which the late King had for five or six Years last kept her, and to William
Longfield Bishop of Ely, his Chancellor, he embarked the fourteenth day of
December at Dover, and landed the same day at Graveling, from whence he went
about the end of the Month to Confer with King Philip at Nonancour; There it
was, that after they had mutually given the one to the other, all the assurance
of an inviolable Amity, they caused Letters, Patents in the Name of both the
Kings, to be dispatched, whereby they fixed the time of their Departure, with
all their Subjects of the Crusade, and promised to each other a most sincere
and indissoluble Friendship, according to the Faith which they had severally
plighted to one another; Philip King of France to Richard King of England, as
his Friend and faithful Liegeman; and Richard King of England to Philip King of
France, as his Lord and Friend. These are the very Words of these Letters dated
the thirtieth day of December at Nonancour, as they are reported by Radulph
Dean of London, who writ in that time such Matters as he himself was an Eye
Witness of, and in the Transaction whereof he had a considerable Share. But in
regard the Time which they had limited appeared too short, for the Preparations
which were of necessity to be made, the two Kings had a second Interview at
Vezelay, where they lengthened the time of their Rendezvous till the Week after
Midsummer. In which time they finished their Treaty, which among others had
these Articles; That if either of them died in the time of the Holy War, the
other should make use of the Money and the Army of the deceased King, to carry
on and finish the War. That the Lords of the two Kingdoms, should maintain a
fraternal Correspondence, and that the Bishops should excommunicate all those
who should enterprise any thing to the Disadvantage of the Crusades during
their Abscence. But it happening that about this same time Queen Isabella lost
her Life, in giving it to two Twins, who did not survive her above three Days,
an inauspicuous Augury was from thence drawn concerning this Voyage; either by
the superstitious Humor of the People, who love to make their foolish Remarks
upon such Events, and to turn every surprising Accident into a Mystery of
future Consequences; or possibly it might be a kind of Presage, which God is
sometimes pleased to give, as has been frequenty observed, and was more
remarkable in another Accident which happened at this very time; For as the
King of England at the Church of Saint Martin in Tours, took the Marks of his
Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, the Consecrated Pilgrims Staff, by his leaning too
hard upon it, broak in the Middle. This Presage gave a certain Horror and Fear
to all the Assistants at the Ceremony, but not the least to this immovable
Prince, who was not of an Humor to Philosophize upon such sort of Adventures,
which gave not the least Trouble or Inquietude to his unshaken Soul.

Philip the August was more calm and edifying: He received, upon St. John
Baptist's Day, in the Church of St. Dennis in France, the consecrated Pilgrim's
Staff, from the Hands of William Archbishop of Reims, his Uncle by the Mother's
side; and himself took from the Altar, the Royal Standard, or the Oriflame,
with all the most sensible Marks of a most tender and admirable Devotion;
imploring the Aid of Heaven by his Prayers and Tears, in such an uncommon and
charming Decency of Piety, as produced the like Sentiments in the Souls of all
those who assisted at that solemn Action. After which, having left the
Government of the Realm, in his Absence, to the Queen Adela, his Mother, he
came to Vezelay, where he was met by King Richard; who, to avert the Effects of
the unlucky Presage which happened to him at Tours, would there anew receive
the Pilgrim's Staff before the Altar of St. Magdalene, whose Body, they say,
reposed in that Abbey. From hence the two Kings marched together to Lion, where,
for the Convenience of the Troops which followed them, they divided themselves,
and took different Ways; the King of France taking that of Genoa, and the King
of England, that of Marseilles; which two Cities they had made choice of for
the Rendezvous of their respective Armies. At their parting, they renewed the
Protestations of an inviolable Amity, which they had so frequently made, and
which, notwithstanding, were presently broken at their next Meeting. And truly,
it was not reasonably to be hoped, that it should be of any lasting Continuance
between two Princes, whose Interests, Temperaments, Humors, Sentiments,
Inclinations and Manners accorded so very little, as may easily be observed
from the Portraicts and Characters, which I am going to draw from the Life, and
the Truth, and to make a Present of them to the Reader.

Philip was then in the very Flower of his Age, being about twenty four Years
of Age, of a most admirable Shape, and a Stature something exceeding the
Middle, of a Majestic Port, and an Air fierce and Martial, which nevertheless,
had nothing in it discouraging the Beholders, in regard it was accompanied with
that rare Beauty which Nature had so advantageously bestowed upon him; for the
whole Turn and Composure of his Face was admirable, and all the Strokes of it
regular and delicate; his Forehead was fair and high, his Nose a little
gracefully rising, his Hair fair, his Cheeks wore a beautiful Vermilion, his
Eyes were quick, and sparkled with a certain gentle Fire, which, with a kind of
Fixedness in his Looks, joined with the Color of his Complexion, manifestly
showed his Temper to be naturally Sanguin, and inclining to Choler; and two
little Moles which he had growing at the Corner of his left Eye, not at all to
the disadvantage of its Beauty, rather augmented the Whiteness of his Skin, by
the Opposition of their Blackness. But that which was the Life of this Royal
Beauty, and which added the greatest Graces to all those Wonders which shined
about him with such a charming Glory, was the admirable Qualities of an
incomparable Mind, which made all the Virtues necessary for a great King shine
most conspicuously in his Conduct, and all his Actions: For he was extremely
Religious, and even jealous for the Glory of God, for which he had Sentiments
most infinitely tender, and full of a respectful Veneration: He was an
implacable Enemy to Blasphemers, whom he caused to be thrown into the Seine;
and of Heretics, whom he exterminated with Fire and Faggot: He was a most
passionate Adorer of Equity, Faith and Justice, which he caused to be rendered
to all his Subjects with the greatest Exactness, and without Discrimination,
Distinction of Persons, or Partiality; merciful and compassionate to the Poor,
as if he had been their Father; Liberal, but according to the Rules of Judgment
and Discretion; Magnificent above the Genius, and the Custom of the Kings of
his Age, but most particularly in the Expenses of his House, and the
Entertainment of Military Men, in public Buildings, and Royal Foundations, as
well appeared by the ruinous Walls of Paris, which he caused to be rebuilt at
the same time that he was engaged in the Holy War. Upon the whole, he was
equally wise, prudent and moderate in his Counsels, and quick, ardent and bold
in the Execution of them; brave and valiant, even to a Fault; a great Lover of
Learning, which he caused to re-flourish, especially in the University of
Paris; affable, vigilant, provident; happy in War, and always invincible and
victorious, English and the Flemmings; and which, in the Process of his Reign,
more remarkably appeared, by the glorious Conquests which he made of a great
part of Poitou, Guienne, and all Normandy, of Avignion, Artois, Cambresis,
Bullen, and so many other Earldoms as he added and reunited to his Crown;
beginning, the first of our Kings of the third Race, the great Work which Lewis
the Great has in our time so happily completed, by giving to France the
ancient Limits, from the Ocean, to the Rhine. In short, if Philip, who always
triumphed over his Enemies, had had the power to vanquish himself, and that
Impatience and Choler which his hot Temper raised in him, and which sometimes
overcame his Reason, and for some Moments took from him the liberty of acting
according to his better Inclinations, one might say, that his Character is that
of a Prince accomplished with all manner of Perfections which could be wished
in a great and admirable King.

And it is much to his advantage that he stands so near King Richard, who could
not come in comparison with him, neither for his Body, nor his Soul; although
it must not be denied, but that Prince also possessed many great and excellent
Qualities; but they were mixed with so many Faults and Vices, which exceeded
his Perfections, that they were obscured and sullied by them. He was about the
three and thirtieth Year of his Age, of Stature very tall, but of a Shape very
disproportionate, being become excessive gross, either by his Intemperance, or
by a Swelling which remained after a long Quartane Ague, which had left his
Vifage of a pale, Leaden Color: His Arms were also somewhat with the longest,
though very strong and Nervous; and his Thighs too short in Proportion: His
Eyes were full of a Fire, but a Fire that was too fierce and ardent: His Hair
extraordinary light, and inclining toward Red, which denoted his Complexion to
be excessively hot and choleric, and naturally strong, if the Violence of his
Exercises, his Passions, and his Debauches, had not so ruined it, as to make it
appear almost quite overthrown, and wholly languishing. It is said also, that
he had abundance of Cauteries, or Issues, upon his Body, in order to the
continual discharging of those corrupted Humors with which he abounded; so
much had that tedious Ague, and the Disorders of his Life, altered the
Establishment and Foundation of his Health, and all the beauteous Lineaments of
his Face, which Nature had bestowed on him. He was however, in the main, a
Prince magnanimous, bold, enterprizing, brave, fearless, and of an invincible
Courage, by which he acquired the Surname of Caeur-de-Lion, or Lyon's Heart; a
Name which the English and Normans bestowed on him, and which the Memory of
those noble Actions which he so happily and courageously executed, have
preserved to him to this day. It was nevertheless easily discoverable, that he
had something of the Fierceness and Brutallity of that Animal, mixed with the
noble Courage of the Lion; for it is certain, that he was most violent, rash
and turbulent, subject to the Transports of Fury; hard and severe, even to
Cruelty, which rendered him odious: Besides, he was inconstant, making little
Account of his Word and Faith; without a true Sense of Friendship, Tenderness,
or good Nature, even to the Violation of the most sacred Laws and Rights of
Nature, as appears by his frequent taking up Arms against his own Father: Above
all, He was as eager to draw Money from every thing, as he was prodigal in
wasting it when he had it: He was presumptuous, proud and arrogant; voluptuous
and debauched, even in public, and so far from being concerned to conceal
them, that he would turn his Crimes into Raillery; witness the Answer which he
gave one day to that holy Man, Fouques de Neuilly, who preaching before him in
Normandy, told him seriously, that it was time for him to set his Affairs in
order, and to quit himself of three dangerous Daughters which he had, which
would certainly prove his Ruin if he kept them any longer with him. Richard,
who took him according to the literal meaning, thinking that it was very easy
to convince him of Imposture; That is false, said he to him, thou Hypocrite, I
have no Daughters at all. Pardon me, Sir, replied the good Man, you have three
very lewd ones; your Arrogance, your Avarice, and your Luxury, which will
infallibly, in a little time, ruin you, if you keep them them with you. Very
well, replied the King, Since there is a necessity then of parting with them,
therefore I do immediately bequeath my Arrogance to the Templers, my Avarice to
the Monks, and my Luxury to the Prelates of my Realm. But as on the one side,
notwithstanding all his Debauches, he had a Principle of Religion which was
firmly rooted in his Soul; and on the other side, according to his impetuous
Nature, he was usually in the Extremes, either of Good or Bad; he had sometimes
such great Transports of Devotion, and was so sensible of the Enormity of his
Crimes, that to witness his Repentance, and to satisfy God Almighty for his
Follies, he would do such things as certainly, the most severe Directors of
Conscience would never have thought fit to be exacted from so great a King. And
that which was infinitely advantageous to this Prince was, that this Principle
of Religion, summoning up all its Power in his Soul at the Hour of his Death,
made him express the most rigorous Repentance that is possible to be found in
the Histories of the greatest Saints. Thus, so long as a Man, more especially a
Prince, preserves the Principles of true Faith, by submitting his Sentiments to
those of Religion and the Catholic Church, one may still retain a Hope,
notwithstanding the Infirmities to which he is subject, that this Root of Life
will, in time, produce the Fruits of a true Conversion, and like a Plant which
keeps its Root, how dead soever it may appear in the Winter, and dispoiled of
its Leaves and Flowers, yet at the Return of the Spring, it will recover its
native Beauty, and pleasant Verdure.

Sea now what kind of Men these two Kings were, and from so vast a difference
of their Tempers and Inclinations, it will be easy to foresee, that they
could not remain long in a good Understanding, one with the other, as appeared
but too visibly in the Consequences of their future Voyage. Philip, whose Fleet
waited for him at Genoa, parted the first, with a brave and flourishing Army,
composed of the greatest part of his Nobility, and the choice Soldiers of
France, though it is hard to determine precisely in what number they consisted,
in regard the Writers of those times have not left us any certain Information:
But this is most certain, that he was accompanied with the greatest Men of the
Realm, the Principal of which were, Eudes Duke of Burgundy, Peter Count de
Nevers, Renaud Count de Chartres, Geoffrey Count de Perch, Aubrey de Rullen,
Mareshal of France; Matthew de Montmorency, who was afterward Constable of
France; the Counts de Beaumont, Rochefort, Valery, Dreux de Mello, Lord de
Loches and Chattillon; and William de Mello, his Brother. The Fleet was met at
Sea with a furious Tempest, which gave the King occasion to show the Greatness
of his Soul, in the magnificent Gifts which he bestowed on chose who lost their
Equipage, being forced to throw it overboard, for the Safety of their Lives. At
last he came to an Anchor, upon the 6th of September, in the Road of Messina,
where the two Kings had before agreed, the place of their Joining should be.

In this time King Richard, after having waited eight days, to no purpose, the
Arrival of his Fleet at Marseilles, being pushed on by his natural Impatience,
he embarked himself, the 17th of August, upon thirty Merchants Ships, which he
caused to be fitted up; and after having Coasted all along, by Genoa, Tuscany
and Champaign in Italy, he arrived happily at Naples; from whence he passed to
Salernum, there to expect News of his Fleet, whose long and unaccountable Delay
gave him an extraordinary Inquietude and Displeasure.

The Fleet had put to Sea in Easter-Week, and after it had been soundly beaten
with a Tempest, which, they say, was miraculously calmed by Thomas of
Canterbury, who had raised many worse in his Life, according to the credulous
Humor of those Ages; it being affirmed by some, that he appeared upon the Deck
of the great Ship called the London, that Vessel came up with Cape St. Vincent,
over against the City of Silves, nine other Ships entering the River of Lesbon,
where they came to an Anchor. The Miramolin, or King of the Sarasins of the
Western Africa, at that time made War, with a potent Army, against Sancho, King
of Portugal, whom he had surprised, and who, with an inconsiderable number of
Troops, had put himself into Santaren. This Prince believing that Heaven had
sent him the Succor of these Strangers, Alphonso, his Father, requested them
to help him in this his pressing Necessity. Whereupon five hundred of the
bravest of them immediately went into his Service, whilst that fourscore of the
most valiant young Gentlemen, who were aboard the London, put themselves into
Sylves, for the Defense of that City: But Fortune, without giving them the
liberty of drawing their Swords, put an end to this War, by the sudden Death
of Mirmalion; after which, his Army immediately disbanded it self. The English
then returning to their Vessels, sound there sixty three more of their Ships,
who had put in there to refresh themselves, and all that great City in Arms
against their People, who had committed great Insolences and Disorders against
the Inhabitants; insomuch that Blood had been drawn on both sides, diverse
Houses plundered and burnt, and some of the English committed to Prison. But all
these Matters being calmed by the Prudence of King Sancho, who knew very well
how to pacify both Parties, the English took their leave, the 25th Day of
July, and the same Day, joining three and thirty great Ships, with which
Admiral William Fortz attended them at the Mouth of the Tagus, they
prosperously pursued their Voyage, till they came to an Anchor before Salernum.
There it was that King Richard met his Fleet, and the 30th of September arrived
at the Port of Messina, where he was received by the French and Sicilians with
all possible Honor, and with all the Marks of a sincere and perfect
Friendship. But this was not of any long Continuance; and the good
Understanding which at first appeared among these three Nations, was presently
interrupted and broken by two great Quarrels which Richard had, and which were
the Cause that the two Kings, instead of presently pursuing their intended
Voyage, were obliged to defer it till the following Year, and to pass all the
Winter at Messina. The manner was thus.

William, king of Sicily, being dead without Issue, the Sicilians, who were
resolved to have a King of the Race of their Norman Princes, placed his Cousin
Tancred, the Natural Son of Roger, Duke of Pavia, upon the Throne,
notwithstanding that, before his Death, William had caused Queen Constance, his
Aunt, the Wife of the Emperor Henry VI. to be acknowledged their Queen, and had
declared her to be the Inheretrix of the Crown. Now Richard, without pretending
to have any part in this great Difference between the Emperor and Tancred, only
desired of this new King, that he would send to him Jane, his Sister, the
Daughter of Henry II. King of England, the Widow of the deceased King William,
that he would restore to him her Dowry, with several other things, to which he
pretended; and above all, an hundred Ships, which the late King had promised to
his Father-in Law, King Henry, for his Voyage to the Levant. Tancred
immediately sent the Queen to him, but deferring to give him Satisfaction in
his other Pretensions, Richard, who was resolved that he should do him Reason,
seized upon two strong Places which lay upon the Straits. This gave such a
Jealousy to the Messineses, who naturally are not too much given to
forbearing, that they took Arms against the English, and beat them out of the
City; and the English, no less naturally impatient of Beating, but more hot and
brave than the Sicilians, ran immediately to their Arms, and issuing in
Battalia, out of their Camp, repulsed these forward Burghers into the City, and
put themselves into a Posture to attack it by Force. There was however, a few
Moments Truce agreed to, by the Interposition of Philip the August, who
endeavored to accommodate this Difference between them. But Richard, having
discovered, or at least believing, that the Messineses had an Intention to
surprise him, during the Preliminary Treaty of the Peace, began the Assault
upon the Town with so much Fury, that he carried the Place; but he left it
again presently, after he had received the Excuses of the Magistrates, and the
Satisfaction which he demanded of them, out of Respect, as he said, to King
Philip, who had his Quarter in the City, and who was not at all satisfied with
these violent Proceedings of King Richard. For this Reason Richard, to
strengthen himself against him by the Alliance of Tancred, concluded a Peace
with that King, who offered him, besides the Ships, twenty thousand Ounces of
Gold, to quit all his other Pretensions; and twenty thousand more for the
Portion of his Daughter, Arthur, Duke of Bretany, Nephew to King Richard. So
that the Conclusion of this Quarrel was the Foundation of another, incomparably
more dangerous, which hereby grew between the kings of France and England.

For Tancred perceiving that the French King had no reason to be satisfied with
this Marriage, which was surreptitious, concluded without his Knowledge, and
which directly shocked all his Interests, endeavored to link himself more
closely with the English, as he did, and to exasperate them against King
Philip. And truly, finding that these two Princes were already imbroiled upon
the Subject of the Taking Messina, where Richard having caused his Standards to
be planted, Philip sent to have them taken down. He went to the King of
England, and showed him the Letters, which, he assured him, came from the King
of France, wherein he offered him the Assistance of all his Forces, if he would
make War with Richard, who, he said, had no other Thoughts but to amuse him
with the Show of Peace, thereby with more Ease to seize upon his Realm.
Richard, although he was extremely provoked with this Procedure, yet was very
well pleased to have so specious a Pretense to break with Philip. Philip
complaining with Justice enough, reciprocally against him, that having, so long
since, affianced his Sister Alice, he had now altered his Thoughts, and was
designed to marry Berengera, the Daughter of Garcias, King of Navarre;
following therein the Counsel of Queen Eleonor, who her self had conducted that
Princess thither. There seemed great Foundation for the Complaints on either
side, and their Spirits were wound up to that degree, as endangered the
Breaking of the holy League, by a deadly War between these two Princes; which,
if it had happened, had absolutely ruined all the Hopes of ever re-establishing
the Affairs of the Christians in the Holy Land. But, in Conclusion, there were
Expedients found out for the appeasing of this great Quarrel, by an amicable
Composure, which pacified their Spirits, at least, in Appearance, and for some
time. Richard protested that he would most inviolably have kept his Promise in
marrying the Princess Alice, if he had not been most certainly assured, for
some time before, that the late King Henry, his Father, who was known to have
been most passionately Amorous of her, had not exceeded the Bounds of Modesty
in his Courtship to her; and she, those of Virtue, in the Caresses which she
received from him: And that, after this Discovery, all the Laws, both of God
and Nature, opposed this Marriage. And whereas the Princess pretended her self
to be wholly innocent of these Crimes, alleging that she had never done any
thing Criminal; and that the Appearances of Kindness, which she might be
accused of, in permitting the Visits of that importunate old King, as she never
consented to them, so she was not in the Capacity of hindering them, which
possibly might be true; yet it was impossible to repair the Blemish which her
Honor had received, and which therefore to him was intolerable because it was
incurable; and the malicious World would, to his Dis-reputation, believe it
true, though it might be false. He therefore offered to restore Vexin, which
she was to have in Dowry, and to pay her ten thousand Marks in Silver. And, in
short, he passed his Royal Word to King Philip that, with the beginning of the
Spring, he would be ready, without any further delay, to accompany him in the
Enterprise of the Holy Land. Philip also, on his side, complained highly, and
protested that the Letters were suppositious, and a treacherous Artifice, to
engage him in a Quarrel with the King of England, his Ally, and Companion in
Arms in this Holy War. Thus the two Kings, having once more patched up an
Accord, did unprofitably renew the Protestations of their Amity, which was
impossible to hold long between two Princes who had an insuperable Antipathy
the one to the other. However, they passed the remainder of the Winter
something more calmly at Messina; where it is said, the famous Abbot Joachim
foretold the little Success, which they were to expect from their Voyage.

This Man who, whilst he lived, made such a Noise and Figure in the World, and
who, to this very day, ever since his Death, is so great a Riddle and Mystery,
was a Calabrian by Birth, and an Abbot of the Monastery of the Cistertians in
his own Country; his Way of Living, and his Conduct, was wholly extraordinary,
and of which never any spoke with Mediocrity, whether it were good or evil; for
some would have him pass for one of the most eminent Doctors, Tritheite
Heretic; for the proudest, most arrogant, and presumptuous of Mankind. But
those who, without prejudice, have coolly examined all that is alleged on both
sides, touching this famous Abbot, believe that, without doing him Injustice,
one may keep the middle way between these two Extremes, and affirm that he was
a bold and ignorant Visionary, who having a weak Head, and a strong
Imagination, together with little Learning, and less Solidity of Judgment to
manage it, took all his Imaginations, and his own Fancies, for Oracles; and
that therefore undertaking to make Predictions, amidst a hundred things which
he pretended to foretell, he must play with very ill Fortune, if some of them
did not prove true, though it were by the pure Effect of Chance: So that those
who had took their Measures of him, according to what he had foretold them
truly, cried him up as a mighty Prophet; and the others, who had been deceived,
as well as he, by his Presages, treated him as a Cheat, and an Impostor:
Neither the one nor the other of these People, all this while, having the Wit
to perceive that he was, in reallity, neither Prophet nor Cheat, but a silly,
overrun Visionary, who deceived himself first, and afterward those who
believed him, by his ridiculous Illusions, which possibly was the genuine
Effect of his few Brains, and much Presumption.

And for certain, this is true, that going to visit the holy Places at
Jerusalem, at the Age of fifteen Years, when he hardly understood his Grammar,
he pretended that the Spirit of God was infused into him, in the Church of the
holy Sepulcher; and there a perfect Knowledge of all the hidden Mysteries of
the Scripture was bestowed upon him, especially of the Book of the Apocalypse,
whereof he said he had the Key, which no Man before him could ever find. That
thereupon, without applying himself to any other Studies, he began to labor
with the Visions of that Book, which he endeavored to adjust to his own, as
best pleased him; taking his own Dreams for the true Sense of those sacred
Mysteries. However, he was so ingenuous as to acknowledge, that he neither had
any Revelations, nor yet the Gift of Prophecy; but that he had received from
God the Spirit of Understanding, as clearly to understand what was contained in
the Prophecies of the Old and New Testament, as the Prophets themselves, who
writ them by the Impulse of the Spirit of God. Moreover, he was a Man who
affected Singularity, and who aimed at nothing but was very uncommon and
extraordinary, both in his Conduct and his Doctrine; and that therefore, in the
Council of Lateran, under Innocent III. he was declared an open Heretic,
because he had undertaken to write, and maintain, against the Great Master of
the Sentences, some Positions concerning the Trinity, which was open Tritheism;
for he was of Opinion, that every Person in the Holy Trinity had a distinct,
Proper and peculiar Essence, and that they were begotten, one from another. He
was also presented in the Pope's Court, and accused by the Religious of his own
Order, among whom he raised a most dangerous Schism. In short, He was an
eternal Medler with Prophecies, Predictions, and the Affection of foretelling
future Contingencies: And if some one of his Presages, by mere Chance, proved
true in the Event, there were a hundred of them, so obscure and ambiguous, that
might be interpreted either way; many of the most famous of those which he
published with so much Noise and Confidence, being proved false in their
Events, even whilst he was alive; which cannot be made appear better, than by
this famous Conference which he had at Messina, with King Richard.

For there being a mighty Talk of this Abbot Joachim, who was at this time in
the Top of his Reputation, especially in Italy, where all People heard him as a
Prophet, Richard desired Tancred to send for him to Messina, that from him he
might be informed of the Success of this War which he was about to undertake,
to re-conquer Jerusalem from the Hands of the Infidels. This is commonly the
nature of Men, especially of Great Men, to have a longing desire to penetrate
into the inscrutable Secrets of the time to come, Richard the greater desire to
consult this famous Abbot was, the sad News of the deplorable Accident which
had befallen the Emperor, taking him out of the World in the middle of his
victorious Course, and which, it was confidently reported, had been predicted
to him most clearly by the Abbot, who positively affirmed, that he should have
no good Success. This gave a mighty Confirmation to all those People who had
conceived this Opinion of him, that he had the Gift of Prophecy. Come he did
then, and, according to his custom, taking upon him the Tone of a Prophet, he
presently told the two Kings, with a serious Air, and without a Moments
Hesitation, That it was to no manner of purpose that they were going to
Jerusalem, to deliver the Holy Land, in regard that the Time appointed for its
Deliverance was not yet come. Philip the August, who had a most solid Mind, and
who took no further care but to give good Order for the present, thereby to
assure the future, in which consists the best Art of Prediction, was in no pain
for this Discourse of the Abbot, to which he gave but little Credit. But
Richard, who had a certain Weakness for those kind of Prophecies, had a
Curiosity to be further satisfied, demanded of him, upon what kind of Knowledge
he founded this Prediction, that he pronounced with such Assurance. Whereupon
this Visionary, whose Head was full of nothing but the Chimera's of his own
Dreams, which he made upon the Apocalypse, of which he thought he had as perfect
an Understanding as St. John, who writ these Revelations, fell to interpreting
the Visions contained in that Book, and especially that of the horrible Dragon
with seven Heads, which would have devoured the Man-child which was to be born
of the Woman clothed with the Sun. The sixth Head of this Monster, he said,
was Saladin, who had taken Jerusalem, who should certainly be destroyed by the
Christians, who should regain this holy City; but that, according to the
Mystery of the Numbers denoted in the Vision, it should not be till seven
Years, from the Taking of it, were accomplished. If it be so, briskly replied
Richard, interrupting him, What have we done, to come so far to no purpose?
Your Voyage, answered the Abbot, was necessary for your own Glory; for that by
doing this, God will make you triumph over all your Enemies, and will elevate
you above all other Princes of the Earth.

The Events plainly showed, that these two first Predictions were most false,
since Jerusalem was not taken in that time, and that the Voyage was, in
conclusion, very unfortunate for King Richard, who fell into the Hands of his
Enemies, and was very ill treated by them.

But his Illusion, or rather, his Extravagance and Folly appeared much more,
when, pursuing the Interpretation of this Mystery, according to the disorderly
Capricioes of his own Imagination, he added, that the seventh Head of this
Dragon was Antichrist, who should be born in Rome, and should be Pope: for this
dangerous Devote had the Confidence to publish this Folly, and boldly to
affirm, that this Enemy of Jesus Christ was, at that time, in his youthful Age.
That in the Year 1199. the sixth Seal of the fatal Book should be opened, and
that thereupon should ensue the Kingdom, Persecution, and the Death of
Antichrist; and that the Gospel should, before that, be preached in all the
World. But he might very well, himself, before his own Death, see the falseness
of his Prediction. And from that time that he undertook, with so much
Confidence, to maintain that Opinion, he was most powerfully confuted, and
convinced of the little probability of his Prophecies, by the Archbishops of
Ousch and Roan, the Bishops of Bayonne and D'Eureux, and other learned
Ecclesiastics, who were present at this Conference; and showed him by
Scripture, which plainly tells us, that the Time which he undertook to limit,
was wholly unknown; that his Conceptions were not only false, but rash and vain
Imaginations of his own Fancy, which he endeavored to obtrude upon the World
for Truths. Insomuch that King Richard himself, who now undertook to be able to
confute him, made no more Account of him than King Philip had done, and no
further amused himself about him. See what manner of Man this Abbot Joachim
was, and what Belief he gained upon the Minds of the English and French,
Italians, many of which, though, did not believe him; but only, among the
Common People, his Fictions passed Current, as if they had been Heavenly
Oracles. But it is observable, that this has constantly been the Destiny of
those who would undertake to prophecy, or to explain future Events, by
accommodating them to the Mysteries of the Apocalypse, to lose the greatest part
of their Reason and Understanding, by dashing against that Rock which has
split so many Spirits as, by their foolish Curiosity, have, at last, only
gained the infamous Reputation of being Visionary Extravagants.

The two Kings therefore, without being retarded by the Predictions of this
Man, whom they sent back to his Solitude of Haute-Pierre in Calabria, to write
upon the Prophets and the Apocalypse, resolved to pursue their Voyage so soon as
the Season would permit. Philip, who always pressed the King of England, not to
delay the time, parted the first, in the Month of March, with all his Fleet,
and arrived fortunately, in two and twenty days, upon Easter-Eve, before Acre,
where he was received by the Crusades with incredible Transports of Pleasure,
as if an Angel from Heaven was come to the Relief of the Christian Army, which
had now besieged this important Place very near three Years. So soon as he was
arrived, he visited the Works, and took his Quarters so near the Walls, that
his Lodgment was within less than a Discharge of the Darts and Arrows of his
Enemies. He then began to plant his Slings for great Stones, his Rams, and
other Engines, which played to so good purpose, and so furiously, upon the
place, that in few days he had made a reasonable fair Breach. At which time the
French presented themselves before it, in order to an Assault, resolved to
perish, or to carry the Place, and all the Honor of the Siege. And no doubt
can be made, but the City had certainly, that day, been taken, considering the
mighty Earnestness which so many brave Men showed, so fresh, and so resolute,
if King Philip, who always acted with great sincerity, had not been something
too scrupulous upon this Occasion, even to the disadvantage of the public
Interest. For whereas one of the Articles of the Treaty which he had made with
the King of England imported, that they should equally share their Conquests,
he understood this Article to extend even to Glory, and was resolved that
Richard should share it with him in the Taking of the Town, which he was in a
Condition to take without him. And therefore, contenting himself with lodging
at the Foot of the Wall, he resolved to put off the Assault till his Arrival.

And in truth, that Prince was resolved to put to Sea immediately after Philip,
but he was constrained to defer it some time, by reason that Queen Eleonor, his
Mother, who brought along with her the Princess Berengera, arrived the same day
that Philip sailed. He caused these two Princesses to be magnificently received
at Messina, where he affianced this new Mistress; after which, Queen Eleonor
returning for England, taking with her Jane, his Sister, and the Princess
Berengera, he commanded part of his Fleet to attend them, and himself, with the
rest, darted at last, upon Wednesday in Passion-Week, from Messina, eighteen
days after King Philip the August. It is true, the Sea was not at all
propitious to him, for, upon Good Friday, he was met by a most furious Tempest;
but having, till this time been ever mighty fortunate, he drew a great
Advantage from this Accident, and the Tempest which scattered his Navy, was
worth to him the Conquest of the Island of Cyprus: The manner whereof I will in
short recount.

The Island of Cyprus, one of the fairest and greatest of the Mediterranean
Sea, lying about some hundred Miles from Syria, was at that time under the
Dominion of the Emperors of Constantinople, who sent thither some Duke, or
Lieutenant, to be their Deputy Governor. Isaac, a Prince of the House of the
Comnenius's by his Mother, who was Daughter of another Isaac, Brother to the
Emperor Manuel, had seized upon that Government, during the Empire of
Andronicus, by virtue of Letters Patents from that Emperor, which this Cheat
had counterfeited; and not long after, he very openly usurped the absolute
Dominion of the Place, by taking upon him the Title and Authorit^ of Emperor.
After the Death of the unfortunate Andronicus, he maintained himself in his
Usurpation, Isaacius Angelus, whom he defeated, with the Assistance of
Margeritus, Admiral of the Fleet of William, King of Sicily. After which, as
this Tyrant, who was one of the most wicked of Mankind, saw himself assured in
his new Empire, according to the custom and nature of Tyranny, which is,
indifferently to commit all manner of Crimes, to enjoy the first, which is
committed by revolting from a lawful Master, there was no manner of Wickedness,
Injustice, Robbery, Extortion, Violence, or Cruelty, which he did not exercise
upon the poor Islanders, whom he reduced even to the utmost Despair. Nor had he
much more Humanity toward Strangers; for three great Ships of the English
Fleet, which, by the Violence of the Tempest, had been thrown upon the Island,
and stranded, in the View of Limisso, anciently called Amathus, upon the South
side of the Island, this Barbarian, who presently run, with his Soldiers, to
the Bank, caused all those who escaped the Wrack to be taken, and after having
inhumanely despoiled them of all they had about them, and in their Ships, he
caused them to be bound, Hand and Foot, and thrown into a deep Dungeon, there
miserably to perish by Famine. Nor would he permit the great Ship, on Board of
which were the two Princesses, and which was in manifest danger of being lost,
to come within the Port of Limisso, as they had earnestly desired Permission of
him to do; but would have them ride it out, exposed to the Mercy of the Seas
and the Waves, that so he might have the brutish and cruel Pleasure, either to
see them sink to the Bottom, or split against the Rocks.

In this time, the Tempest being appeased, Richard, who had taken Port at
Candia, and from thence had sailed to the Rhodes, where he re-assembled his
Ships; and hearing of the ill Treatment which some of his Ships had met with in
the Island of Cyprus, he came and presented himself, with the rest of his Navy,
in good Order, before Limisso, the 6th Day of May, and immediately sent to the
Tyrant, to demand Satisfaction for the Affront had been done him, with a
peremptory Command to him, instantly to set such of the English at Liberty as
he had made Prisoners, and to make full Restitution of whatever he had taken
from them. The furious Brute fiercely replied to the Envoys of the King, That
they should go tell their Master, that he was so far from giving him the
Satisfaction he foolishly demanded, that if he did not make the more haste, and
take the advantage of his Sails and Oars, he must expect the same Treatment for
himself. And thereupon he marched directly to the Shore with all the Troops
which he kept in Pay, and a multitude of confused, undisciplined People, ill
armed, and worse ordered, who ran down in hopes of Booty, and not in
expectation of Blows: But he was mightily mistaken in the Man with whom he was
to deal, for Richard, furiously exasperated by his Answer, gave present Order
that all his Army should make a Descent, by the help of the Barks and Chaloups;
and putting himself into the first Row of the Barks, at the Head of his
Archers, he rained such a Storm of mortal Arrows, as he rowed to the Shore,
upon the Heads of his affrighted Enemies, that under the favor of that
Consternation, he leaped first ashore, and was followed so courageously by his
Men, who sound none to oppose their Descent, that they charged so briskly upon
these Barbarians, with their Swords in their Hands, and fell into the
Battalions of these cowardly and disorderly Greeks, they presently put them
into Confusion, and in a few Minutes, to a manifest Flight, and in the Pursuit,
made a dreadful Slaughter among them, till they got to the Mountains, where
they saved themselves: Then returning, the victorious Army entered Limisso
without Resistance, the Soldiers, who were to have kept it, having, for fear,
abandoned the place.

This happy Beginning was presently succeeded by a Conclusion no less
fortunate; for the Night following he surprised Isaac, who, having rallied his
People, came to encamp within five Miles of Limisso; and having cut the best
part of his Troops in pieces, dissipated the rest, and taken all his Baggage:
So that this miserable Wretch, abandoned of the Cypriots, who, the next day
after the Victory, came to do Homage to King Richard, was constrained, in most
humble manner, to beg a Peace; which he obtained upon Conditions hard enough,
and sufficiently ignominious, and such as, possibly, King Richard would not
have required of him; but his Cowardly Fear dictated them to him: That he
should own the King of England for his Sovereign, and should do him Homage for
the Island, under the Title of the Realm of Cyprus. That he should give his
only Daughter and Heiress to whomsoever King Richard should nominate. That,
besides delivering the Prisoners which he had taken, he should pay twenty
thousand Marks in Gold, for Damages to those whom he had plundered. That he
should go in Person, with twenty thousand choice Men, to serve the King in the
War of the Holy Land. That, for the Security of his Promises, he should
instantly put all the Places in his Dominions into the King's Hands: and that,
reciprocally, the King should engage upon his Honor to restore them to him, so
soon as he had accomplished all his Engagements. And, to begin with what was
most shameful, he immediately came to do his Homage to King Richard, in the
Presence of Guy, King of Jerusalem, and Geoffrey de Lusignan, his Brother,
Raymond, Prince of Antioch, and Bohemond, Count of Tripolis, his Son, Aufrey de
Thoren, and the other Lords, who were come to Cyprus, to oblige King Richard to
enter into their Interests, against the Marquis of Montferrat, Prince of Tire,
whose Party King Philip the August seemed much to favor.

But this Peace did not last long; for, whether this unfortunate Tyrant was
ashamed of his Cowardice, or that some Person had advertised him secretly, that
there was a design to make him a Prisoner, he fled the same Day, and made it be
told to the King, That he was resolved never to keep such an unjust Treaty;
which being the Effect of Force, and the sudden Disorder of his Judgment, by
Despair, was not at all obliging. For this Reason Richard, who was better
pleased with War than Peace, which, how advantageous soever, ravished from him
a Conquest which he could not fail of obtaining, instantly caused him to be
pursued both by Land and Sea, with so much Heat and Expedition, that, running
over the whole Island, with his Troops divided into several Parties, all the
Cities opened their Gates to him, so soon as he or his Lieutenants appeared
before them. So that the miserable Isaac, abandoned of all the World, who had
him in Detestation, even in his better Fortune, was constrained to surrender.
The Princess, his Daughter, who was in the Castle of Cherin, was the first to
implore the Clemency of the King; who received her with great Civility, and
caused her to be conducted to Limisso, where was the Queen, his Sister, and the
Princess Berengera. After which, the Tyrant, who had now no other Retreat left,
besides a Monastery fortified upon a Rock, seeing that he was about to be
attacked, could not resolve to die honorably, in making a noble Defense, but,
by extreme Lowness of Spirit, resolved to beg a Life, which ought to have been
more insupportable than a thousand Deaths. He came then from the Monastery in
the Habit of a Mourner, his Hair and Beard neglected, his Eyes overflown with
Tears, throwing himself, like a Slave, at the Feet of the King; and he, who had
so audaciously assumed the Title of an Emperor, submitted himself entirely to
his Mercy, only making his Request, that he would not put him in Chains; which,
of all the things of the World, he said, was what he most feared, and which
would, assuredly, make him die with Grief. Whereupon, King Richard, who
naturally loved to divert himself with the most serious things, and who was so
far from being touched with any Compassion for the Misery of this Infamous,
that, in regard of his woeful Cowardice, he had scarcely the Patience to see
him; turning himself to Raoul, his Chamberlain, to whose Charge he consigned
this miserable Man, and smiling, he commanded him to use him as an Emperor, and
that therefore he should put upon him Manacles, Fetters and Chains of Silver,
to distinguish him to be a Prisoner of Quality: Which Raoul did not fail,
solemnly to put accordingly in Execution.

Thus the Realm of Cyprus was, without any considerable Loss, conquered in less
than three Weeks by King Richard, who, at the same time, married the Princess
Berengera at Limisso, and caused her to be Crowned Queen of England, Cyprus,
with all manner of Magnificence, and, as it were, in a kind of Triumph, after
such a happy Conquest. This done, he sent the two Queens and the Princess, the
Daughter of Isaac, with a good Party of his Fleet, who arrived happily at Acre,
the 1st Day of June, being the Eve of Whitsunday. He caused the Tyrant to be
conducted Prisoner to Tripolis; and, for himself, after he had regulated the
Affairs of his new Kingdom, which he put under the Conduct of two Governors, he
received from his new Subjects the Value of half their Movables, which they
offered him of their own Accord, that so they might have from him the
Confirmation of the Privileges which they had formerly enjoyed under the
Emperor Manuel. All which Matters being adjusted, upon the 5th of June, he
parted from Cyprus, with the King of Jerusalem, and the Levantine Princes: The
next day he passed before Tire, where the Garrison of Conrade, fearing he might
seize upon the Place, would not permit him to Land. The next Day, as he drew
near to Acre, he discovered the biggest of all the Ships that he had ever seen
upon the Sea, who had the Arms of France painted upon her Stem; but suspecting
it might be some Stratagem, and sending out to hall her, he found it was a Ship
of Saladin's, which had on Board her five hundred choice Men, Provisions, Arms
and Munition; as also, Artificial Fireworks, and two hundred most venomous
Serpents, in Glasses, to throw into the Camp of the Christians. Richard caused
her to be attacked by his Galliots; and, after a long and furious Combat, which
was maintained with extraordinary Obstinacy by those desperate People, till
such time as being pierced in a great many places by the Stems of the Galliots,
who ran upon her with full Sails and Oars, that she sunk to the Bottom, all the
Soldiers and Mariners, who threw themselves into the Sea, or into the Ships of
the Christians, to save themselves, being either drowned or slain, excepting
two hundred of the principal Officers and Engineers, who were taken Prisoners.
After which, Richard, landing the next day, being the 8th of June, entered, as
it were, in Triumph, laden with Spoils and Glory, into the Camp before Acre.

Philip the August received him with the greatest Demonstrations of Joy and
Friendship. But that Prince, too generous, learnt quickly after, by a dangerous
Experiment, that an Excess of Virtue, which causes one to lose a fair
Opportunity, especially in Matters of War, is always a great Fault in a Prince
or Captain. And certainly, he ought not to have made any Scruple of Taking the
City, as he might easily have done, without King Richard, whom he unprofitably
staid for so long time, while that King, more cunning, and less scrupulous, and
who had not for others such tender Concerns, did, without him, take a whole
Kingdom. For, in short, the missing of this Opportunity gave Rise to many
Accidents, which had like to have entirely ruined the Enterprise: For the
Besieged made great advantage of that long Repose, and the leisure which was
given them by a kind of Truce, of which they knew not the Cause; however, they
employed it to the repairing of the Breaches, and were so strengthened by little
Succors, which frequently slipped into them, that they found themselves in a
Condition often to repulse the great Assaults which were given against them at
unseasonable times, the Opportunity being lost before. Besides, the King of
France first, and after some time, the King of England, fell sick of that
dangerous Malady, which made them lose their Hair, Nails and Skin, by its
subtle and Corrosive Malignity, which consumes all that Matter which is
necessary for the Defense or the Ornament of the Body. But the most dangerous
Evil of all, and which endangered the common Ruin, was, the Division which
broke out more furiously than ever between the two Kings. The ancient English
Historians of that time lay all the Blame upon Philip, whilst the French, who
writ at the same time, accuse King Richard, and lay all the Fault at his Door:
and the reason is plain, that both the one and the other living at the same
time, and writing what was done in their own time, either their Fear or their
Hope, their Love or Hate, took from them the power and the liberty of writing
the Truth sincerely, and without Partiality. For my own particular, who,
besides the natural Love I have for it, have always made Profession to speak
and write, when there is occasion, with that frank and honest liberty which can
never be taken from a good Man, Richard did not use King Philip with that
Respect which was due to him, as his Liege Lord for so many great and fair
Provinces as he held of him in France: For as he had amassed prodigious Sums of
Money in England, in Sicily, and in Cyprus, he spared no Cost to allure the
bravest Men to his Party, and to draw them to his Service by excessive
Profusions, and the extraordinary Advantages which he made them; insomuch that,
understanding that Philip gave three Crowns in Gold by the Month to every
Horseman, he promised four to such as would quit that Service, and take Pay
under him. So that he seemed to endeavor to exhalt himself above his Master,
and to render him contemptible. But then, on the other side, Philip, who had a
great Heart, and who bore it very impatiently, to be in this manner insulted
over by his Vassal, showed so much displeasure, that he gave those whom the
Profusions of Richard had gained, especially the Levantines, who were most
charmed with them, occasion to believe that he was not able to support his
Greatness, and his Merit, to be thus topped and overshaded. Moreover, as
Philip, before the Arrival of the English, had so far advanced the Works, and
so beaten down the Walls, and ruined the Defenses, that he might easily have
taken the place, if he had not been too scrupulous of taking all the Glory to
himself; whereas Richard, to whom he had given the opportunity of taking his
share, by a strange Effect of Jealousy and Ambition, would by no means have
the City taken whilst Philip was there; insomuch, that when the French
assaulted the Town, this jealous Prince prohibited the English, either to
sustain them, or to assault it on their side, as had before been resolved upon
at the Council of War. This brought on Reproaches, Quarrels and Hatred, which
daily increased, and grew more violent between the two Nations, than that of
the War which had begun to break out before, under King Henry; there being,
besides, naturally not too much Sympathy between them.

That which augmented this Division was also the Difference between Guy de
Lusignan and the Marquis Conrade de Montferrat, for the Realm of Jerusalem;
which the one pretended to keep, and the other to have, when as Saladin was yet
possessed of it: For King Philip carried himself openly for the Marquis, in the
Right of his Wife; and for that being a great Warrier, who had, by his good
Conduct, preserved the small Remainder of that poor Realm, it seemed much
better that he should have it, rather than his Rival, who had lost it so
unfortunately, for want of Courage, and sufficient Conduct. On the contrary,
the King of England, for that very reason, opposed his Pretensions, being
unwilling it should fall into the hands of so brave a Man; and therefore, with
all his Power, he supported Guy of Lusignan, by reason that that unfortunate
Prince having much Weakness, and little Merit, Richard was in hopes of
disposing of the Realm according to his own Will. And, in short, the new
Conquest which the King of England had made of the Island of Cyprus, which he
was resolved to keep, did not at all please Philip, who demanded the half of
that Realm, in virtue of the Treaty, by which they were obliged to divide
equally between them whatsoever should be gained by that Voyage. But Richard
maintained, either that this Division was to be restrained to such Conquests as
were made upon the Infidels, or otherwise, that by the same reason he ought to
divide the Succession to the Earldom of Flanders with the King, since, by the
Death of the Earl, Philip pretended to have acquired a Right unto. And by
reason of this Division, their Spirits were so exasperated, that while nothing
was done against the common Enemy, both sides reproached each other with
holding a secret Intelligence and Correspondency with the Infidels, both the
one Party and the other receiving Presents from Saladin. And, in truth, this
brave Sarasin Prince, who was naturally generous, and made War like a noble
Enemy, was used, from time to time, to send the most excellent Fruits of
Damascus to the two Kings, who, in Return, sent him some of the pretty Rarities
of Europe.

Levant and other Succors come from Europe made more than three hundred
thousand men, that they were reduced into a worse Condition than before, by
this fatal Discord, which divided all the Christian Lords, and armed them one
against the other. The Knights of the Temple, the Duke of Burgundy, all the
Party of the Marquis Conrade and the Germans declared themselves for Philip.
Richard had of his Party besides his own Subjects, the Hospitallers the Pisans,
and those among the Levantine Princes who favored Guy de Lusignan, the
Flemings who were for the Young Baldwin, the Nephew of their deceased Earl, and
who some twelve Years after obtained the Empire of Constantinople, as also some
French men, among others, Henry Earl of Champagne, whom Richard had gained by
his excessive Liberalities; so that the Camp seemed more dangerously besieged
than the City, being attacked from without by the Army of Saladin, and more
miserably within by this fearful Division, which had ruined all, unless God,
who was resolved to crown the Zeal of these two great Princes, notwithstanding
all the disorders of their Passions, had appeased this Tempest, and
unexpectedly brought a Calm among them by the undertaking of some of the Wisest
and most prudent Persons, of both Armies who made a Composure of all
Differences between the two Kings on this manner. It was ordained, That they
should confirm their former Treaty and most inviolable and exactly keep it on
one side and the other. That they should devide between them whatsoever they
should take from the Infidels. That when one of the two Kings should give an
Assault to the City, the other should oppose Saladin in defending the Lines;
and for the difference between Guy de Lusignan and the Marquis de Montferrat,
it should be referred to the Determination of certain Judges equally chosen on
both sides. And not long after a solemn Judgment was rendered thereupon by
which it was decreed, That Guy de Lusignan should for the remainder of his Life
continue King of Jerusalem, but that his Children if he should marry again
should have no sort of Pretentions to that Crown, the Reversion and Succession
whereof should remain to the Marquis and those Children he should have by the
Princess Isabella his Lady, Sister to the late Queen Sybilla. That in the
Interim he should have the Moity of the Revenues of the Realm, together with
the Principalities of Tire, of Sydon, and Baruth, by holding them of the Crown;
and that Geoffry de Lusignan should upon the same Conditions hold the Counties
of Jaffa and Caesarea.

This being done, and the Peace in this manner confirmed at least in Appearance
between the two Kings, nothing was now thought upon but how to press forward
the Siege; and it was done with so much Vigor, by continual battering the Walls
both Night and Day and redoubling the Attacks, that the Besieged Sarasins now
dispairing to be able long to defend the Place against so great Forces, as were
now become unanimous, offered to surrender, provided they might be assured of
their Lives and Liberty to retire whither they pleased, without carrying any
thing away with them more than their wearing Apparel, The Kings, who were
assured they could carry the Place, thought to make a considerable Advantage of
that despair to which so many Brave men were reduced, whom they believed
Saladin would not suffer to perish, and therefore would hearken to no Terms,
unless Saladin would restore the true Cross, Jerusalem, and all the Cities
which he had taken after the Battle of Tyberias. Saladin, who was obliged to
turn his Arms against the Son of Noradin, who attempted to take from him
Mesopotamia, was willing to consent to these very Terms, provided that the
Kings should assist him against his Enemies in Person with thirty thousand Men;
nay he was contented that it should be done by their Lieutenants, and with
fewer Troops, to which he would join his, provided, they would serve him one
Year. But whether the two Kings judged it unworthy of their Majesty, which they
thought must suffer an Abasement in serving an Infidel,; or that the Son of
Noradin on the other side soliciting them to join with him against Saladin,
They believed that by such a favorable diversion they should be able with Ease
to take from him all those Cities, they absolutely refused these Conditions.
And therefore they began now more furiously than ever to attack the City, in
one of which Assaults, Alberic Clement Marshall of France, after he had
already gained the Walls was slain in the City. Christian, who was in the Town,
and who was one of the Council, gave them frequent Advertisement by Letters,
which he threw into the Camp, of all the Resolutions, which were taken by the
Sarasins; so that all their Enterprises being discovered, were rendered
ineffectual; but this Important Service was never recompensed, in regard the
Intelligencer could never be known after the taking of the City, which was at
last constrained to surrender. For on the one hand Saladin who was obliged to
retire, had sent to them to make the best Terms they could; on the other, there
was no more Expectation of Succor for them by the Sea where the Christians
were absolute Masters; and the French who by prodigious Labor, had drawn their
Mines to the very Foundations of the Wicked Tower, and the eleventh of July had
overthrown all the Walls, and were just now ready to set Fire to the Wooden
Pillars which supported it; therefore the sive Admirals or Emirs, who commanded
the Garrisons, Caracos, Mesiock, Helsedin, Limathos, and Jordic, hung out a
Flag of Parley; and after having treated with the Commissioners, of the two
Kings, the next morning the Agreement was perfected in these Articles. That
they should immediately surrender the place with all the Gold, Silver and
Movables, the Ammunition, Arms and Provisions which were in it, without
retaining any thing to themselves more than their wearing Apparel. That they
should procure from Saladin the true Cross, together with all the Christians,
which he detained Captives, and that he should pay to the two Kings one hundred
thousand of those pieces of Gold which were called Besans, from the Name of
Constantinople otherwise called Bysance, where they were minted with the
Effigies of the Greek Emperor; that in Expectation of the Performance of the
Treaty, they with the whole Garrison should remain Prisoners at War; and that
if Saladin did not in forty days accomplish these Articles, they should be
wholly at the Discretion of the two Kings, who should dispose of their Lives
and Liberties as they should judge convenient.

Thus was the City of Ptolemais or Acre taken at the last by the Christians,
after one of the longest and most memorable Sieges which have been ever seen,
and with the loss of as many brave men as might have conquered all Asia; for
besides an Infinite Number of Soldiers, Gentlemen and great Lords, Germans,
English, Italians, Flemings and Levantines who perished during the Siege,
either by the Malady, or by the frequent Combats which happened. The French
lost there, aamong the Persons of the greatest Quality, the Counts Thibaud de
Chartres and de Blois, Stephen de Sancerre, John de Vendome, Rotrou de Perch,
Erard de Brienne, Raoul de Clermont. Gilbert de Tilieres, the Count de
Ponthieu, the Viscounts de Turenne and de Castillane, Alberic Clement Marshall
of France, Adam the Great Chamberlain, the Lords jocelin de Montmorency, Guy de
Chastillon, Florem de Augest Bernard de St. Valery, Enguerand de Fiennes,
Gautier de Moy, Geoffry de la Briere, Anselm de Montreal, Guy de Dane, Hugh de
Hoiry, Raoul de Fougeres, Eudes de Goness, Raoul de Hauterive, and Renaud de
Magni, all whose Names I have found among the Writers of those times, and which
I thought my self obliged by no means to suppress; but that in this History the
Reader may receive the Pleasure of finding among his Ancestors, by consulting
the Pedigree, some of these Illustrious men, whose glorious Memory ought to be
an Eternal Honor to those Houses who have descended from them.

The City being taken, the Kings according to their Treaty divided all the
Booty equally between them, as also the Prisoners and the Houses. The Cardinal
Bishop of Verona, Legate of the Holy See, the Archbishop of Tire and Pisa, the
Bishops of Beavais, Chartres d' Eureux, Bayonne, Salisbury and Tripolis,
solemnly re-dedicated the Churches, which the Sarasins had turned into Mosches.
There were also assigned to the Venetians, Genoeses, Pisans, to the Knights of
the Temple and those of the Hospital the Quarters and Rights which they were to
possess in the City of Acre, and in truth every thing passed peaceably and in
good Order, except that King Richard, who too easily suffered himself to be
transported by his Natural Violence and Choler, committed two Actions, of
surious Madness, one of which proved afterward very dangerous to himself, and
the other presently to the poor Christians, which happened thus, at the same
time that the French had overthrown the Walls adjoining to the Wicked Tower,
Leopold, Duke of Austria, who attacked a quarter on the opposite part had
seized upon another Tower, and had there planted his Standard, which stood
there after the Reduction of the City. Richard, who for other Matters was
exasperated against Leopold, in regard that as well as the rest of the Germans
he had been of Philip's. Party, took this occasion to be revenged of him, as if
he had usurped upon the Authority of the two Kings, and therefore caused the
Standard to be taken down by plain Force, and being torn in pieces and trampled
under Foot he caused it to be thrown into the Kennel, by the most insupportable
of all Affronts that could be given to a Prince who loved Glory. The Germans
who were naturally jealous of the Honor of their Nation, and incapable of
bearing, I do not say, such a horrible Injury as this was, but even the Shadow
of being contemned, had not failed instantly to do themselves reason by their
Arms, which they presently took against the English; but Leopold who was
altogether as brave, but something a better Dissembler than King Richard, chose
rather for a time to respite his Vengeance, which he hoped to find a more fit
occasion for, where he should not be blamed by enduring the pain of this
Affront for doing greater Mischiefs to the Christian Affairs, which must needs
suffer much by a Civil War, and which in a few days following did suffer
extremely by another cruel Effect of the Violent Nature of this Prince. For
seeing that Saladin persisted in refusing to satisfy the Articles of the
Capitulation, which the Besieged had on his Behalf ratified, he conceived such
a Despite, that he Inhumanly caused the Heads of above five thousand Prisoners
which fell to his Share, to be cut off. Nor could he be diswaded from it, by
the Consideration of so many Christian Captives, to whom Saladin as he had
menaced caused the same measure to be given, by a kind of cruel Reprisal, the
blame of which is always laid upon him who begins. And certainly it has always
been seen, that these dangerous Examples, which are given to an Enemy in the
time of War, which he always believes he has a Right to render the like
measure, for the Security of his own People, have always been condemned by
others who have had the Occasion to suffer by it, and that those who give it
are at last constrained to abstain the first from it, though something with the
latest, and after it has caused the Lives of so many unfortunates, as have
perished either by the transports of the one or the Vengeance of the other. As
for King Philip who was more moderate, he used his with more humanity and
contented himself to leave the Prisoners in the Hands of Marquis Conrade, as he
Passed by Tire in his return from the Holy Land into France.

This Prince who was extreme Wise, perceived on the one hand that Richard,
become now more Fierce and Violent than ever, after the taking of Acre, kept no
sort of Measures, and that it was impossible for them long time to keep in any
Terms of Accord; and on the other, perceiving that he was daily infeebled by
the Distemper into which he was again relapsed; he might run the Hazard of
dying in Palestine, without being able to do any Service to Christendom; and
that in the mean time Advantage might be taken of his Absence, by invading the
Earldom of Flanders, which ought to return to the Crown of France, by the Death
of Count Philip. He made this to be most civilly represented to the King of
England, that finding by the increase of his Distemper, he was like to be
rendered incapable to serve the Affairs of the Christians in the Holy Land, he
judged it more to their Advantage, that one single Commander should finish the
War; and for this purpose, that he would resign all wholly to his Conduct,
together with a good party of his Army, under the Command of the Duke of
Burgundy. He added also, that to take from him all manner of Pretext which he
might have to complain of his Departure, or the Fear that he might entertain,
that he did not return into France, but to fall upon his Dominions there during
his Absence, he assured him, that if he had occasion to make War upon him, it
should not be till the Expiration of forty days after his Return. After which,
having left five hundred Men at Arms, and ten thousand Foot, with the Duke of
Burgundy, and some Troops which he lent for a Year to the Prince of Antioch, he
imbarcked the first day of August upon thirty Galleys, Syria, the le^ser Asia,
Greece, Epirus, and Calabria, from time to time, making such Stays by the Way
as were necessary for the regaining of his Strength and Health, he went to pay
his Devotions at Rome. There he was received with all imaginable Honor by Pope
Celestin the III. who approving of his Return, according to the Custom,
bestowed upon him and his Followers, the Palms and the Crosses, in token that
they had accomplished their Vow. From thence, passing by Land into France, in
the Month of December he arrived at Fountainbleau, and from thence he repaired
to St. Dennis, where prostrating himself before the Altar of the Holy Martyrs,
he offered his Royal Robe, and gave solemn Thanks to Almighty God, who had
delivered him from so many Dangers as he had run by Sea and Land, and had at
last happily reconducted him into his own Kingdom. This was the Conclusion of
this holy Enterprise of Philip the August, and as one may say absolutely, that
it was very Fortunate, by the Reduction of the City of Acre; so it is most
certain, that it had been much greater, if it had been performed by his single
Forces; for being composed of the very Flower of the Nobility and Gentry of
France, and conducted by the most Wise and Valiant King of that time, they
might without Difficulty have Triumphed over Saladin, if the Conjunction of a
most potent Rival had not infeebled them by than unhappy Division which his
haughty, jealous, and ambitious Humor occasioned among them. But in short,
this is generally the Fatality which accompanies such kind of Unions, which
being made among differing States and Princes for some common End, usually by
the growing of Discords among themselves, terminate in the entire Ruin of those
united Sentiments and Designs; there being nothing so Improsperous, especially
in the Affairs of War, as want of a good Understanding and Concord among
Confederates, which in reallity is seldom, if ever, to be expected from the
multitude of Coordinate Captains, which must needs produce Differences and
Oppositions first in point of Opinion, and afterward by necessary Consequence,
in the very Union it self.

But in this time King Richard, who was now the sole Commander of the Christian
Army in Syria and Palestine, proved not much more Fortunate in the end of his
Enterprise, by reason that he was so continually agitated by the Tempests of
his own violent and tumultuous Passions, that he was difficultly at any
Agreement with himself, but was become even his own Rival: For on the one hand,
his Ambition, and love of Glory, mingled with some Remains of Piety and
Religion, transported him vigorously toward the pushing forward his Conquests
against Saladin, and above all, to take Jerusalem, which was the main End of
this Crusade; on the other, the Jealousy of State, and the Fear of the Arms
of Philip, whom in his Conscience, he knew to be most justly Exasperated
against him, the Distrust which he had of the French which were left behind,
under the Command of the Duke of Burgundy, the great Friend of the Marquis the
Prince of Tire, his mortal Enemy, and above all, his Avarice, which was his
ruling Passion, and the Covetousness of drawing immense sums of Money from the
Sarasin Nobility, whom he detained Prisoners, and from Saladin himself, who
continualy solicited him for a Peace; all these Passions put him into great
Discomposures of Mind, and he was under very strong Temptations of making some
Truce with the Sarasins, and passing immediately into Europe. But it must be
said to the Glory of this King, who doubtless was one of the bravest of his
Age, that at length his most no^^e Passion, which was the Love of Glory, and it
may be also, that which he had for the good of Religion prevailed over the
rest, and in Conclusion, carried him to the War, which he recommenced in the
most glorious manner in the World.

He employed some six Weeks in repairing the Breaches of Acre, and in
refreshing his Army, which after the Retreat of Marquis Conrade, and almost all
the Italians, and many other Crusades, whom either Poverty or Weariness, or
Discontent, caused to forsake this lingering War, yet consisted in above one
hundred thousand Men. After which, toward the latter end of August, he began
to move, and took the right hand along the Sea Coast, to selve upon such
maritim Places as Saladin had caused to be dismantled. The Fleet constantly
plied along the Coast with them, Saladin, who coasted along the Mountains, to
molest him by continual Skirmishes in his March, and to watch some favorable
Opportunity to give him Battle upon any notable Advantage; and upon the seventh
of September, the Infidel thought he had found the lucky Moment at the Pass of
a River, which discharges it self into the Sea near Antipatris. For Saladin,
who had above three hundred thousand Men in his Army, had divided them into
three Bodies, one of which was posted on this side the River, to oppose the
Passage of the Christians; another was ranged on the further Bank, to the
intent that if the first Body should be broaken, they might be ready to charge
such as should attempt to pass the River; Saladin himself with the third, which
was by much the greatest, and composed of the choicest of all his Troops, kept
himself in the Coverture of the Mountains on the left of the Christian Army,
ready to fall upon the Rereguard, at such time as the Van should be engaged
with his other Troops in disputing the Pass of the River.

King Richard, who had stayed some days at Cesarea, as well to refresh his
Army, as to repair the Ruins of that Place, no sooner came within View of the
River, but that he saw it on both sides imbanked with his Enemies, he resolved
therefore to give them Battle; both in regard there was no stopping to loose
the Pass, nor no retreating without manifest Danger of being surrounded, and
put into some Disorder by retireing. Now as he marched always in Battalia, for
fear of being surprised, his Army was instantly drawn into such Order as was
convenient. The Valiant James d' Avesnes that day commanded the Van, with what
remained of the Danes, Brabanters, Flemings, and Hollanders. The King led the
Body of the Battle, where were the English, the Normans, the Poiteuins, the
Gascons, and the Levantine Troops; near his Person was the Young Henry Count of
Champagne, his Nephew, who to the Prejudice of what he owed to King Philip his
Sovereign, who was also his Uncle; this young Prince being born of the Sister
of the King, the Daughter of Queen Eleonor and Lewis the Young, was entirely
devoted to King Richard. The Rereguard was commanded by the Duke of Burgundy,
General of the French Army, who was accompanied by the Templers and the German
Troops, who followed Leopold the Archduke of Austria, who never abandoned the
French, but were most strictly united with them during this Crusade. So soon as
the Armies came within View, which was about Noon, the Combat was not long
deferred; For James d' Avesnes, who was one of the bravest and most prudent
Captains of his Age, charged so furiously upon the first Squadrons of the
Enemies, who were posted on this side the River, that he broak into them twice,
overturning and killing all that opposed his Passage: But being transported
with the heat of his Courage, as he returned to the third Charge, followed but
by a few, in comparison of that fearful Number of those who succeeded in the
place of the broaken Squadrons, he received a terrible Blow with a Scymiter,
which cut off his Leg; notwithstanding which he sustained himself by the force
of his invincible Courage, and failed not still to fight and to Slay on the
right and the left, all such as durst venture within the reach of his dreadful
Sword, till at last, that also with the Sword fell by another unfortunate Blow
of the Scymiter, whereupon those cowardly Infidels fell upon him, and by a
thousand Wounds gave him a glorious Death, after he had opened the Way to
Victory by that Carnage which he had made of the most daring of the Sarasins,
and by the Flight of the more Cowardly.

For Richard, who sustained him, and who heard him a moment before his Death,
cry out aloud, Brave King, come and revenge my Death, all in Fury at his Fall,
entered at the Breach which this illustrious Deceased had made, and fell in like
a Thunderclap among the thickest of the Enemies, where the Flemings, mad even
to despair to have lost their General, already made a dreadful Slaughter among
them, that unable to stand the dreadful Shock, they turned their Backs, and
sled amain toward the Mountains to save themselves. So that the Bank being on
this side cleared of the Enemies, this valiant Prince, without giving the
courageous English leave to cool one Moment, threw himself into the River,
which at this time was but very low, and drawing by his Example, all his
Battle after him, and the Vanguard, who now had no other General, Sarasins,
who pretended to defend the other Bank. This he did with so much Resolution,
that they had not the Considence to expect him, but instantly dispersed
themselves and sled, the King not offering to put himself to the trouble to
pursue them; so that finding himself Master of both the Banks of the River,
where no Enemy appeared, he believed he was in perfect Possession of a complete
Victory, when he found himself mistaken, and perceived at a great Distance on
the other side of the River, a prodigious Cloud of Dust, mingled with Darts and
Arrows, which might be seen sly from all Quarters, as also one might hear a
confused noise of the Instruments of War, the cries of Men, and the neighing of
Horses: This was occasioned by the greatest part of the Army of the Sarasins,
commanded by Saladin himself, who descending from the Mountains into the Plain,
had surrounded the Arrere-guard, which he believed was at too great a distance
to be secured by the main Battle: For Saladin, who was a great Captain, had cut
them off so much to his Advantage, and had them so in the plain Field, that he
promised himself an assured Victory, and doubted not but he should certainly
either cut them in pieces, or force them to surrender at Descretion. But he
quickly found that he had to do with People who were Masters in the Trade of
War, who having without any Confusion, ranged themselves into four Battalions,
sustained on the right and left by what Cavalry they had, formed the Face of a
Battle every way, and with little Loss sustained all the Efforts of the
Sarasins, who believed themselves already Conquerours, till such time as
Richard advertised of the Danger of these gallant Men, quickly repassing the
River, came running at full Speed to their Assistance.

Then it was, that for some time the Combat began to be more surious and bloody
than it was before, the two Kings by their Voice and Gesture, but much more by
their Example, animating their Soldiers to aspire to Victory. For after having
done all that could be expected from two of the most able Captains in the
World, Providing against all Events, giving out necessary Orders, and
themselves in the Charge giving the the first Blows, it happened that in the
Rencounter, knowing each other by those Marks which distinguished them from the
rest, they both hit upon the same thought, and each of them believing he had
sound an Enemy worthy of himself, and whom with honor he might combat, both as
a Soldier and a King; they both believed that the general Victory would depend
upon their particular Encounter, and that he whom Fortune should declare her
Favorite, would not fail of having the Glory of singly obtaining the Victory.
So both of them, at the same time, charging his Arm with a strong Lance, they
furiously ran one against the other, and being both of them most Stout and
Valiant Men, admirably mounted, and animated with an ardent desire of Glory,
wherein Hatred had the least Share, the Shock was extreme Rude and Violent,
their Lances flew into a thousand Splinters, and Richard was something
disordered with the mighty Blow which he received, but he had managed his Lance
with so much Adress and Force, that he overthrew both Horse and Man upon the
Ground: This raised a mighty Shout from both the Armies, as if Saladin had been
slain; and the Sarasins came tumbling in Shoals about him, so thick, either to
relieve him if alive, or to carry him off if he were dead, that Richard, who
was approaching with his Sword, advanced to finish his Victory, was constrained
to let it fall upon less considerable Enemies, of whom he made a most horrible
Slaughter, for their interposing betwixt him and Glory. Saladin, the goodness
of whose Arms had saved his Life, sorely bruised in Body, and tormented with
the Shame of his Fall, being mounted upon a fresh Horse, did by his speedy
Flight prevent a worse Destiny, and left the Christians in possession of a
cheap and perfect Victory. For seeing that a great part of his Men, frightened
by the Belief they had that he was slain, had already found their Heels, and
that the rest being altogether in Confusion and Disorder, retreated before the
Enemy, he thought now no longer of any thing but how to save himself, and after
him the whole Army thought it no Disgrace to make the best have they could from
Death and Danger, which followed them closely at the Heels. Thus the Christian
Army remained Victorious on all sides, Christians but a very few private
Soldiers, and not one Man of Condition, except the valiant James d' Avesne, who
was slain at the beginning of the Battle of the Vanguard.

But it must be said, that if King Richard knew how to vanquish in this famous
Day, with all the Glory which can be gained upon a like Occasion, he had
Hanibal's Misfortune, not to have the Art to make Advantage of his Victory: For
if instead of amusing himself with Rebuilding the Maritim Towns, which Saladin
had ruined, which might have been more commodiously done at another Season, he
had marched straight to Jerusalem, most assuredly he might have taken it
without Resistance, by reason that Saladin was fled among the Mountains, and
those who were left there for the Defense of the Place, not being able to hope
to be Relieved, and fearing to meet with the same Measure, which those who had
so obstinately defended Acre, would scarcely have had the Courage to defend it
against him. But whether it were his Prosperity, and the excessive Joy, with
which so great a Victory had disturbed his Mind, which made him incline to taste
the Pleasure of being so great a Conqueror, or whether it were, that after
having done very well, one naturally loves to take the more easy part, and not
to hazard that Glory which one has already acquired; certain it is, that this
is a Fault with which almost in all Ages, one has occasion to reproach the
greatest Captains; and it is observable, that most frequently they have lost
the Opportunity of finishing a War, by attacking, after great Success, the
Enemy, and following the fortunate Blow which they had given. Thus King
Richard, after so fair a Victory, lost the rest of the Year in re-building and
re-peopling the Maritim Towns, and especially Jaffa, whither he caused the two
Queens to come; and where in that time he ran a far greater Danger than he he
had done in besieging of Jerusalem.

One Day as he was hunting, he with five or six of his Gentlemen, fell into a
great Ambuscade of the Sarasins, where he had been infalibly taken and lead
Captive to Saladin, if one of the Lords who accompanied him, whose Name was
William de Pourcellets, a Gentleman of Provence, who was wholly devoted to his
Service, had not done an Action which History ought to recommend to Posterity,
as a most illustrious Example of that inviolable Fidelity which Servants owe to
their Masters, and much more Subjects to their Sovereigns, though to the hazard
of their Lives: For seeing the King, who valiantly defended himself with mighty
Blows of his Sword, in danger to be taken, or slain, as already four of the
Company were, who lay extended upon the Grass at their Masters Feet, he cried
out in the Language of the Sarasins, I am the King: Whereupon, all of them
desirous to have a share in the taking of so great a King, ran to him, and gave
King Richard the liberty to save himself, whilst without regarding any others,
they all fell with Precipitation upon him whom they took for the King. Saladin,
who had nothing of the Barbarian in his Conduct, acting like a generous Prince,
treated his Prisoner according to the merit of so brave an Action: And King
Richard for his part, failed not to recompense him with Honors proportionable
to his Deserts, for he gave in Exchange for him ten of the greatest and richest
Noblemen among his Prisoners, to manifest the Esteem which he had for this
brave Man, whom alone he valued at the rate of ten Princes, for whose Ransoms
he might have expected very great Riches and Treasures. This was the Glory,
which by his Virtue, this gallant Man acquired for himself whilst living, and
which dying he bequeathed to his illustrious House, which to this day preserves
its Luster, and maintains its Rank among the most Ancient and the most Noble of
Provence.

All this time Saladin ceased not to lay all the Country Wast, and thereby to
take away all manner of Subsistence from the Christians; as also to ruin all
the Cities of Palestine except Jerusalem and two or three strong Fortresses;
whilst Richard unprofitably wasted his time in rebuilding those Places, which
being demolished, could give no trouble to his principal Design. He also
suffered himself to be amused by a Treaty of Peace, extremely Advantageous to
him, which Saphadin the Brother of Saladin pretended to negotiate between them,
Jordan to the Sea, provided that Ascalon, which was to be demolished, should
appertain to neither Party. These Offers seemed so Advantageous to Richard who
was already imbroiled with the French under the Duke of Burgundy, that he was
very much disposed to conclude with Saphadin. But at length he perceived that
he was deluded, and that the Barbarian, more cunning than honest, had not begun
this Negotiation but to gain time, and to throw him upon the Winter. He
thereupon fell into an extreme Rage, and as Rage is one of the worst of
Counselors, which puts Men upon acting without any certain Rules or Measures,
to satisfy this inpetuous Passion, he blindly followed its Conduct, and at that
unseasonable time of the Year undertook the Siege of Jerusalem, which if he had
consulted Reason, he ought to have done, and might happily have effected it,
three or four Months before. January, with the whole Army, already much
diminished by the departure of many of the Crusades, who were displeased with
his Delays of Peopling, Planting, and Rebuilding, in which he consumed the
Summer, and passing by Rama, which Saphadin in his Retreat had demolished, he
advanced within three or four Leagues of Jerusalem. All the Soldiers witnessed
an excessive Joy, to find themselves within View of that City, where they hoped
shortly to worship before the Sacred Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, so great an
Assurance had they of the Victory. But when the Counsel was assembled, the
Passion of King Richard being something cooled, and the Matter debated in cold
Blood, the greatest part of the Captains adjudged that the Enterprise was too
rash to hope that it should Prosper. There it was remonstrated, That the Town
was very Strong, and well provided, that Saladin was there in Person with the
choicest of his Troops, not at all doubting but that there he was in a
Condition of Security, as Affairs then stood, the Season being such, that an
Army could not possibly undertake a Siege, without putting themselves, against
all the Rules of Art and War, into a most manifest Danger of being Ruined; That
in effect, the Country being entirely ruined by the Wast, which Saladin had
made, there was not Subsistence to be found for one single day for the Army;
and that it being in the deep of Winter, there was no probability of getting
Provision by the Sea. And for that extraordinary Ardor which the Soldiers
showed, it ought to be suspected, by reason that one might well fear, that so
soon as they had visited the Holy Sepulcher, they would quit Palestine to
return into their respective Countries, aand abandon the new Conquests to the
Sarasins, who would then easily recover what had been taken from them. And for
these Reasons, It was concluded to defer the Siege till the Spring should be
advanced, and in the mean time to continue the Fortification of the places
which had been Demolished, and above all, the City of Ascalon, which was
infinitely Commodious, for hindering the Succors which might come to the Enemy
out of Egypt, and to receive such as might arrive for the Assistance of the
Crusades out of Europe.

This Resolution was no sooner taken than it was put in Execution, though with
an unconceivable Displeasure to the Soldiers, and above all to the French, who
openly murmured against Richard, whom they did not stick to accuse of having a
secret Understanding with Saladin. They said boldly, That Saladin had never
shut himself within the Walls of Jerusalem, if he had not been very well
assured that he had nothing to fear from such an obliging Enemy. And that
without all question, he was ready, had the Army but once faced it, to quit the
Place, and that the Garrison would either quickly have followed him, or have
Surrendered, fearing to be abandoned by him, like those who so bravely defended
Acre, to the Descretion and Mercy of the Vanquisher. But however it were, so
soon as the Army came to Rama, a great part of it disbanded, the most of the
French retiring to Jaffa, Tire, and Acre; but this did not hinder King Richard
to pursue the Resolution which had been taken, to go and fortify Ascalon,
whither he went acompanied with the Count de Champagne, his Nephew, who
continued always constantly faithful to him. The Dukes of Burgundy and Austria
also went thither with him, but it was not long before they left him; the
Austrian, because he was afresh unworthily, as he thought, treated by him, for
refusing to take one part of the Town to Fortify, Germans, to retire into his
own Country; the Burgundian, because having desired him to lend him some Money
for the payment of his Troops, he briskly refused him in Terms very
disobliging, which caused the Duke, who before had no great Kindness for King
Richard, to carry away the rest of the French to Acre; in a little time after
which, there happened an Accident which occasioned a mighty Change in the Face
of Affairs.

The Pisans and the Genoese, to whom Quarters were assigned in that City, and
who had for a long time quarrelled each other, came at last to open
Hostilities, and in the Fray had committed great Slaughters one upon the other.
The Genoese, who had always joined with the French, in taking part with the
Marquis Conrade, called him in to their Assistance; but the King of England, to
whose Service the Pisans were devoted, came so expeditiously with his Army to
their Succor, that Conrade, who was already encamped before the Town, finding
himself too weak to make any Resistance, was constrained to draw off again to
Tire. And within a few days after, about the end of April, as the Marquis
returned from the Bishop of Beauvais, who had treated him at a Dinner, he was
slain in the open Street by two Assassins of the Old Man of the Mountain: The
Prince so called was Lord of a little Estate situated in the Mountains of
Phoenicia, between Tortosa and Tripolis, which consisted in ten Castles, built
upon most inaccessible Rocks, and in some few Towns, which stood in the most
fair and delicate Valleys which lay among these Mountains. These People, who
from a Persian Word were called Assissins or Capyciens, consisted in about
sixty thousand Souls, who came from the Confines of Persia near Babylon, some
four or five hundred Years before, about such time as the Arabians, the
Successors of Mahomet, rendered themselves Masters of the East, and having
possessed themselves of these Mountains, whose Avenues they had rendered
inaccessible, they had so well fortified them, that till this very time they
had maintained their Liberty independent from either the Caliphs, the Sultans,
or the Kings of Jerusalem. Their Prince was Elective, who took no other Name
but that of the Ancient, or the Old Man, as a Mark not of his Age, but of his
Authority and Power.

And indeed that was so great, and he was so obeyed by his Subjects, that there
was no manner of Danger to which they did not freely expose themselves in the
Execution of his Commands, tho the most unjust and barbarous in the World, even
to throwing themselves headlong from any Precipice, upon the least
signification that such was his Pleasure. So much power had this false Belief
upon their Spirit, which they had by Tradition received from their Ancestors,
and in which they took great Care to Educate their Children, that by dying in
this manner, in Executing without Exception or Difference, what was commanded
them by the Ancient, they should pass imediately to the enjoyment of a Life
infinitely Happy in the Heavens. So that when he sent them to the Court of any
Prince, either Christian or Sarasin, who had disobliged him, with a Command to
dispatch him, there was no sort of Disguise or Artifice, no manner of Treachery
which they would not make use of, to perform his execrable Commands, without
ever flinching at the most cruel Torments, which they might expect to Suffer;
and in the midst of which, they would manifest a certain Pleasure, that they
had with Fidelity acquitted themselves of their Commission.

It is certainly very strange, that the Princes who had so much Interest to
exterminate such a pernicious Nation, should so long time permit them, not only
to have a Being, but looking upon them as it were, as Masters of their Lives,
by the Fear which they had of these Assassins, they made them continual
Presents, thereby to gain their Favor to permit them to live. For never any
except the Templers, were so bold as once to offer to attack them; but they
valiantly set upon them, entered their Country, and obliged them to pay the
yearly Tribute of two thousand Crowns, to secure their Villages from being
Plundered; but in this Prosperity of their Arms, they did an Action so Base and
Wicked, as diservedly drew upon them the Hatred and the Curse of God and Men.
For during the Reign of Amauri King of Jerusalem, the Old Man of the Mountain,
who was a Man of Sense, having compared the Gospel with the Alcoran, sent to
let that King Understand, that he with all his People, were ready to embrace
the Christian Religion, provided that at the same time, Christians, but
especially to Princes, who had always reason to fear all things from these
Desperadoes; but Avarice, which had already begun to corrupt that Order,, so
far blinded them, that one of the Knights, upon whom the great Master would
never permit Justice to be done, assassinated the Ambassador, who was come to
propose a Condition so just and reasonable. This so exasperated these People,
that they became more obstinate in their Mahometanism, more Enemies to the
Christians, and more Assassins than ever they had been before.

It was for such a kind of Injustice that these two Russians murdered the
Marquis Conrade, Prince of Tire, for a ship laden with rich Merchandise which
belonged to a Subject of the Old man of the Mountain being forced by a Tempest
to put into the Port of Tire, the Marquis caused her to be seized, and put the
Master of her to death for complaining of the Injustice which was done him. The
Prince of the Assassins sending to demand Satisfaction and Restitution of the
Ship and Goods, and Reparation for the Death of his Subject the Marquis made a
laughing matter of it at the first, but upon a Second demand, he commanded one
of the Envoys, to be thrown into the Sea. This so incensed the old man, that he
sent two of his Devotes to Tire, who there counterfeited to renounce
Mahometanism and got themselves baptized the better to cover and enable them to
execute their Treason; After some time they found means to get into the Marquis
his Retinue, and ordinarily to attend him wherever he went; and hereby obtained
an Opportunity of stabbing him as he returned from Dinner from the Bishop of
Beauvais; and though they were put to the most exquisite Torments which could
be suffered, and roasted alive, yet would they never accuse any Person, or
confess who it was that set them on to commit such a horrible Murder. There
were some however who failed not to suspect King Richard, who was known to be
his declared Enemy, and the report was so strong that it was written to King
Philip the August, and he was assured that this Prince with whom he had had
such great differences, had hired the Old man of the Mountain to commit this
Assassinate upon the Marquis.

There cannot indeed be too much Precaution to preserve the Sacred Persons of
Kings upon which depends the Welfare of their Dominions; and upon this
occasion, Philip took Guards about his Person, to protect himself from a like
Treason, and such damnable Attempts. But neither History nor Historian ought so
far to take the particular part either of Princes or Nations, as to disingage
himself of that Duty which he owes to truth; and for the Interest I have in
that, I think my self obliged tosay, That though King Richard neither loved
King Philip nor the Marquis yet nevertheless he was, not at all culpable of
these horrid Crimes of which some have with so much Injustice and so little
Truth accused him, and endeavored to blacken his Memory. And indeed the Prince
of the Mountains did in a short time after wholly justisie and acquit him of
this suspicion, by the Testimony of his Authentic Letters, wherein he declared
the true cause of this Murder of the Marquis, according to the manner which I
have before recounted. And one ought with Truth to avow, that considering the
Natural Humor and Inclination of King Richard, he could not be capable of so
black a Treason; for although he was extreme Violent, Impetuous and mighty
Impatient of Injuries and Affronts, yet he had a great and generous Soul, and
made Profession openly and like a Gallant man to attack such as he believed he
ought to esteem his Enemies, and was never known to have recourse to base and
Ignominous Ways of taking his Revenge. And this great Courage not only taught
him to despise all these false Reports, but also to draw all those advantages
which an able Politician could make of such an untoward Accident, in the
baseness whereof he knew he had no share. For he managed the matter so well,
that without much difficulty he persuaded the Princess Isabella, the Widow of
Marquis Conrade, to marry Henry Count of Champagne, to whom in regard of his
Adherence to him, Christians of the Holy Land, the Promise which he made to the
Princess to make her Queen of Jerusalem by the Exclusion of Guy of Lusignan,
was the thing she most passionately desired, was the most powerful reason to
induce her to this Marriage. Nor was it difficult for him to make good his
Promise, in regard that on the one hand Count Henry was extremely beloved by
the great men of the Country, who had no manner of kindness for Lusignan; and
on the other that he promised him in Exchange for a Kingdom, which was almost
wholly lost, to give him that of Cyprus, provided he paid to the Templers a
certain Sum of Money for which he had engaged it to them. This despoiled
Prince, whose Fortune absolutely depended upon his Protector, willingly
received this Offer; so that shortly after, the Marriage was celebrated between
the Count du Champain and the Princess Isabella, who from that time took upon
her the Title of the Queen of Jerusalem, although Henry out of Modesty would
pretend to nothing higher than that of Prince. Thus all the Forces of the Realm
being united by this Accommodation, Richard put himself at the Head of them, and
began the Champaign early in the Month of June, by the Siege of Darum which he
took in four days, being one of the strongest Fortresses which Saladin had; and
after the taking of several other places of less Importance, which he put into
the Hands of his Nephew, he returned to Ascalon, where the Duke of Burgundy
joined him with the French Troops under his Command. After which to save his
Reputation, and that it might not appear to have been his Fault that Jerusalem
was not taken, he seemed resolved to besiege and take it in good Earnest, which
caused a mighty joy throughout the Army, which seemed to breath nothing but the
consummating of that glorious Enterprise. For this purpose he parted from
Ascalon, and advanced to Bethanopolis between Jaffa and Jerusasalem, to the
same place where he was posted before, when he had a former Design of besieging
the City. When he arrived there he understood that a Part of the Army of the
Sarasins, was encamped behind the neighboring Mountains, with a Design to fall
upon him, when he should be about making his Lodgements; whereupon he went and
briskly fell upon them, and that with so much Fury and so little Expectation,
that he cut the greatest part of them in pieces, and put the rest to Flight,
taking all their Baggage, and so returned laden with Booty to the Camp;
whilst this happened news was brought him, that the Caravan of Egypt guarded
with above ten thousand men with all sorts of Munitions for the Relief of
Jerusalem, was advancing thither and at no great distance; whereupon taking
five thousand Horse, he marched upon the Eve of St. John Baptist to surprise
them and charged them so Impetuously, that after having slain the greatest part
of the Convoy, with the loss of not above seventeen or eighteen Horsemen, and
dissipated the rest, he took betwixt four and five thousand Camels, and an
Infinite Number of other Beasts of Burden, charged with Gold, Silver and
precious Merchandises, not only for Necessity but delight, such as come from
the Indies by the Arabian Gulf to Egypt. And this great Booty he distributed
liberally among the Army without reserving any thing for himself which was more
then ever he had done in all the former Battles which he had gained.

And in Truth it seemed very reasonable that, after two such great Victories,
and the taking of such a rich Convoy, the taking of Jerusalem could not be a
thing to be doubted; but the Joy which possessed the whole Army which with
incredible Ardor undertook that Enterprise, was presently after changed into an
Excessive Grief, when the Resolution of returning to Ascalon was declared to
them, as the Advice of twenty Captains whom Richard had chosen to deliberate
concerning the Siege of Jerusalem, whilst he marched to attack the Caravan.
For they all concluded, that the Siege was not by any means fit to be
undertaken; alleging many weak and feeble reasons, but concealing the true
ones upon which it was grounded, which was that the King of England, had
strongly resolved to return to his own Dominions; and that all which he had
done was but to amuse the World and to make a show, as if he would besiege
Jerusalem, For he had received advice two several times, after Easter by two
Expresses from England, that his Brother John, having by force displaced and
driven out of the Realm, the Bishop of Ely his Chancellor, France, who was
ready by force to take Vexin, because it was refused to be surrendered to him,
according to the Articles of Messina. Richard who was extreme hasty, would have
immediately embarked himself, leaving to the Count de Champagne, with the
Places in Palestine, three hundred men at Arms, and two thousand English Foot,
together with the Forces of the Country for his Defense. But a certain
Ecclesiastic, a very able man, who was near his Person, and in whom he reposed
very much Confidence, persuaded him to deferr his Departure for a little time,
that so he might save his Honor, by making some Movement by which the World
might be persuaded that it was not his Fault that Jerusalem was not taken; and
upon this Account it was, that he did all that is before mentioned, and that he
would have those twenty Captains of whom he was very well assured, determine
the Affair concerning the Siege of Jerusalem, who by no means approved it; but
urged, that it was much better to continue the Fortifications of Ascalon and
Gaza, which were the two Keys of the Realm toward Egypt, and by that means to
secure themselves from the Attempts of Saladin, before they undertook the Siege
of the Capital City. So that Richard seemed only to deferr it upon the Opinion
of so many knowing men who were chosen from among the Templers and Knights of
the Hospital, the Lords of the Country, and several of those who come from
Europe; after which he declared publicly, that since it was judged
inconvenient at that time to attempt the Siege of Jerusalem, he would there
leave thee Count de Champagne his Nephew to undertake it in due time; and that
for himself he was obliged to return to defend his Dominions, against such as
laid hold of this Advantage of his Absence to Enterprise against him and to
invade them.

It is impossible to express the Mischief which this Imprudent Declaration
occasioned, which he did before he had perfected his Treaty, with Saladin which
was then a Foot; for Saladin seeing the Danger he was in to lose all, was
contented to have some and to yield the rest to the Christians, upon most
advantageous Conditions: But so soon as he perceived that he had nothing to
fear from that quarter, and that upon Richard's resolving to depart, the whole
Army would Instantly disband; he held so firm and fierce, that a Truce in such
a manner as he pleased, was all that could be gained from him; a Truce unworthy
of the Reputation and Courage of a King of England. the Army of the Crusades
being herewith most furiously enraged, and almost mad, to see themselves robbed
of the Glory of delivering the Holy Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, which they had
with so much Danger, come so far to search after, disbanded of its one accord,
the greatest part of them thinking now of nothing but returning into their own
Country, bestowing a thousand Curses upon King Richard, whom they accused more
than ever, to have assassinated the Prince of Tire, to have attempted against
the Life of Philip the August, and sold the Holy Land to Saladin, with whom he
held a Correspondence. Richard by the Grandeur of his Soul and his Natural
Courage, gave himself no manner of trouble, for what was the Effect of Rage and
Anger, and the Malicious pleasure, which men take to speak Evil of those whom
Fortune or Merit have elevated above them or what they spoak so outragiously
against his Conduct in this War; and, indeed in a short time after he made it
evident by a most glorious Action, that this last Accusation was as great a
Calumny as the two former.

For as he arrived at Acre, where the Duke of Burgundy with the French, were
also come to give order for their Return, he received advice that Saladin,
understanding that the Christian Army was broken up, had laid Siege to Jaffa;
Upon this news he rallied all the Troops he could, and dividing them into two
Bodies, he gave one to the Count de Champagne, with Orders to march by Land,
and with the other he himself went by Sea, with the choice Lords of the French
and Flemings who would follow him upon this great occasion. Those who
manifested the greatest Ardour, and whom among others he chose to be near his
Person, were Gauchier de Chastillon, who had lost his Brother in the Siege of
Acre. the Counts of Cleves, and Limbourg, the Baron of Stanford, Valeran de
Luxenburg, Guy de Montfort, Bartholomew de Mortemar, Raoul de Mauleon, William
de L' Estang, Andrew de Savigni, Henry de Nevile, Dreux de Mello, and William
de Bars. He was for some time stayed by contrary Winds, and did not arrive,
till precisely the Evening of that day, wherein those who had retired into the
Castle, after the taking of the City, had promised to surrender, if they were
not before that time relieved. The Sarasins seeing him coming, had put
themselves in Battalia, upon the Bank to hinder his Descent; and the greatest
part looking upon such an Attempt as impossible, advised the King to return:
But this undaunted Prince, perceiving that the Castle yet held out, causing his
Shallop to row close to the Shore, was the first that leapt into the Sea, and
drew the rest after him, rather by the extreme Danger to which they saw him
expose himself, than by the Force of such a brave Example; and after he had
routed the Sarasins who fled instantly amazed at his prodigious Boldness, he
stormed the Town by the same Breaches which they had made, and cutting in
pieces those who besieged the Castle; he constrained Saladin with the remainder
of his Troops, to retire in great disorder to the Mountains,

But this was not all; for three days after, seven thousand chosen men of the
most brave of all Saladin's Army, thinking to surprise him early in the Morning
in his Quarters while he was asleep, taking the Alarm he so quickly rallied
what Troops of Infantry could be gotten together on the sudden, and formed them
so well into a square Battalion, that they durst never so much as approach him;
for he had so ranged his men, that between every Pike, who kneeled with one
knee upon the Ground, two Cross-Bows were placed, one of which charged the
Cross-Bows, whilst the other let fly the Mortal Arrows among them without
ceasing; and at last seeing the Enemies disordered by the great Showers of
those dreadful forked Arrows, and that they did nothing but wheel about his
Battalion which had a Front every way, he by an excess of Courage, or rather
Temerity threw himself on Horseback into the midst of his Enemies, although he
had not with him above ten Lords, who were mounted as he was, the Chief of
which were the Count de Champagne, the Earl of Leicester, Bartholomew Mortemar,
Raoul de Mauleon, Andrew de Savigni, William de L' Estang, and Henry de Nevile.
There he did show the Prodigies of Valor with those Generous Lords, who by his
Example combated like so many enraged Lions. He relieved Robert, Earl of
Leicester, who happened to be dismounted; he cut off the Arms of those who had
seized upon the Lord Mauleon to make him Prisoner; his Sword like Lightning
flew every way, carrying Death and Terror along with it among his Enemies, and
at last seeing the General who commanded the Sarasins, who was animating his
men to the Combat, and reproached them of Cowardice to suffer such a handful to
triumph over them, he ran up to him and with a mighty Blow of his Falchion cut
off his Head and right Arm close by the Shoulder, so that he fell dead among
the Horses Feet. This dreadful Blow so terrified the Sarasins, that they durst
not come near him, but attacked him at a distance with their Arrows; so that at
last weary of their Slaughter he returned to his Camp, the Caparison of his
Horse being bristled with the Enemies Arrows of whom he left seven hundred
Extended upon the Earth without having lost any more then two of his Men.

In truth such a Noble and Heroic Action, made it most apparent that there was
no manner of Understanding between him and Saladin, against whom, if there had,
certainly he would never have fought with such apparent Hazard of his Person to
drive him out of Jaffa, after he had taken it. But all this did not hinder, but
that Saladin, who saw very well that Richard, who was fallen sick after this
Combat, was not only resolved but necessitated to return into Europe, obliged
him in Conclusion to accept of a Truce with such Conditions as he was pleased
to give, as if he had been the Conqueror. They were these. That the Christians
should demolish all the places which they had siezed upon, since the taking of
Acre, and above all Ascalon. That all the Coast from Tire to Jaffa, should be
in the Power of the Christians, that the rest should remain in the Possession
of Saladin, except Ascalon, which upon the Expiration of the Truce, should fall
to his Share who should then be most potent; Richard should be satisfied from
him for the Expenses which he had been at in the Fortifications of that Place.
That during the Truce, which was to begin at Easter, in the following Year, and
to continue for three Years, three Months, three Weeks, and three Days, the
Christians should have liberty, in small numbers, freely to enter into
Jerusalem, to make there their Devotions at the Holy Sepulcher.

Thus this great Crusade, wherein all the Forces of Germany, France and England
were employed under three of the greatest Princes of the Universe, against one
single Conqueror, ended, at last, in nothing more than the Taking of one poor
Town, which cost the Lives of an infinite number of brave Men; the least part
of which, if they had been under the Command of one single Captain, might with
ease have conquered the whole Eastern Empire. But it is never to be expected,
or hoped, but that Hatred, Envy, Ambition, Jealousy of State, and Diversity of
Interests, which never fail to happen among plurality of Commanders, should
ever suffer these kind of Unions to continue firm or long: And it would be a
kind of Prodigy, if they should not, according to their nature, produce those
Divisions and Animosities, which alone, without the Assistance of other
Mischiefs, are capable of ruining the greatest Enterprises, and the bravest
Armies: Whereas one single Chief, with far less number, shall certainly triumph
over the greatest Multitude, leagued against him, provided he has but Patience
to permit Discords to enter into the Camp of the Confederates, and will but
give them leave to overthrow themselves.

The Truce being signed, Richard, who found himself still worse in the
unwholsom Air of Jaffa, caused himself to be removed to Caiphas; where Saladin,
who had naturally a generous Soul, sent to visit him, with great Marks of
Affection, Esteem and Respect: He also very obligingly received the Bishop of
Salisbury at Jerusalem, who, with the rest of the Pilgrims, went thither, to
offer the Vows of the King, who still continued much indisposed in his Health.
And after he had most courteously entertained that Prelate, he obliged him to
demand what Favor lay in his Power; and promised, he would grant it. Whereupon
the Bishop requested, that, not only in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, but
those of Nazareth and Bethlehem, there might be permitted to remain two Latin
Priests, and two Deacons, with freedom publicly to celebrate Divine Service in
those places: to which Saladin without any difficulty, according to his Word,
accorded. After this, the King, finding his Health in some measure
re-established, repaired to Acre, where the Duke of Burgundy was dead of the
Distemper, some eight Days before his Arrival: There he caused his Fleet to be
rigged, upon which he embarked the two Queens, with the greatest part of his
Forces; who, not long after, happily arrived in England: And about the
beginning of October, he also departed, with the Displeasure of having on one
side concluded a Truce, most inglorious and disadvantageous to the Christians;
and on the other, with the Honor and Pleasure, at his parting, to have
bestowed two Kingdoms, that of Jerusalem, which was a very piteous one, but yet
a Kingdom, upon the Count de Champagne, his Nephew; and that of Cyprus, which
he had conquered, upon Guy de Lusignan, in which House it continued two hundred
and eighty Years. Thus it was that King Richard left the Holy Land, with a
Promise to these two Princes, that, upon the Expiration of the Truce, he would
return with more powerful Forces; and to persuade the World that this
Resolution of his was in serious Earnest, he continued still to wear the
Pilgrim's Cross upon his Habit.

As for the rest, his natural Impatience and Temerity made him commit two
mighty Faults, which rendered his Return very unfortunate. For first, Whereas he
ought to have embarked himself like a great King, upon a gallant Fleet, that so
he might return with Security, and the same Magnificence with which he came, he
satisfied himself with one great Ship, in which he might easily, by Sea, have
fallen either into the hands of Enemies or Pirates; and after that, when he was
at Corsu, perceiving that his Vessel was a Slug, and made no Way, he threw
himself, for the more Expedition, into a Galliot, and was, by Tempest, driven
into the Gulf of Venice, where he was shipwrack'd between that place and the
City Aquilea; and having run a thousand Dangers in crossing through Germany in
Disguise, Germans, who pursued him, and laid all the Passages for him, he was,
at last discovered near Vienna, by the Subjects of the Duke of Austria, his
mortal Enemy, who made him Prisoner, and treated him with sufficient
Inhumanity, in Revenge of the old Quarrel before Acre; and after some time he
delivered him into the hands of the Emperor Henry VI. This Prince, to cover his
abominable Avarice, which made him so unjustly detain this King, only to draw a
great Ransom from him, made his public Pretense, that all this was to do
Reason for what Richard had done to his Prejudice in Sicily, and for the
Assassinate of the Marquis of Montferrat, and those other Crimes of which he
had been accused in Palestine. But Richard, who was naturally cloquent, in a
full Diet before the Princes of the Empire at Spire, made his Innocence so
evidently appear, that the whole Assembly was moved for him, even to Tears, and
entreated the Emperor that, for the future, he might be treated like a King;
which the Emperor, more out of Shame than Honor, consented to.

Pope Celestin also solicited by the Letters of Queen Eleonor, which were all
in the Style of Peter de Blois, who writ them; and by the Prayers and
Entreaties of Gautier Archbishop of Roan, and the Bishops of Normandy; who,
upon this occasion, manifested great Ardor and Affection for the Service of
King Richard, did all that he possibly could, to obtain his Liberty. He
proceeded so far as to denounce the Anathema against the Duke of Austria, for
daring to make a Prisoner of a Pilgrim, expressly contrary to an Article of the
Crusade, which denounces Excommunication against such as should attempt any
thing either against the Persons or Estates of such as had taken upon them the
Cross. He also menaced the Emperor to interdict all his Dominions, if he did
not presently release this prince, who came to employ his Blood and his Fortune
against the Infidels, and over whom he could pretend no sort of Right. But this
had very little Effect upon the Germans, who, for a long time, had been
accustomed to be in no pain for the Thunders of Rome: For, notwithstanding all
these Menaces, Richard could not be set at Liberty, till, after above a Years
Imprisonment, he paid a hundred thousand Marks in Silver before his
Releasment, and left fifty Hostages, among which was the Archbishop of Roan,
for the Payment of fifty thousand Marks more; of which, the Duke of Austria was
to have twenty thousand, and the third part of the hundred thousand already
received by the Emperor. So that, to raise this Sum, all England was taxed; and
even the Chalices and consecrated Vessels were forced to be melted down and
coined. So far was this Prince, who was falsely accused to have sold Palestine
to Saladin, from making any Advantage of the Crusade, that it is most certain,
that, in this Expedition he spent an immense Treasure, to the great
Impoverishment of himself, and his whole Realm.

But as he had not made this Treaty, but whilst he was under a Force and
Violence, therefore, so soon as he was returned into England, he sent his
Ambassadors to the Pope, to demand Justice from him. He desired of him, that
since, by virtue of the Protection of the Holy See, it was promised to all the
Crusade, that their Persons and Estates should be free from Injuries, during
the whole time of their Pilgrimage, that he would, by all sorts of Canonical
Ways, compel the Emperor and the Duke of Austria to set at liberty his
Hostages, to restore the Money which they had so unjustly exacted from him, and
to make him Satisfaction for the cruel Injury which they had done him, contrary
to all the Laws, both Humane and Divine. Celestin, who saw that the Treaty of
the Crusade, which was universally received and confirmed, without
Contradiction, was manifestly infringed in this great Article, could not refuse
to do him Justice. He therefore, according to the Canons, caused these two
Princes to be three several times admonished to make Satisfaction in these
Particulars; and seeing that they persisted obstinately to deride his
Threatenings, he did anew denounce the Anathema of the Church, first against
Leopold, and then against the Emperor, with all the usual Solemnities. The Duke
hereupon became more obstinate, and was so far transported, as to threaten the
Hostages which he had with Death. But it was not long before all the World
believed, that those terrible Scourges with which the Duke was chastised, and
that deplorable Accident which befell him,

And, in truth, besides that many of his Cities were destroyed, either by Fire
from Heaven, or by the Waters of the Danubius, which drowned the greatest part
of his Country, in which Plague and Famine made a horrible Ravage, one Day,
when he had made a magnificent Entertainment at Gretz, to celebrate his
Birthday, his Horse falling upon him, broke his Leg; after which, a Fire in
such furious manner seized upon the Part, that, unable to endure the violence
of the pain of that terrible Inflammation, he caused it to be cut off; but the
Inflammation, of whose Nature the Physicians were wholly ignorant, mounted from
his Leg, to his Thigh; and from his Thigh, expanding its Flame through his
whole Body, he then acknowledged that it was the Hand of God which was upon
him, confessed his Fault, delivered the Hostages of King Richard, became a
Penitent, received Absolution from the Bishops, and died in the Peace of the
Church, after he had, by his last Will and Testament, ordered Restitution to be
made to Richard, King of England, of all the Money which he had received from
him. But it is commonly to be observed, that these kind of Restitutions, with
which dying Persons charge their Executors, are rarely discharged by the
Living: And Pope Innocent III. who succeeded Celestin, had not a little trouble
with the Successors of Leopold, when he endeavored to oblige them to the
Performance of that part of his Will, the difficulty of Restitution persuading
them against the Justice of it. But as to any thing further, it is to be
observed, that neither this Leopold, nor his Successors, of whom I discourse,
were at all related to those Princes who, at present, possess the Title of
Austria; that Family, which, about a hundred Years after, entered into the House
of Hapsbourg, being descended from the House of Alsatia, from which, that
August Family, which now bears the name of the House of Austria, derives its
Original.

In this time the Affairs of the Christians of the East remained in great
Tranquillity in reference to the Sarasins, who willingly maintained a Truce
which was so extremely advantageous to them, and which gave them reason to
hope, that in a small time they should become Masters of all the Remainder of
Syria: But they happened to be something embroiled, by a kind of Civil War,
which was like to break out by the Treachery of Bohemond, the third of that
Name, Prince of Antioch. For, being a Man of great Ambition, little Prudence,
and less Power to support it, he had recourse to unworthy Artifices and Cheats,
which he made use of to oppress the Armenian Princes, his Neighbors, whose
Power and Greatness, which increased every day, gave him a troublesome
Jealousy. He had, by these Cowardly ways, made Rupin of the Mountain his
Prisoner, upon pretext of a Conference, and thought to have done the same to
Livon, who did not only succeed in the Power of his Brother Rupin, but was also
more successful, and augmented that Power, by the taking of diverse places from
Bohemond. This Prince, after he had made an Accommodation with him, thought to
have surprised him also in the same manner; and having sent to him, to desire
an Interview in a certain place, he resolved there to seize upon him, and make
him his Prisoner. But Livon, who followed the Maxim of those who hold, That one
ought never to trust a Man who has once violated his Faith, came to the place
appointed strongly guarded, with a great number of brave Men, whom he placed in
Ambuscade, in a place at a convenient distance from the place of Meeting; and
then advancing, only accompanied with two Persons, according as it was
concluded between them, perceiving by the Company which Bohemond had with him,
the Treachery which was intended, he gave the Signal to his People, who
immediately came pouring in upon Bohemond, and surprised him, putting him into
the hands of Prince Livon, who carried him Prisoner into his Dominions. Count
Henry, who saw well that this Quarrel must necessarily divide all the
Christians of the East, went himself into Armenia; where he was, by Livon,
received with all the Respect imaginable, but with a strong Resolution,
nevertheless, to draw all the Advantage he could possibly from his good
Fortune, as indeed he did: For the Count so well managed the Spirit of
Bohemond, Raymond, his Son, should marry the Princess Alice, the Daughter of
Rupin, and Neice to Livon: That Livon should hold all the Places which he had
conquered in the Principality of Antioch, and that, for the future, that
Principality should do Homage to Armenia. After which, Livon, by the Consent of
Count Henry, took upon him the Title of King of Armenia; which was afterward
confirmed to him by the Pope and the Emperor.

It is most certain that the Sarasins might have drawn extraordinary Advantages
from these Divisions which began to arise among the Christians; but the Divine
Providence averted that Misfortune, by the Revolution which happened in the
Empire of the Infidels, by the Decease of Saladin, who, amidst these Actions,
died at Damascus, after he had tamed all the Rebels on this side Euphrates. He
was certainly a Prince, notwithstanding all the Sarasin he had about him, who
was possessed of Virtues and Qualities, which might well be compared with those
of the most famous Conquerors of Antiquity; and who, after having performed a
thousand noble Actions in his Life, did one at his Death which ought to be
received by Posterity, as a most admirable Lecture of the Vanity of all Earthly
Pomp and Glory: For, some Moments before his Death, calling for him who used to
carry his Banner before him in all his Battles, he commanded him to tie to the
Top of a Lance a Linen Shroud, in which he was to be wrapped at his Interment;
and displaying it, as being the Standard of Death, which triumphed over so
great a Prince, to make this Proclamation; This is all which the great Saladin,
Vanquisher and Master of the Empire of the East, must carry with him, out of
the World, of all the Treasures and the Glory which he has acquired by so many
mighty Conquests. A rare Spectacle, and most worthy to be eternally regarded by
the greatest Kings, who, from hence, may see and know, that, though their Birth
and Fortune have elevated them above the Level of Mankind; yet Death, which
will one day equal them with the meanest of their Subjects, will strip them of
all the Pomp and Grandeur of this World; and that nothing but the Riches of the
Soul, and the Glories of their Virtue, will distinguish them from others in the
Life to come.

As to the rest; This great Prince, who, by the Obligations of his Birth, and
the Policy of State, upon which his Interest and his Fortune depended, had,
during his Life, made public Profession of Mahometanism, at his Death seemed
not so very well satisfied of the Truth of that Sect; for, after he had
disposed of his Dominions in favor of his Children, he divided all his
Personal Estate into three Parts, which he ordered to be equally distributed
among the poor Sarasins, Jews and Christians, which should be found in all his
Dominions. And this he did with an Imagination, that, at his Death, he having
these three Strings to his Bow, though two should fail, he should be sure of
the third; and that, though he lost two Thirds of his Alms upon two false
Religions, yet the other falling upon the true, he should undoubtedly find
Advantage by it, for the good of his Soul. Poor, well meaning Prince! He did
not know that there is a vast difference between Temporal and Eternal Goods:
And that though those are submitted to the Empire of Fortune, which gives or
takes them, according as she pleases to turn her sporting Wheel; yet in these
it is far otherwise, and that Eternal Goods are never exposed to Hazard and
Adventure but they are certainly lost.

The Death of Saladin presently made a Change in the Face of Affairs throughout
all Asia: For, having divided his Dominions among his twelve Sons, without
leaving any thing to his Brother Saphadin, who had most faithfully served him
in all his Wars. This Prince, valiant and ambitious, resolved to revenge
himself upon the first Opportunity; nor was it long before it was offered, and
by him laid hold of: For his Nephew, to whose Share, in the Distribution, Egypt
fell, being slain by a Fall from his Horse, as he was hunting, Saphadin, with
Ease, made himself Master of that fair Dominion; and presently raising a
powerful Army, all the Soldiers of Saladin, who had served under him, and
esteemed him, infinitely running in to him, he attempted the Ruin of his other
Nephews; and in a short time, either by Force of Arms, or by Treachery of their
Subjects, he overthrew them all, Alepo, to whom his Subjects always preserved a
most inviolable Fidelity. Thus, whilst the Infidels armed one against another,
and thought of nothing but how to destroy themselves, it was believed in
Europe, that a fair Occasion was offered for the Recovery of the Realm of
Jerusalem, now almost entirely lost; which gave occasion to a new Crusade,
which was also followed by three others, as in the ensuing History may be seen.

The End of the Second Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
PART III.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS of the First Book.
The little Disposition which was found in Europe to this fourth Crusade. The
Pope resolves, at last, to address himself to the Emperor, Henry VI. The Diet
of Worms, where the Princes of Germany take up the Cross. An Heroic Action of
Margarite, the Sister of Philip the August, Queen of Hungary, who takes upon
her the Cross. The Artifice of the Emperor, who raises three Armies, and makes
use of one of them to assure himself of the Kingdom of Naples; where he
extinguishes the whole Race of the Norman Princes. The Arrival of the Armies,
by Sea and Land, at Ptolemais. The Truce broken by the Christians. The
deplorable Death of Henry Count de Champagne, and King of Jerusalem. Jassa
taken by Saphadin. The Battle of Sidon, gained against Saphadin, by the Princes
of the Crusade. The greatest part of the Cities of Palestine taken by the
Christians. Emri, Brother of Guy de Lusignan, King of Cyprus, made King of
Jerusalem. The Seige of Thoron unhappily raised by the horrible Treason of the
Bishop of Wertzbourg, and his Punishment. Division among the Christians. The
Combat of Jaffa. The Death of the Emperor Henry VI. The Description of that
Prince. A Schism in the Empire occasions the sudden Return of the Princes of
the Crusade, who abandon the Holy Land to the Insidels. The Death of Pope
Celestin III. Innocent III. succeeds him. The Elegy and Portraict of that Pope.
He endeavors to set up a new and general Crusade. Fouques de Nevilli preaches
it in France. The Elegy and Character of that holy Man. The Crusade is preached
in England. King Richard engages many of his Subjects in it. The Death of that
Prince, and his Penitence. The Counts of Champagne, Blois and Flanders take
upon them the Cross. Their Treaty with the Venetians, by the Undertaking of
Henry Dandolo, Doge of Venice. The Description and Elegy of that Prince. The
Death of the Count of Champagne. Boniface, Marquis of Montferrat, made Chief of
the Crusade, in his place. The Death of Fouques de Nevilli. A new Treaty
between the Princes of the Crusade, and the Venetians, for the Seige of Zara. A
great Division upon that Subject. Henry Dandolo takes upon him the Cross. The
Siege and Taking of Zara. The History of Isaac, and the two Alexises, Emperors
of Constantinople. The young Alexis desires the Assistance of the Princes of
the Crusade, against his Uncle Alexis Commenius, who had usurped the Imperial
Throne. The Speech of his Ambassadors. The Treaty of the French and Venetians
with this Prince, for his Re-establishment. A new Division upon this Subject. A
new Accord among the Confederate in the Isle of Corfu. The Description of their
Fleet, and their Arrival before Constantinople.

Christian Princes of the East to hope for any Assistance from the Princes of
Europe, where there was now not the least favorable Inclination toward the
Holy War. The Kings of England and France, upon whose Protection they had
always chiefly depended, were so far from uniting, as they did before, Naples
and Sicily, in Right of his Wife Constantia, the Empress: In pursuit of which,
after the death of Tancred, he extinguished the whole Race of those brave
Normans, who had so generously conquered, and so gloriously possessed those
Realms for above one Age. Pope Celestin III. wasted with Age and Fatigues,
being now advanced to ninety Years, was in no Condition to undertake so
difficult a Task as the Forming of a new Crusade: And besides, he was extremely
embroiled with the Emperor, whom he had excommunicated for the Violence which
he had used to the King of England; so that he had little hope to engage him in
the Enterprise. Nevertheless, after he was assured of the death of Saladin, and
the great Revolutions which that had made in his Empire; which he understood by
Letters from Henry Dandolo, Doge of Venice; he applied himself, with the same
Zeal which his Predecessors had done, to form a Holy League among the Christian
Princes, to make advantage of this fair Opportunity for the re-gaining of
Jerusalem.

For this purpose he sent his Legates throughout all Europe: He did all that
lay in his power to procure Peace between the two Kings of France and England;
and conjured them, at least, to send some Assistance to Palestine, if the
posture of their Affairs was such, as would not permit them to go thither in
Person, to deliver the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ. He writ very pressing Letters
to Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, England, and to his Suffragan Bishops, to
oblige them to preach the Crusade throughout England. And he was determined
also to constrain, by the Censures of the Church, all such, as, having not
accomplished their Vow, had quitted the Crusade, to take it upon them again;
and, with all convenient Expedition, to put themselves into a Condition to
undertake the Voyage to the Holy Land: Or however, if their imperfect Health
would not allow of their undertaking it in Person, to send a Man in their
place, who might be able to serve in that War. But, after all the Care and
Pains of this devout Pope, he found very slender Effects of them in the two
Realms: For Philip, who, after having discharged his Vow, no longer carried the
Cross, was not at all inclined to reassume it, nor to join himself again with
a Prince, of whom he had so many and great Subjects to complain; and with whom
it was almost impossible that he should have any firm or durable Peace; so much
did their Interests, as well as their Humors, contradict each other. However,
he permitted the two Cardinal Legates, whom the Pope had sent to him, to cause
the Crusade to be preached in France; where many took it upon themselves, fully
resolved to undertake that Voyage with the first Opportunity that should fairly
offer it self.

King Richard still carried the Cross upon his Habits, as a Token that he
designed, upon the Expiration of the Truce, to return to the Holy Land. But the
Troubles which he daily created to himself, as by degrees they lessened his
Inclinations, so also, at length, they took from him the power of putting that
Design in Execution: So that he was forced to make the best of it, by
persuading the Great Men of his Realm to undertake the Expedition, for the
Health of their Souls, and his; and since, he said, he was not in a Condition
to satisfy the Desire and Intention which he had, once more to combat against
the Infidels in Person, he hoped he should, in some sort, accomplish those
Intentions, by the brave Actions which those, who should supply his place,
would perform in that War. But for all that, this turned to no great Account;
whether it were that the Lords were a little shocked with the thoughts of a
Voyage so long, dangerous and toilsom, or that they easily discovered the
little Sincerity in these Discourses of the King, who, they knew, had much
rather that they should stay at home, than abandon him in the Wars which he
then had with France.

The Pope therefore, perceiving that he was to expect little Aid, either from
France or England, in such an unlucky Conjuncture, turned all his Thoughts
toward the Emperor, in hopes that that Prince would not be displeased with so
fair an Occasion of putting himself into good Terms with the Holy See. And in
truth, this way, which seemed next to impossible, after such a notorious Breach
as had been betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, had an unexpected and undifficult
Success. For Henry resolved absolutely, upon this Occasion, to give the Pope
all manner of Satisfaction; whether it were that he was really touched with a
true Remorse for his past Faults, and that hereby he thought to oblige Celestin
to restore him to the Peace of the Church; or that he was glad to have so fair
an Opportunity to return into Italy with a powerful Army, where the Empress her
self, highly dissatisfied with his Conduct toward the Norman Princes, had
raised a potent Interest against him: It is certain that he received the
Cardinal Gregory in an extraordinary manner at Strasbourg, where, at his Return
from Italy, he had caused an Assembly of the States and Princes of the Empire.
He most favorably heard the Speech which the Legate made to him at the Diet,
when he presented to him the Letters of Celestin, in which the Pope, without
taking the least notice of their former Differences, or the Anathema which he
had denounced against him, exhorted him, as if there had never been any
Unkindness, or Breach between them, to take upon him the Cross, and to unite
all the Forces of the Empire, to gain the Glory of establishing that of Jesus
Christ in Palestine. The Emperor hereupon, at least in outward Appearance,
embraced that glorious Design with all his Heart, and protested publicly, that
he was ready to do whatsoever the Pope should desire, in reference to this holy
Enterprise; and that he was resolved to employ his Estate, his Forces, and his
Life, to put it in Execution; and, following the Example of his Father, to
march himself at the Head of the Christian Army, Infidels.

For this purpose he called a general Diet at Worms, where almost all the
Princes, Ecclesiastic and Secular, were assembled, about the latter end of
November. There he solemnly declared, in the Cathedral Church, his Resolution
to undertake the Holy War, in a Discourse which moved the whole Assembly. After
which, eight of the most famous and eloquent Bishops, every one in his Turn,
did, for eight days, make elaborate Speeches upon this Subject; and discoursed
it with so much Force and Zeal, that the whole Assembly took upon them the
Cross; some out of a true Sentiment of Piety, and a sudden Transport of
Devotion; others by the Obligation of Shame, not to follow the Example of so
many Great Men, after the Throng of whom, they were necessitated, for their
Honor, to permit themselves to swim along that generous Stream. Thus it
sometimes happens, that Men do well, even contrary to their own Inclinations,
when, by a kind of Necessity, they find themselves forced by the Company and
Example of such as out of good Inclinations, and Greatness of Soul, follow the
Paths of Piety and Virtue. The most remarkable of those, who, in this Assembly,
took upon them the Cross, were Henry Duke of Saxony, Otho Marquis of
Brandenbourg, Henry Count Palatin of the Rhine, Harman Lantgrave of Thuringia,
Henry Duke of Brabant, Albert Count of Hapsbourg, Adolphus Count of
Scawenbourg, Henry Count de Pappenheim, Mareshal of the Empire; the Duke of
Bavaria, Frederick, the Son of Leopold, Duke of Austria; Conrade Marquis of
Moravia, Valeran, Brother to the Duke of Limbourg; and the Bishops of
Wirtzbourg, Breme, Verden, Halberstad, Passau and Ratisbonne.

But that which was the most extraordinary, and which deserves the Admiration
of all Ages, was, that Bela King of Hungary being dead not long before this
Diet, Queen Margaret, a Daughter of France, his Widow, the Sister of Philip the
August, and who had some time worn the Crown of England, as Wife to the young
Henry, finding her self a second time in a State of Freedom, was resolved to
employ that Liberty, together with her Life and Fortunes, in the Service of
Jesus Christ, in this fourth Crusade. For this purpose she took upon her the
Cross, and solemnly engaged her self in this Holy War, with the Resolution of a
true Heroine; and having joined her Troops with the Army of the Princes of the
Crusade, she under went the Voyage with them, with as great Zeal and Ardour as
any of them, and with far more Constancy, and firmness of Resolution. For,
being ashamed of the precipitate Return of the others, who unworthily abandoned
the Interests of Jesus Christ in the East, in the very Heat of the War, she
only remained unmovable in her first Resolution, and passed all the Remainder
of her Days at Ptolemais, that so she might be always ready, upon all Occasions
which offered, either to attack the Infidels, or defend the Christians. An
Example which confirms what has been frequently seen in other Princesses, that
Heroic Virtue does not at all depend upon the Quality of the Sex; but that the
weakness of Temper and Body may be supplied by the greatness of the Soul, and
the Vigor of the Spirit.

During this time, the Letters of the Pope, with those of the Emperor, which
were sent all over Germany, produced such Effects upon the Minds of Men,
already filled and prepossessed with the haughty Idea's which they had
conceived of a Crusade, wherein the Empire only should be concerned; so that
every City, willing to signalize themselves upon this Occasion, furnished out a
considerable number of Crusades. Insomuch that the Emperor found wherewithal,
abundantly to satisfy, not only the great Desire which he seemed to have to
undertake the Holy War, but also that which in reallity he had, which was,
under this pretext, to lead a potent Army into Italy, to exterminate the
Remainder of the Normans, who had caused a Revolt in the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily. And that he might play his Game with greater Success, by covering his
principal Intendment under this specious Appearance of a mighty Zeal, he
presented himself to take the Cross from the hand of the Legate; protesting
that for the Accomplishment of his Promise, and to animate others by his
Example, he was resolved to march at the Head of his Army, and, in Person, to
combat against the Infidels. But whether it were that they discovered his
Artifice, and saw that it would be an acceptable Service to him, Crusade, it
was not at all expedient that he should engage himself, in Person, to undertake
this Voyage, it is certain that all the Princes humbly entreated him to
continue in the Empire; remonstrating to him, that thereby he would render
greater Service to God, by constantly taking care, and providing the
Necessaries for Subsistence and Recruits for the Armies which he should send
into the East. So that, after some small Struggling, and faint Oppositions, he
submitted to the Request of the Assembly; and, in conclusion, resolved to set
on foot three great Armies, that so he might make profitable use of that
infinite multitude of Soldiers who had taken upon them the Cross, throughout
all the Provinces of Germany.

The first of these Armies, under the Conduct of Conrade Archbishop of Mayence,
accompanied by the Dukes of Saxony and Brabant, and the greatest part of the
Princes of the Crusade, took its Way, by Land, to Constantinople; where, being
embarked upon the Fleet of the Greek Emperor, whose Daughter Irene, Philip Duke
of Suabia, Brother to the Emperor Henry, had married, they arrived happily at
Antioch; from whence they marched to Tire, and a few days after to Ptolemais.
The second Army passed by Sea, and after having coasted along the Low
Countries, England, France and Spain, in their Passage, they took the City of
Sylves, which the Sarasins had regained from the Portuguese; and fearing lest
the Infidels should again seize upon that important place, which had been so
ill defended by Dom Sancho, the Crusades demolished it from the very
Foundation. After which, they prosperously held on their Course, and came to an
Anchor in the Port of Acre, where they joined the first Army. And for the third
Army, which was the strongest, and composed of the best Troops, drawn
particularly out of the Dutchies of Suabia, Bavaria and Franconia, consisting
in sixty thousand Combatants, the Emperor, in Person, conducted it into Italy;
where, in Execution of the Design which he had so artfully concealed under the
specious pretext of the Holy War, he surprised the Norman Princes and Lords who
were confederated against him; and without any trouble, made himself Master of
all the places which they yet held against him in the Realms of Naples and
Sicily; Constantia, unable to endure this horrible Butchery which was made of
those of her Nation, whom this cruel, fierce and vindicative Prince resolved
utterly to exterminate, she conspired against him, both to take away his Life
and Empire. And that her wicked Enterprise might prove successful, she covered
it and her Resentment, for the present, with a deep Dissimulation. Henry, who
believed that he had now no more Enemies who were in a Condition to enterprise
any thing against him, caused the greatest part of his Army to be embarked upon
the Fleet which Conrade, Bishop of Wirtzbourg, his Chancellor and Lieutenant
General in Italy, had rigged the Year before, who conducted them with a
prosperous Voyage, in a few days, to the Port of Acre, where they arrived very
opportunely to reinforce the German Troops, who, for some time before, had had
all the Forces of the Insidels upon their hands.

For Valeran de Limbourg, who, with his Brigade, having marched with the first,
was arrived in Palestine before the rest, having broken the Truce which was
made with the Sarasins, they, who before thought of nothing but how to ruin one
another, began immediately to reunite, under Saphadin, against the common
Enemy, as they esteemed the Christians. This Prince, who was a great Soldier,
having presently raised a potent Army of his own Troops, and those of his
Nephews, who, upon this Occasion, owned him as their General, made a great
Slaughter of all the Christians who fell into his Power, thereby to revenge
himself of Valeran, who, by an Action very little Christian, and of most
dangerous Consequence, had in like manner treated the Sarasins, whom he
surprised upon his breaking the Truce. After which, by a wonderful Diligence,
preventing the Army of the Crusades, he laid Siege, before their Arrival, to
Jaffa, into which the King of England had put a strong Garrison before he
quitted Palestine.

Henry Count de Champagne, who had all the Authority of a Sovereign, after his
Marriage with Queen Isabella, saw very well of what Importance it was to save
that Place, without which it was almost impossible to undertake the Siege of
Jerusalem; and therefore he resolved to march to relieve it with all the
Expedition possible, and with all the Forces of his Realm, joined to the Troops
of Valeran, and those, which in such have he could raise at Acre. But by a most
sad Misfortune, as he looked out of a Window of the Palace to see the Troops
march bye, and thrust himself out of the Casement, to give Orders to some of
the Officers, the Frame of the Window, upon which he leaned, brake, and with
its Fall drew him along, so falling headlong upon the Pavement, he broke his
Neck, the accident being so sudden, Violent and Surprising, that neither those
about him above, or those beneath, could once think to lay hold on him, or
endeavor to break his Fall; this deplorable Accident gave a stop to the
intended Succors, so that they could not make that have in their March which
the Occasion required. And as it usually happens, that one Misfortune follows
another, the Garrison of the besieged City making an unfortunate Sally,
Saphadin counterfeiting a Flight, drew them so far, that with his Horse he cut
off their Retreat, and then turning head upon them, he attacked them so
furiously on all sides, that they were all cut in Pieces. After which, forcing
the City without much Resistance, he put all the Christians in it to the Sword,
and to deliver himself at once from the Fears of this dangerous Post, which
might so much incommode Jerusalem, he caused the City to be entirely ruined
from the very Foundations.

Whilst these Matters were transacting, the Dukes of Saxony and Brabant, with
the other Princes of the Crusade, being arrived at Ptolemais, a Council of War
was held, where it was determined to march immediately against Saphadin, in
regard that his Army being at present Master of the Field after his Victory,
and that he had equipped a powerful Navy in Egypt, consequently if they did not
endeavor presently to remove him by giving him Battle, he must of necessity
hinder all manner of Passage of Provisions both by Sea and Land, whereby they
should be reduced to great Extremities at Acre. They were not long searching
for an Opportunity, for Saphadin, understanding that the Christians, to draw to
him to a Combat, advanced toward the City of Baruth, which he was obliged to
relieve, being extreme brave, and his Army since the taking of Jaffa, very much
augmented, he took the same Resolution of fighting them, and to meet them half
way, he descended from the Mountains of Antilchanon to the Plain by the Sea,
there to oppose them in their Passage. So that the two Armies happening to
Rencounter between Tire and Sidon, the Battle was fought in the plain Field,
with an incredible Courage on the one side and the other, and with far more
Obstinacy on the part of the Sarasins, than had ever been known in any of the
preceding Wars.

For as they were grown very Martial, having for so long time been accustomed
to Wars without any Interruption, either against the Christians, or against
those of their own Nation since the Death of Saladin, and their civil Broils;
so they were mightily animated by the happy Success which they had met with in
the Siege of Jaffa; and Saphadin who commanded them, forgot nothing upon this
Occasion, that could be expected from a complete General, and one of the
gallantest Men in the World: So that their Efforts were wholly extraordinary;
whilst they endeavored to follow the Example of so great a Captain, and to
preserve the Glory and Advantage which they had already gained. On the other
side, the Germans, who were no less Brave, and much better armed than these
Barbarians, and who had at the Head of them so many great Princes, who animated
them not only with their Voice and Gesture, but by the gallant Actions which
they saw them perform, combated so generously, and so briskly pursued their
Point, continually pressing upon the Enemy, without so much as recoiling a
single Step, or making the least Halt, as determining either to overcome or
perish, that in Conclusion the Sarasins, who were never before known for so
long time to maintain a standing Fight against the Christians of Europe, were
put into Disorder, and in a few Moments after, to an entire Rout and downright
Flight, leaving all the Field covered with the Bodies of the Slain, among whom
were two Sons of Saladin, Saphadin himself being also supposed to be slain; nor
was it without great Difficulty that he escaped, being grievously wounded,
after he had that day done all that became a great Captain and a gallant
Soldier.

This glorious Victory was followed by the Reduction of the greatest part of
the Cities which the Sarasins had seized; Sidon, Laodicea in Syria, Giblet, and
several other Places of lesser Importance, either surrendered themselves or were
taken without much Difficulty. So that they had Time and Covenience to repair
the Ruins of Jaffa, Palestine. At the same time one of the Sons of Saladin,
who was Master of Jerusalem, sent to the Princes to offer his Alliance, making
a show as if he intended to renounce his Sect, and become a Christian; but
whether with an intention only, by this Artifice to amuse them, and to divert
the furious Tempest of their Arms, which he feared was ready to be poured upon
his Head; or that in reallity his Intention was to join with the Christians, to
revenge himself of his Uncle Saphadin, who before had made War upon him, and
endeavored his Ruin, is uncertain: There also happened at the same time
another unexpected piece of good Fortune to the Christians; for as in
prosecution of their first Intention, they came within view of Baruth, which
they designed to Besiege, they saw appear the Christian Fleet, commanded by the
Archbishop of Mayence, which returned from the Isle of Cyprus, whither they had
sailed to Crown, and bring along to Palestine, Emeri, who had succeeded to Guy
de Lusignan his Brother, who was lately deceased without any Children. Upon the
sight of these two mighty Armies, which at the same time appeared before the
City, the Sarasins, although they had there a very strong Garrison, were so
dismayed, that they suffered the Castle to be taken by the Christian Captives,
who in that Consternation found means to knock off their Irons; and in
Conclusion, the Infidels dispairing to be able to Defend the Place, made have
to save themselves by abandoning the Town to the Conquerors, who there found an
inestimable Booty. There the Princes, to give a Chieftain to the Realm of
Jerusalem, and a Successor to Count Henry, without much Trouble persuaded Queen
Isabella to Marry Emri de Lusignan, who was her fourth Husband, and who joined
the Crown of Cyprus to that of Jerusalem.

Hitherto all things succeeded most admirably to the Army of the Princes of the
Crusade; and if after this happy beginning they had marched straight to
Jerusalem, it is almost certain, that in the Condition wherein the City then
was, without all manner of Hopes of being relieved, and under a Prince who
already seemed to Capitulate, it must either have been surrendered upon
Composition, or carried by Force. But there is no time wherein it is not easy
to observe, that those who have known very well how to Vanquish their Enemies,
have not yet been so Fortunate as to know how to make the best Use of their
Victories; and that they have lost all the Fruit of their gallant Actions, for
want of taking Time and their Enemies by the Head, after such considerable
Defeats: For the Crusades, whereas they ought immediately to have lead the
conquering Army to Jerusalem, and to take all the Advantage they could of the
Disorder of the Sarasins, before they could be able to recover the
Consternation of the Blow, and to re-settle their Affairs; they very
unadvisedly undertook the Siege of Thoron, which was the most impregnable of
all the Places which the Sarasins yet held in Palestine, and the most able to
stop the Course of a Victorious Army to no purpose. This place was rather a
great Castle than a Town, which Hugh de St. Omer, Lord of Tiberias, had
beforetime caused to be built in the Reign of Baldwin the I. about seven or
eight Leagues from Tire toward the East, to oppose the Excursions of the
Sarasins, who at that time were Masters of that great City. It was situate upon
the top of a high Mountain, which was environed round with broaken Rocks, which
rendered it wholly inaccessible to an Army; for there was no coming to it, but
by one way, which was very Narrow, and on each hand whereof lay most dreadful
Precipices, so that a few Defendants might easily maintain it against all the
Forces of the Earth, only by rolling down great Stones in this narrow Way,
where not above two Men could march abreast: The Lords of Thoron had also taken
great Care;

The Army coming to incamp before it in the beginning of the Winter, it was
quickly perceivable that the way of Force would be to no purpose against a
place of that Nature; for there were no kind of Engines which could be elevated
proportionably to the height of the Walls and Towers, to batter them; the
Darts, Arrows, and Stones which were thrown from below upwards, lost all their
Force of doing any Execution, before they could come at the Besieged, who
laughed at the vain Efforts which were used against them; whereas at the same
time their Engines discharging from above, showred down a furious Tempest of
Darts, Stones, and Arrows, upon the Camp, which had much to do to cover it self
from the dreadful Storm. They endeavored however, by mining, to find a Way
under the Earth, after the Example of the Dictator Camillus, who by that means
entered the City of Veiae, situate like Thoron upon the top of a Mountain. But
the German Engineers who began the Work, found the Rock so very hard, that they
dispaired of Success, Saphadin, who was cured of his Wound, had time to levy
Men, and raise an Army more numerous than before, with which he intended to
besiege the Christians in their Camp. Nevertheless Thoron, which began to be in
great want of Provisions, and which had already desired to Capitulate, had
undoubtedly fallen into the hands of the Christians, if the Avarice and
infamous Treason of those, whose principal Interest it was to have it taken,
had not saved it. For the Templers, who served in the Army, and whose Manners
were already abominably degenerated, suffered themselves to be corrupted by the
Gold of Saphadin, who promised them vast Sums if they would find out some way
to cause the Siege to be raised; they therefore gained by the same way Conrade
Bishop of Wirtzbourg, the Emperor's Chancellor, who either out of Jealousy and
Envy of the Glory of the Archbishop of Mayence, and the Dukes of Saxony and
Brabant, who commanded the whole Army; or blinded with the Luster of the
prodigious quantity of Gold which was offered him, no longer regarded either
his Conscience, his Honor, his Truth, or Fidelity, Virtues which in all Ages
have been the Glory of the German Nation; but that he joined with the wicked
Templers to betray the Interests of Jesus Christ.

For having persuaded the greatest part of the Italian Captains, who came along
with him into Palestine, to enter into the same Sentiments with himself; these
joined with the Templers made the major part of the Council: And first
therefore he opposed the receiving the Besieged to Conditions, alleging that
it was impossible but they must presently come and submit themselves with
Halters about their Necks; and after that having spread a Report that Saphadin,
who had received a most powerful Reinforcement by his Fleet from Egypt, was
about to attack Baruth, at the same time that he would also besiege them in
their Camp, he therefore protested that there was an absolute Necessity that
they should march the next day to relieve that City. And accordingly marching
out of his Quarter, with those of his Party, to take that Way, he obliged the
rest of the Army instantly to raise the Siege and follow them, least Saphadin,
coming upon them, thus divided, with his whole Strength, they might fall into a
worse Disaster. Thus was Jesus Christ, in his Interest, and the Reputation of
his Religion, sold to the Sarasins by these Traitors, as he had formerly been
in his Person to the Jews by Judas. But as that Infamous received little
Benefit by that ill gotten Money, and afterward came to a deserved End; so
these perfidious Men gained little by their detestable Bargain, more than the
Vexation and Shame to find that the Besances, with which the crafty Saphadin
had in such profusion paid them, were nothing but counterfeit Gold, which, so
blinded were they at the receiving, as not to discover. And for the traitorous
Bishop of Wirtzbourg, returning some time after to his Bishopric, he was
unluckily assassinated by some Officers of his Chapter, with whom he had made
a cruel War. Thus it is,

After this Misfortune, a mighty Division arose between the Orientals and the
Germans, who now began to perceive that they were betrayed, so that separating
from the Templers and Hospitallers, whom they left at Piolemais, resolving to
have nothing further to do with such base and infamous Traitors, they drew off
to Jaffa, to preserve that place, which they had fortified, and to defend it
against Saphadin, who threatened to besiege it. And in truth, that Sultan, that
he might make his Advantage of this Disorder among the Christians, after having
made them raise the Siege of Thoron, took that Resolution, and came to Incamp
in view of Jaffa, almost at the same time that the German Army arrived there.
Now as it was very much weakened by the Fatigues of a long Siege, and by the
Retreat of the Orientals, who had separated from the Germans, they durst not
adventure upon a Battle, but satisfied themselves with molesting the Sarasins
by continual Skirmishes, wherein they generally had the Advantage. And
particularly, one time having drawn the Sarasins into a great Ambuscade which
they had laid for them, they cut in pieces the greatest part of their Army; but
this cost the Life of the brave Duke of Saxony, who was slain upon the Place,
and of Frederick Duke of Austria, who died the night following of a Wound which
he received in Combating against the Lieutenant of Saphadin, whom he overthrew
dead upon the Place with the stroke of his Lance.

Such a considerable Victory gave some room to hope that in a little time they
might become Conquerors, and that they might happily Re-establish the Affairs
of the East; but the unhappy News which arrived while these Matters were in
Agitation, from the West, caused all these blooming Hopes to wither in a
Moment, together with the Reinforcements which the Princes of the Crusade
expected; which obliged them instantly to return into Germany, where all was in
a Flame of War, for the Reason which I am about to relate.

The Emperor Henry the VI. who had so cruelly treated the Norman Princes in the
Realms of Naples and Sicily, died a little before at Messina in the Month of
September, of the preceding Year, either with the Regret which he had to
submit to those shameful Conditions imposed upon him by the Empress Constantia
his Wife, who with the Assistance of the Sicilians, had surprised and besieged
him in a Castle, from whence it was impossible for him to escape; or as some
suspected, but with more malignity than Probability, of Poison, which that
Princess, who for his proud and cruel Humor, hated him, had caused to be given
him. Now he knowing that he had formerly been Excommunicated by the Pope for
his unjust Imprisonment of Richard King of England, in his Return from the
Crusade, when he came to die he manifested great Sorrow for the same: He also
sent to that King, that so he might make him some sort of Satisfaction, by the
acknowledgment of his Offense; and by his last Will he obliged his Heirs to
make Restitution of the Money which he had so unjustly exacted from him for his
Ransom, and in case of failure, he desired the Pope to employ all his Power to
see it performed. Great Weakness of Princes, who cannot resolve to make
Restitution while they live, of what they believe themselves unjustly possessed
when they come to die; or to think they discharge themselves sufficiently by
charging it upon their Successors, who commonly are of the same Temper, and not
troubled with these Sucruples till they come to die, where it is not very
difficult to make fruitless Orders, which rarely oblige the Living, who may be
supposed after their Example, will detain it as long as they live, and then
only relinquish it, when they leave the World, and can hold it no longer.

This unhappy Prince died in the very prime of his Age, being about two and
thirty Years old; and when he was upon the point of putting in Execution those
great Designs which he had formed against the Greek Emperor, whom he had
compelled by the only Terror of his Arms and Name, William King of Sicily had
formerly conquered from the Greeks, and which they had recovered during the
Troubles of Italy. He was of a middle Stature, having a weak Constitution, and
a lean Body, his Face was handsome enough, but something too Meagre, his
Complexion was delicate and very fair, his Head not altogether large enough for
the Proportion of the other parts of his Body, which were well made, and fit
for all manner of Exercises, in which he was very dextrous, either on foot or
horsback; he was an excessive lover of Hunting, Walking, and Field Sports, and
therefore he chose the Country rather than the City, for his usual Residence,
and it was very seldom that he repaired to the City, unless it were to show his
Magnificence in the Spectacles and public Sports or Festivals, which he loved
to make with great Magnificence, and even Vanity: This nevertheless did not in
the least hinder his applying himself to public Affairs, or acting upon all
Occasions with abundance of Vigor, Prudence, and Resolution; for he had a
Spirit lively, penetrating, cultivated by Study, and supported by an Eloquence
Easy and Natural, a Judgment solid, a Soul great and enterprizing, and a Heart
truly generous. But all these noble Qualities were dishonored by his Avarice,
his Violence, and Injustice, his extreme Ambition, and above all, by his
insupportable Humor, his herce and insatiable desire of Revenge, and his
barbarous Cruelty, which rendered him odious to his own Wife, by whom he held
the Realms or Naples and Sicily, which made her conspire against him, thereby
to stop the horrible Inundation of his Hatred and Fury. He left only one Son
about three Years of Age, whose Name was Frederick, as was his Grandfather, and
who afterward was Emperor. He had caused him from his Cradle to be recognized
for his Successor to the Empire; but the Princes and Estates, notwithstanding
their Oath, being on one hand resolved to have an Emperor, who was able to
manage the public Affairs, and on the other hand, not being able to agree
among themselves, upon whom to fix the Choice, there arose a most furious
Schism among them, in which some of them chose Philip of Suabia, Brother of the
deceased Emperor, others elected Otho, the Brother of Henry Duke of Saxony; and
both the one and the other took Arms to support and defend their Emperor. This
raised great Troubles and War, not only in Germany, but all Europe, by the
different Interests of the several Princes, who believed themselves obliged to
join upon this Occasion with each Party. Richard King of England, joined with
Otho his Nephew, the Son of his Sister, to whom he had given the Earldome of
Poitiers. Philip the August, who took the opposite part to the English,
declared himself for Philip; and the Pope on the contrary, who believed that
the House of Suabia, whose Princes had made War against the Holy See, ought to
be humbled, employed all his pontifical Authority to maintain Otho against
Philip; so that this unhappy Division disturbed the whole West, and in
consequence ruined all the Hopes of the Christians in the East.

For so soon as the Princes of the Crusade, who were in Palestine, received an
Account of this News, although after the Defeat of the Sarasins before Jaffa,
they were upon the point of turning their victorious Arms against Jerusalem;
they instantly changed that Resolution, and by common Consent agreed to return
into Germany without any Delay, although the Pope writ to them in most pressing
Terms, conjuring them not to abandon the Holy Land to the Infidels; but the
particular Luterest which every one of them had in one Party or the other in
the Affairs of Europe, prevailed above that of Christ Jesus, and reestablished
the Affairs of the Sarasins, who failed not to make Advantage of their Absence,
and in a short time after their Departure, to recover Jaffa, and Baruth, and
all the other Places which they had taken. Thus this Crusade, which was
composed wholly of the German Nation, some few Italians only excepted, served
to no other Purpose but to manifest what has in all Ages been too apparent,
and what we do too plainly know at this very day, that the Mohammedan Empire,
which has robbed Christianity of the greatest part of the World, had hardly
grown to that prodigious and unweildy Bulk, or even been able to subfist, had
it not been for those fatal Divisions, which support and strengthen them by
enfeebling the Christians; and that all their Power would not be able to resist
one of our Monarchs,

But to comfort Christendom for this Loss, Providence raised up almost at the
same time, a new Pope to unite all Europe in another general Crusade, one part
whereof made it most evidently apparent, that a few Christians well united, and
who have no occasion to distrust among themselves, might easily make themselves
Masters of the Capital City of the Ottoman Monarchy, and consequently recover
the Empire of the East. This great Pope was Innocent the III. who by an
unanimous Consent, and which is not commonly known in the Conclave, was chosen
the same day that his Predecessor Celestin died, being the 8th. day of January;
and that which increased the Wonder, was, that he was the youngest of all the
Cardinals, having not yet seen more than thirty Years; and although the more
Ancient had taken mighty Pains to make their Parties, during the Indisposition
of the deceased Pope, yet the Succession fell upon one least expected. This
Pope was of noble Extraction, being descended from the illustrious House of the
Counts de Signie; he was of just Proportion, and very well made, having an
agreeable Aspect, the Air of a great and generous Man, he had a Spirit subtle
and clear, a prodigious Memory, a most solid Judgment, and a mavelous
Vivacity, joined with an indefatigable Diligence; which in a short time rendered
him one of the most knowing Men, that the Church ever had, in all sort of
Sciences, both Divine and Humane, all which he chiefly gained in the famous and
learned University of Paris, where he soon made himself be known and admired as
the Honor and Ornament of the Age. And besides all this, he had a Soul truly
Great and Noble, naturally inclined to all those Virtues which concur to the
making one of the first Rank among Mankind, and particularly, great in the
Church; for he was extreme Zealous, Vigilant and Active, always upon his Guard
for the Defense of the Catholic Faith, and maintaining the Purity of its
Principle, which is the Word of God, against the Attempts of Heretics; which
he made appear in a manner, which possibly will not be disagreeable to be
known, that so the Conduct of the Church at that time, in Affairs of that
Importance, may be the better observed.

The Bishop of Metz, a knowing Prelate, and who carefully watched over his
Flock, writ to him, That there ran about in his Diocese, a French Version of
the New Testament, and of some Books of the Old, very Dangerous, and which
occasioned great Disorders; that those who favored and supported them were
Laics and Women, of whom the Number was very great, and who were so besotted
and blinded, that with the greatest Obstinacy they held their Erroneous
Opinions, and would by no means hearken to such as endeavored to reduce them
to their Reason. And then he adds, These People are arrived to those Degrees of
Insolence, as openly to deride their Pastors, who go about to prohibit the
Reading of those ill Translations, pretending to prove the Lawfulness of them
by the Holy Scriptures; and that they impudently protested, with an incredible
Confidence, that they would neither obey Bishop, Archbishop, nor the Pope
himself, though he should, by a solemn Decree, condemn this Translation, which
they were resolved never to forsake; and that strangely despised, and with the
utmost Contempt, treated all those as simple and Ignorant, even the Priests, as
well as others, who would not receive it as they did. Innocent, for the Remedy
of this Disorder, the dangerous Consequences whereof he plainly saw, did not
only Authorize what the Bishop of Metz had done against this Translation, but
also nominated certain Commissaries, whom he associated with him, to inform
against the Authors and Favorers of this Disorder, to cite them Canonically
before their Tribunal, and there to Correct and pass Sentence upon them without
Appeal; commanding these Commissaries, with great Care and Diligence to put in
Execution the Commands which they had received from the Holy See, Because,
says he in the Decretal, Herein the Universal Church is deeply Concerned, and
the Cause of the Catholic Faith lies at the Stake.

This wondrous Pope, being such as I have described, burning with a mighty Zeal
for the good of the Christian Religion, was no sooner settled in the Chair, but
he began seriously to think of establishing it in the City of Jerusalem, where
it took its first Original: For this purpose, he did all that possibly could be
done by his Letters, to stay the Princes of the German Crusade in Palestine;
But when he saw the Revolution which had happened in the Empire had recalled
them all from thence, Crusade in Despite of the Devisions and Troubles which
those of the Empire had raised throughout all Europe. For this purpose
therefore he dispatched his Legates to all places, with most pressing Letters,
by which he exhorted the Kings, the Princes, the Prelates, the Nobility and the
People to take upon them the Cross according to their Power, for the carrying
on this Holy War, and to excite the whole World by his Example, and that of the
Ecclesiastics, and above all the Sacred College, he ordained that all the
Clergy, who possessed the Goods of the Church, should give the fortieth penny
of their Revenue, and the Cardinals the tenth for the carrying on of this Holy
War. Obliging himself in particular to send considerable Sums of Money and
store of Provisions for that purpose; and to raise Money for those Expenses, he
caused all his Plate, both Gold and Silver to be melted down, and would be
served in nothing but earthen, Wooden, or Vessels made of Glass. At the same
time he sent Cardinals to Venice, Genoa and Pisa, to exhort those potent
Republics to rigg out their Shipping as well to transport the Crusades into
Palestine, as to attack the Sarasins by Sea. He also took great care to pacify
the Troubles of Hungary, which hindered the Effect of the Crusade there; and
which Duke Andrew, the Youngest Son of the deceased King Bela, had raised in
that Realm against Henry his Brother who succeeded to the Crown. But in regard
the happy Success of this Crusade depended more especially upon the Kings of
England and France, the two most potent Monarchies of Christendom, who were now
engaged in a cruel War, he sent the Cardinal Peter of Capua his Legate, who
negotiated so skilfully and with such Success between them, that at length at a
Conference which they had at Andeli, they consented to a Truce of five Years,
in which time it was supposed the Enterprise of the Holy War might be happily
concluded. And in the mean time the Crusade, was published in all Places but
especially in France where that Devout man Fouques de Nevilli preached it by
order from the Pope.

This so famous man, who without Dispute was one of the greatest and most
admirable Preachers that ever was, was Curate of Nevilli upon the Marne, not
far from Paris, a man of a great temporal Estate, but most Zealous for the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls, which he endeavored after, by
exercising, with an incredible Fervency, that extraordinary Talent which he had
received from God to preach his Holy word. This he did with all the Force
imaginable, not only in his own Parish Church, but in all the adjacent Places,
and especially in Paris, where he declared himself the Implacable Enemy of all
Vices, but above all of Usury, and Impudicity, which occasioned such horrible
disorders in that time, which he reproved boldly, without fearing any person,
and with all the Heat and Zeal which his Temperament, ardent and billious,
could furnish him with. God who at the Beginning of his Ministry, to elevate
him by the Way of Humiliation, permitted him for two Years to toil and labor
without any Fruit, whilst preaching with all his Power against those two
Vices, some mocking him, others wholly abandoning him, whilst a third sort,
took occasion outrageously to abuse his Sermons, not any one seeming to reform,
or be converted by all his preaching; insomuch that he was just upon the point
of quitting and giving over his preaching, despairing ever to do any good by it.

But God who was resolved to make use of him, did so suddenly Change their
Hearts and gave such Power to his words, that piercing like flaming Darts into
the most obdurate Hearts, they made such a Prodigious Change upon the Manners
of Men, that to astonishment all France seemed to be reformed by him; For he
did not only abolish that Extravagant Extortion and unjust Usury, which had so
prevailed, that neither the Ordinances of the King, nor the Censures of the
Church, had been able to repress; but he touched, the Hearts of the Usurers so
to the quick, that publicly detesting their Crime, they made restitution of
what they had gotten by this kind of Robbery, unto those whom they had
oppressed by those horrid Extortions; and where they could not sind those to
whom they ought to make Reparation, they came drowned in Tears throwing
themselves at his Feet, Paris of those Infamous Places, and the converting of
so many lewd and debauched Women, some of which making the Vow of Chastity,
silled the new Nunnery of St. Antonina, whic'h he sounded for so pious a
Design; others of them publicly promised for the Future to lead a most austere
and penitent Life; and among the Young Women, many who distrusted their Courage
and their Power, accepted the Favor which he offered, which was a handsome
Portion, by the help whereof they easily passed from that danderous Condition
wherein they were, into that of an honest and lawful Marriage.

For this Purpose he procured mighty Contributions, even the Scholars of the
University raising for him five hundred Livres in Silver, and the Burgers of
Paris in a Body, not reckoning the Particular Benefactions, adding above a
thousand more, which was a very extraordinary Sum for those times. So many
Wonders, which his Renown published of this admirable Preacher, caused the
Bishops to invite him into their Diocesses, where he was received with
extraordinary respect, the People and Clergy flocking to him as if he had been
an Angel sent from Heaven. The good man did not hereupon grow proud and vain,
or distinguished himself by any foolish Affectation; for he always went
according to his Custom on Horseback, decently habited like a man of his
Profession; he kept his Beard shavenaccording to the Custom of that Age; his
Diet, which he always received with Benediction and giving of Thanks, was
indifferently what was offered him; neither did there appear any thing
singular, either in his Person or in his manner of Living; so that his
preaching and his Miracles always produced good Effects, wherever he came,
excepting in two Places in Normandy where he was very ill treated. For coming
to Lizieux, and taking upon him with his usual Liberty and Vehemence to reprove
the Disorders of the Ecclesiastics, who were very irregular, they made him
Prisoner, but without being able to abridge him, even in his Fetters, of the
Fredom, which he took to reprehend them; so that being ashamed to detain him,
after they were a little recovered from the Brutal Transport, they set him
again at Liberty. After which, as he preached at Caen, doing his usual Wonders
before the People, The Governor of the Castle, thinking he should do the King
of England a great pleasure, the good man having been very liberal in reproving
his Debauches, committed him to Prison, from whence, being in a mavelous way
delivered, according to the Command of the Gospel, he shook off the dust of his
Feet against them, and continued his preaching constantly to other Cities, till
such time as Pope Innocent being well imformed of the Virtue and the admirable
Talent, which this mavelous man had in preaching, he appointed him by his
Breve bearing Date November the fifth in the Year 1198, to publish the Crusade
with all its Indulgences and prerogatives throughout all France.

Sometime after understanding that the Abbots of the Cistercian Order held
their general Chapter, being accompanied with abundance of his Disciples, he
there solemnly took upon him the Cross, as did also at the same time, Garnier
Bishop of Langress, possibly to put himself into good Terms with the Pope, who
was not over well satisfied with him for his Conduct. After which he made his
Supplication to the Assembly, that since there were met there so many Abbots,
famous for their Learning and their Virtue, they would be pleased to appoint
some one of their Number, who might share with him in this glorious Employ for
the Service of Jesus Christ and his Religion by assisting him in preaching the
Crusade, and accompanying him in this Holy Voyage. But he could not meet with a
Gratification, in his Request, it may be, Cistercian Order to preach the
Crusade in France, Germany and Italy, they did not judge it convenient to draw
any more of their Abbots from their Charges to employ them in this Ministry. So
that Fouques departed from the Assembly, and was scarce got out of the Gate of
the Monastry, where an Infinite Number of People were assembled upon the Report
of the Arrival of this Holy Man; but he began to preach up the Cross with so
much fervency and Eloquence, that all of them indifferently engaged themselves
to take it upon them. After which having made choice of one among his
Disciples, who was most capable to second him in this Exercise of preaching, he
travailed over almost all France, where an infinite Number of Persons of all
sorts and Conditions took upon them the Cross, whilst Herloin, a Monk of St.
Dennis, a very able and knowing man, and well acquainted in the lower Bretanie
did the same in all that Country; and that those whom the Pope had commissioned
to publish the Crusade in England proceeded there also with admirable Success.

For King Richard, who ever since his return from the Holy Land wore the Cross,
as a mark of his Resolution to return thither, made a most Magnisicent
Entertainment at London, where the greatest part of the Gentlemen, who resorted
thither to gain Honor in the Tilts and Tournaments which were held there,
engaged themselves after his Example to combat more nobly against the Sarasins
for the Honor of Jesus Christ. But whether this was done in reallity, this
Prince having an Intention to go once more to Palestine; or that it was only in
Appearance, and to ingratiate himself with the Pope, that so he might fix him
to the Interests of his Nephew Otho, and assure his Pretensions to the Empire
is very uncertain, but let it be which of them soever, there presently after
happened an Accident which put an end to his Intentions and Designs; For having
understood that the Poitouins were revolted from him, he passed over with an
Army so suddenly, that by his only Presence he repressed the Rebels; but though
he knew how to overcome his Enemies, yet he was not so happy in conquering his
Passions, and his Natural Temerity, instigated by the Rebelious Vice of
Covetousness, brought this brave Prince to an untimely Grave, when his Affairs
were in the most flourishing and prosperous Condition. For Vinomare, Vicount of
Limoges, having found a mighty Treasure in some of his Lands, offered him one
half, provided he might possess the other himself. But King Richard, who
inordinately doated upon Money, resolved to have it all, alleging that the
Treasure of right appertained to the Lord of the Fee; and upon the Vicounts
refusal, he presently laid Siege to the Castle of Chalus, where he imagined the
Treasure was kept. So soon as those of the Garrison saw their Prince in Person
before the Place; fearing to fall into his Hands, they offered to surrender the
place provided they might be permitted to march out of it honorably, and with
their Arms; but this sierce Prince to discourage them commanded it to be
signified to them, that he did not use to capitulate with his Subjects, that he
was resolved to take the Place by Force, and to hang every one of them who had
dared to oppose him; This terrible Menace, reduced these poor people to
Despair, and that Despair begat in them a Courage and Resolution to defend
themselves to the last: Whereupon this Prince, whose Heart was always a
Stranger to fear, coming to take a View of the place in order to attack it, and
approaching too near, one Bertrand Gourdon, a principal Officer of the
Garrison, knowing him, took so true aim at him, that he shot him out of a
Cross-Bow with a barbed Arrow, through the left hand and a little under his
Shoulder; the King enraged with the Wound caused the Place to be so furiously
stormed night and day without Intermission, that according to his Desire it was
at last carried by Assault; after which he caused all the Officers and Soldiers
who defended it to be hanged, Gourdon only excepted who had wounded him, and
whom after his recovery, he resolved to put to death by the most cruel
Punishments: But it was in vain that he promised himself Health and Revenge.
For the Surgeon, who when he attempted to draw out the Arrow left the Head
behind, being an unskilful Bungler, made so many cruel and dangerous Incisions,
that the Wound Gangreen'd, and the Cure became impossible; April, in the Year
1199. He died in the Arms of Gautier Archbishop of Roan, with so many
Sentiments and Marks of true Repentance, as one shall rarely find greater among
the most celebrated Saints. So rigorously did he permit himself to be treated
in those Extremities of his Life, that, by his Patience and Submission, he
might in some manner atone the Divine Justice, by offering to God the
Sacrifice of a Heart perfectly and truly humble and contrite, and a Body
mortified by the severe Pains which he endured, besides those which he suffered
by his Wound.

A little before his Death he caused Gourdon, who had given him the mortal
Wound, to be brought into his Presence; and calmly demanded of him, Why he had
endeavored to take away his Life? It is, replied he siercely, and very
resolutely, because thou have slain my Father and my two Brothers; because thou
did resalve, by the ignominious Halter, to take away my Life; and because
thou have done an insinite deal of Mischief in the World. And after this, there
is nothing that thou can do to me which I fear: And since I am assured of thy
Death, I shall, with Joy, be ready to receive my own, though it comes
accompanied with all the Terrors and cruel Torments that can be inslicted on
me. And I, replied the King immediately, will, for the Love of God, that thou
shall live. And thereupon he caused him presently to be set at liberty,
commanding that an hundred Pounds Sterling should be bestowed upon him, and
straightly prohibiting all his People to do him any Injury. But presently after
the death of the King, the Lieutenant General of his Army causing him to be
seized, made him be hanged and roasted alive, in a most barbarous and horrible
manner. At his Death, the King commanded a good part of his Treasure to be
distributed among his Domestics, and the Poor. He ordered that his Body should
be interred at Fontevraud, at the Feet of his Father, as it were, to make some
honorable Reparation, by this little Humility at his Death, for the ill
Treatment which he had given him during his Life: He bequeathed his Heart to
the Church of our Lady at Roan, which he had always particularly cherished: And
for his Soul, he entirely submitted it to the Divine Justice; offering himself,
after such an exemplary Repentance, to suffer the Pains of Purgatory, even till
the Day of Judgment, for the Expiation of his Crimes.

It is not my Province to judge of what it pleases God to determine and
ordain; but this is certain, that three and thirty Years after his Death, Henry
Bishop of Rochester in England, preaching, after he had given holy Orders, the
Saturday before the Passion-Sunday, on which Day the Church begins the Service
with those words of Isaiah, Ho! Every one that thirsts, come to the Waters,
says the Lord; Come and drink with Joy: In the midst of his Sermon, as if it
had been by a sudden Enthusiasm, he cried out, Rejoice, my Brethren, the Soul
of the glorious King Richard, after having, till this time, been purified like
Gold in the Furnace, is now passed into Heaven. And he affirmed it with such an
assured Air, exposing to every Person all the Circumstances of the Revelation
which he pretended to have had, that the Authority of a Prelate, who was known
to be a most virtuous and learned Man, and who was never accused for a
Visionary, made very many wise People believe, that, without Weakness, they
might give Credit to it. However it be, it is not so much upon these sort of
Revelations, which are liable to be doubted, as upon the manner of the Death of
this great Prince, that one may reasonably found a Belief of his Salvation.
However, I thought fit to recount these edifying Particularities of the Death
of this King, who had so great a Share in these Crusades; that so Princes may
understand, that when they have had the happiness to render unto God any
considerable Service by any Heroic Action, as did this King Richard, in being
the first that took upon him the Cross in this Holy War, where he performed so
many brave things, they have great reason to hope that the Divine Goodness,
which is never slow in rewarding the meanest Services, will recompense them by
the greatest of all Favors, in permitting those to die well, who have employed
their Lives in his Service, and for his Glory.

Fouques de Nevilli continued his preaching the Crusade with a most wonderful
Success; and after he had run through abundance of Provinces, distributing an
infinite number of Crosses among the People, he at last happily sinished his
Enterprise, by the Engagement of two great Princes in his Design, who could not
but, by their Example, draw after them a great number of considerable Persons.
These two Princes were Theobald IV. Count de Champagne, Brother to Henry II.
King of Jerusalem, who died by the unfortunate Accident at Ptolemais; and
Lewis, his Consin-german, Count de Blois and Chartres, both of them nearly
related to I hilip the August, both by the Father and the Mother. They were
both young, and both passionate of Glory. And Theobald, who was a magnificent
Prince, that he might declare himself with more Splendour, and draw after him
more Persons of Quality, published a Tournament to be held at his Castle of
Escri, upon the River Aisne, in Advent of that Year 1199. whither the principal
Gentry of the Neighboring Provinces assembled themselves, to be Sharers in
those Manly Exercises. There it was that the brave Count Theobald, amidst those
noble Exercises of Chivalry, which the French, and particularly the Counts de
Champagne, have always so much delighted in; resolving to pass magnificently,
from that gallant Representation of War, to that true and holy War which he was
about to undertake, in most solemn manner took upon him the Cross, together
with the Count de Blois, his Cousin. They were immediately followed by two
Lords of extraordinary Merit, and high Reputation; the famous Simon de
Montfort, and the valiant Renaud de Montmirail, the Cousin of Count Lewis.
After which, all those who were under any particular Obligation to these two
Counts, and many other Gentlemen and Barons, especially of the Isle of France,
and of Picardy, also followed their Example, and took upon them the Cross. The
principal among these new Champions of Jesus Christ, whose Names are most
known, and which I mention in this place, reserving my self to speak of the
others upon occasion of their brave Actions, were Geoffry de Joinville,
Steward, and Geoffry de Ville Hardouin, Mareshal of Champagne, who, like a
frank and generous Cavalier, has obliged Posterity with the History of this
War; the Counts Gautier, and John de Brienne, Gautier de Vignori, William and
Villain de Neully, Erard de Montigni, Manasses de l' Isle, Guy de Chappes,
Renard de Dampierre, Oliver de Rochefort, Ives de Laval, Anselme de Courselles,
Henry de Montreil, Paien d'Orleans, Matthew de Montmorenci, Guy de Couci,
Robert de Malvoisin, Enguerrand, Hugh and Robert de Boves, Counts d' Amiens; to
whom, the Year following, joined the Counts Hugh de St. Paul, Renand de
Bologne, and Geoffry de Perch, and Stephen, his Brother; with diverse other
Lords which followed them. And to take care of the spiritual Militia of this
Army designed for a Holy War, Garnier Bishop of Troies, who had taken the Cross
the Year before, and Nevelon Bishop of Soissons, resolved to accompany this
Crusade.

Such a famous Action, which could not fail of making a mighty noise in the
World, was the Parent of others, great Examples being commonly very prolisick,
which were produced thereby in generous Minds, and Hearts, which were amorous
of Glory. The young Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Henault, Nephew to the late
Count Philip, who died at the Siege of Acre, seeing himself at liberty by the
Peace of Peronne, which he had concluded with Philip the August, was resolved
not to be behind his Brother-in Law, the Count de Champagne, whose Sister he
had married, in this glorious Career of Honor and Virtue. He therefore
solemnly took upon him the Cross, in the Beginning of Lent, in the Year 1200 in
the Church of St. Donatien at Bruges; as did also the Countess Mary, Henry and
Eustace, by Thierri, his Cousin, the Natural Son of the late Earl Philip;
Eustace Count de Sarbruck, Conon de Bethune, James d' Avesnes, the Son of the
noble Lord of that Name, who performed so many brave Actions in Palestine; and
by the greatest part of the Flemish Nobility.

A part of these Princes and Lords being assembled at Soissons, could there
come to no determined Resolution, in regard they were not as yet assured that
they had sufficient Forces; Crusade at Compiegne, they found themselves in so
good a Condition, that there it was agreed, for expediting this Affair, that
the three Earls of Champagne, Flanders and Blois, should each of them nominate
two Deputies, who should be authorized with full Power, to take care of all
things relating to the Design, both as to the number of Troops, and the Choice
of the Men, among such an innumerable Multitude of People as had taken upon
them the Cross: As also, to treat with such as it was necessary, for their
Passage and Provisions. The six Deputies having debated an Affair of this
Importance, found that, to secure themselves from those terrible Inconveniences
which the Christian Armies had suffered in the first Crusades, by long and
hazardous Land-Marches, it was much more convenient to take the Passage of the
Sea; and, that the Passage might be short and commodious, with so much
Provision, and so many Ships, as was necessary for the transporting of so great
an Army, either into Syria or Egypt, there could not be any way more proper
than to treat with the Venetians, who, without all Contradiction, were at that
time, the People, of all Europe, the most powerful upon the Mediterranean Sea.
This Advice therefore being approved of by the Princes, Venice in the Beginning
of the following Year 1201. where, in a few days, they negotiared most
successfully with the famous Henry Dandolo, who, for nine Years past, had been
the Doge of that flourishing Republic.

This Henry was a Prince of a great and Majestic Port; and being now above
fourscore Years old, though, to a Miracle, neither decrepit in Body, nor
decayed in Mind, his great Age rendered him still more August and venerable; he
had Prudence, the consummated Effect of long Experience, a most invincible
Courage, and an immovable Firmness in such Resolutions as he took for the Good
of his Country, of which he was a most passionate Lover. He was a great
Captain, and a valiant Soldier, an able Politician, and, even at those Years,
wonderfully taken with the fair Image of Glory. Above all, he was the most
dexterous Manager of Affairs; and though he were almost blind, not so much by
the Decay of Nature, as the Effect of Cruelty, yet was he the clearest sighted
Man of his time in Matters of State. The Occasion of the Loss of his Sight was
this, About fifty Years before, being employed from the Republic, as their
Ambassador at Constantinople, where he generously sustained his Character, and
stoutly maintained the Interests of his Country; the perfidious Emperor Manuel,
not able to bear that Freedom, caused a red hot Plate of Iron to be held before
his Eyes, to put them out: But for all this barbarous Outrage, whereby he
violated the Law of Nations, though his Sight was mightily impaired, yet it was
not wholly lost; nor did his Eyes lose any thing, to Appearance, of their
Luster and Clearness, till, after this, he received an unfortunate Blow upon
his Head at the Seige of Zara, which, if it did not altogether take away his
Sight, yet left him but a very little. Notwithstanding which, never any Duke
acted with more Application, or better Success, for the Interests of Venice,
where his well known Merit gained him an universal Respect, and gave him more
Authority and Power than either his Charge or Dignity, although at that time
the Power was far more unlimited than it has been since, by the Laws which
that sage Republic has enacted, to abridge the Authority of its Head.

It was then with this great Man, that the Deputies immediately treated in his
private Council, which was composed of six Senators; and they managed their
Negotiation with that frankness, remitting themselves wholly to him for what
they must give the Republic for the Assistance which they desired from them,
that in eight days they came to agree upon the Conditions of the Treaty, which
were these; That the Venetians should furnish them with flat bottomed Boats and
Ships, either to pass into Syria or Egypt, for four thousand five hundred
Knights with their Horses, nine thousand Esquires, and twenty thousand Foot,
with so much Munitions and Provisions which should suffice this Fleet for a
Year. That all the Vessels should be rigged and ready to sail in the Month of
June following, and should serve them for one Year, accounting from the Day
that the Fleet should part from the Port of Venice. That the Princes of the
Crusade should pay for the same eighty five thousand Marks in Silver; which,
according to the true Supputation, French Money, which was a very extraordinary
Sum in those times. But the Doge, who had a great Soul, being resolved that it
should not be said that the Venetians acted just like Merchants, in furnishing
Ships and Provisions at a reasonable Rate; having besides, a great desire to
signalize himself upon this Occasion, and to have a share in the Glory which
was to be acquired in this War; therefore acquainted them, that the Republic,
to contribute to such a holy Enterprise, was resolved to join with them at the
least fifty Galleys, well rigged and armed, with so many Soldiers as were
necessary to serve profitably by Sea at the same time that the French acted by
Land; and that they should equally part betwixt them the Conquests which should
be made during the time of their Confederation.

Dandolo having easily brought the great Council of forty Senators to approve
of the Treaty, as also the three other Assemblies of the Notables of the City,
judged that it was convenient to have it ratified by the People, whom, to the
number of above ten thousand, he caused to be assembled in the place, and the
Church of St. Mark; where, after the Mass of the Holy Ghost had been sung, the
six Deputies being introduced, as before had been agreed with the Doge, Geossry
Mareshal of Champagne, who spoke for his Colleagues, delivered himself in few,
but very moving Words, to the Senate and People, after this manner; That the
most powerful Princes of France having solemnly devoted themselves to the
Service of Jesus Christ, for the Deliverance of his Holy Sepulcher, and Holy
City, which groaned under the Tyranny of the Insidels, had, among all the
People of Europe, made choice of the Venetians, as the most potent and
generous, the most capable of engaging in such a glorious Enterprise, to desire
their Assistance, and the Conjunction of their Forces; without which, they had
no hope ever to re-conquer the holy City of Jerusalem. And for this purpose,
added he, with a very odd and surprising Frankness, as on the one hand they are
resolved to undertake this Conquest; and on the other, that they are fully
satisfied, that without your Assistance it is impossible to succeed, they have
therefore given us in Commission, to use no other Arguments to persuade you,
but to prostrate our selves at your Feet, with a Protestation that we will
never rise from thence, till you have agreed to our Desires, and to such
Conditions as you shall judge fit to prescribe. And thereupon they fell upon
their Knees, and without saying any thing further, with their Hands extended to
the Assembly in the posture of Suppliants, by that piteous Gesture, accompanied
with Sighs and Groans, they moved them much more than they could have done by
the most Rhetorical and passionate Discourses.

And here it is that we must be forced to acknowledge, that our Ancestors had a
great Stock of a certain frank and generous Goodness, which the following Ages,
which have been much refined upon the point of Honor, would be far from
submitting to, or imitating, upon a like Occasion. But though they did not so
exactly observe all the Measures and Punctilioes of Breeding, which at this day
are with so much Nicity and Scruple observed, for the maintaining of the
Dignity which is owing to the Character of Ambassadors, yet they had this
Advantage, that many times they accomplished that in a Moment, which now costs
whole Years of tedious Negotiations; which, when they are finished, are yet
scarely to be consided in. This Action, which the Envoy of a Gentleman would
scarce be persuaded to now, had such an Effect upon all this great Assembly,
that the Doge, the Senate and the People raising them up immediately from that
beseeching Posture, as it were, by Consent, all together lifting up their
Hands, and their Eyes, drowned in Tears of Compassion, cried out with one
Voice, We will, We will; making the Church, the Palace and the great Place
resound with their repeated Echoes, which instantly ran cheerfully to the City,
where they were so redoubled, that they made the very Arched Roof of Heaven
ring; and embracing the Deputies, they protested that they would employ their
Lives and Fortunes with these generous French Princes, for the Reestablishment
of Jesus Christ in his Inheritance, and his Empire, which had been invaded by
his Enemies. After which, the Treaty, which to this day remains in the Archives
of St. Mark, together with the Confirmation of Pope Innocent, being ratified by
all the Orders of the Republic, and signed by both Parties, with an Oath upon
the Holy Evangelists, France, where the Mareshal de Champagne found the Count,
his Master, sick of the Distemper of which in a few days after he died most
religiously, in the very Flower of his Youth, being aged but twenty five Years,
having, upon his Deathbed, appointed Count Renaud de Dampierre to be his
Substitute, and in his Name to take the Voyage with the Troops which he put
under his Conduct.

Now the Count de Champagne having been chosen Head of the Crusade, there was a
necessity of putting another in his place. For this purpose the Princes
concerned, after that Eudes Duke of Burgundy, and Theobald Count de Bar, the
Cousin of the deceased Count, to whom this Honor was offered, had excused
themselves, by reason that they were not inclined to engage in this Voyage,
deputed some to offer it to Boniface Marquis of Montferrat, Brother to that
famous Marquis Conrade Prince of Tire, who had acquired so much Honor by the
glorious Actions which he performed in the third Crusade. He willingly accepted
of the Honor which was done him, hoping thereby to gain Glory to himself, by
being employed to procure that of Jesus Christ. He therefore instantly repaired
to Soissons, where the Princes, who were there assembled, declared him Head of
the Army of the Crusades, with the general Applause, and the particular good
Liking and Approbation of Philip the August, to whom he had the Honor to be
related. He solemnly received the Cross from the hands of the Bishop of
Soissons, and the holy Man, Fouques de Nevilli. This great Preacher of the
Crusade, who had done far more Wonders than ever did Peter the Hermit,
Bernard, to assemble the Army of the Crusades, but not to accompany them, much
less conduct them to the Wars; where Priests, if they act regularly, and
contain themselves within the Bounds of their Profession, according to God's
Appointment, ought to make use of no other Arms but Prayers, nor to combat
otherwise than Moses did against the Amalekites, by lifting up their Hands to
Heaven. This holy Man died of the Disease in his Parish of Nevilli, where he
was making preparation for his Voyage. He appointed by his last Will, that all
the Money, which he had collected from the Charity of well disposed People,
should be employed for the Assistance of the Holy Land. Thus died this devout
Preacher, to whose Memory, the Church, at this day, renders great Honors; and
who deserved, for his Piety, to be eternally reverenced by all the Earth.

In this time the Princes of the Crusade, having made their Preparations during
the Winter, about Whitsunday put themselves upon their March toward Venice,
where an untoward Adventure, which they could not possibly foresee, had like to
have ruined the whole Enterprise, just upon its first beginning. For on one
part, the Venetians had so exactly performed their part of the Treaty, that
there were more Ships rigged, and furnished with all things necessary, than was
needful for the Transporting and Entertainment of the Army after their
Disimbarkment, besides the fifty Galleys well armed, which they had furnished
at their own Charge; so that it was but reasonable that the French, according
to their Stipulation, should, before their setting out, pay so much of the
Money as they were obliged to do. But on the other side, a great number of the
Lords, who had promised to repair to Venice, in order to their Transportation,
had changed their Resolution, and went to embark at Marseilles; as did the
Bishop of Autun, and the Burgundians, John de Nele, Chastelain of Bourges,
Nicholas de Mailli, and Thierri, the Cousin of Baldwin, with whom that Count
had entrusted the Fleet which he had equipped in Flanders: And others of them
in the Ports of Pavia; among which, the brave William de Nevilli, Henry de
Longchamp, and Renaud de Dampierre, General of the Troops of Champagne; either
because they believed that the Passage would be shorter, and less dangerous
that way, than to embark at Venice; or that they had some Distrust and
Jealousy of the Venetians; or, which is most probable, that they thought they
should thereby be exempted from paying their Quota of so great a Sum of Money
as was promised to be paid to that Republic. Insomuch, that there being a
great number of those who ought to have contributed to the Charge, drawn off,
Venetians: So that, after they had generously, above what was their Part, given
all that they had in Gold, Silver and Jewels, they still found themselves in
Arrear thirty four thousand of the eighty five thousand Marks, which they were,
by Contract, obliged to pay. Thus this noble Enterprise, which was so happily
begun, ran the danger of being shipwrack'd, even in the Port where it was to be
embarked. But the Doge, who was a mighty Politician, made his Advantage of this
Accident to serve the Republic, by furnishing the Princes, who extremely
desired it, with an Opportunity of dis-engaging themselves from the trouble and
perplexity of this untoward Accident.

For, after he had communicated his Design to the Senate, who approved it as a
most suitable Expedient to secure both their Honor and their Interest; and
also to purchase them a considerable Advantage; he went to the Princes, and
offered to give them time for the Payment of the residue of their Debt, till
such time as the Holy War should be happily accomplished by their Conquests,
provided they would presently join with the Venetians for the recovering of
Zara, a strong and potent City in Dalmatia; which having revolted four or five
times from them, had, about three Years before, put it self into the Power of
the King of Hungary. There were a great many who stoutly opposed this
Proposition; some out of a secret Malignity of Spirit, and a desire they had to
see the Army disbanded; others, on the contrary, by the eager desire which they
had to go immediately to the Conquest of the Holy Land; amongst whom, the
hottest were some Abbots of the Cistertian Order, as the Abbot du Val de
Sernay, the Abbot of Trappe, and a German, named Martin Litz, Abbot of a
Monastery in Alsatia; who, after he had, by the Order of Pope Innocent,
preached the Crusade about Baste, after the Example of Peter the Hermit, had
put himself at the Head of an Army of Crusades, and conducting them by Trent
and Verona, arrived at Venice a little before this Accident fell out. Great
Disputes there were upon this Subject, and the Reasons which were urged on one
side and the other were very plausible: Those who were against it alleged,
that, besides its being a most detestable thing for Christians, who had taken
upon them the Cross, to turn those Arms which they had taken up against
Infidels, upon their Brethren, by making War against a Christian King; it was a
known thing, that the Bulla of the Crusade declared all those Excommunicate,
who should attempt any thing, during the Holy War, against the Crusades; and
that none could be ignorant, that the King of Hungary, who was in possession of
Zara, had taken upon him the Cross, and was making Preparation to pass into
Palestine.

And, in truth, Pope Innocent fearing that they would undertake this Siege,
had, a little before, sent Cardinal Peter de Capua to Venice, to oppose that
Design, and expressly to forbid the Crusades, under pain of Anathema, to engage
therein. But on the other part, Henry Dandolo, the Doge, remonstrated, That
these Lightnings of Rome were not discharged, but against such as went about to
make any Advantage of the Absence of the Crusades, and thereby unjustly to
ravish from them their Estates; and that they were not designed against such
as, pursuing that natural Right wherewith God had invested them, and which it
was not in the power of any Pope to take from private Persons, much less from
Sovereigns, designed only to recover their own Estates, to reduce their Rebels
to Obedience, and to constrain those who supported them to leave them to the
Justice and the Clemency of their Masters. That if this were not allowed to be
Truth, it must of necessity follow, that a thing so sacred as the Crusade, must
be the Cause of all manner of Injustice, by favoring, and giving Protection to
Thieves, Robbers, Revolters, Rebels and Usurpers; to whom the Popes, by virtue
of their Bulla's, under pretext of the Holy War, must give the Opportunity to
glory in their Crimes, and to confirm themselves in their Revolts and
Usurpations. That the Authority of the Church extending it self only to things
purely spiritual, which were entrusted to it by Jesus Christ, Zarantines, who,
besides that they were Rebels, were also, by their continual Piracies, and
destroying Commerce, public Enemies to Mankind, and particular Enemies to the
Crusades, whose Passage into Palestine by Sea, as that of their Provisions,
they made very unsecure and dangerous.

Now as these Reasons, both on the one side and the other, appeared very
strong, it was a long time before any Resolution could be taken; and in that
time, many of the Germans, who were come thither under the Conduct of the Abbot
Martin, having consumed what they brought with them for their Voyage, and
diverse others of the more Wealthy, resolving not to make War against the
Christians, took occasion to return back into their own Countries. But at
length, the greatest part of the French suffered themselves to be persuaded by
the Reasons of the Doge, which made a strong Impression upon their Spirits, to
which the necessity to which they found themselves reduced, either to join with
the Venetians, or give over the Enterprise, contributed not a little toward
the finishing this Agreement. Nevertheless, it was made with this Condition,
that after the Taking of Zara, the Venetians should join their Forces with them
in order to the attacking of Egypt, the Conquest whereof they hoped would not
be difficult, which, by reason of the Famine and the Pestilence, had been
extremely desolated for five Years, in which it had wanted the Inundation of
the River Nilus. Dandolo ravished with Joy to have obtained what he so
earnestly desired, upon this Occasion, did an Action which was wholly
unexpected from him, and by which he most justly acquired immortal Fame: For,
notwithstanding his extreme Old Age, and the Weakness, and, in a manner, entire
Loss of his Sight, which might well have dispensed him from going to the Wars;
yet one Day, in a great Assembly of the Senate, the Lords of the Crusade, and
the People, being in the Church of St. Mark, he unexpectedly mounted the
Tribunal, and earnestly entreated the Republic to give him permission to take
upon him the Cross, and in Person to conduct the Venetian Army; and that,
leaving his Son to supply his place, after the Taking of Zara, he might
accompany the brave and generous Princes of France, either to partake with them
in the Glory of delivering the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, or to die with them
in the pursuit of such a glorious Enterprise. These Words were received both by
the Crusades and Venetians, with mighty Applause, and with such great
Acclamations, mingled with Tears and Cries of Joy, that the venerable old
Prince, more encouraged by the general Consent, and the glorious Testimonies
which were rendered to his Virtue, descending instantly from the Tribunal, made
himself be conducted to the Foot of the Altar, where, prostrating himself to
offer his Life as a Sacrifice to Almighty God, to whose Service he now d^^oted
the Remainder of his Days, he caused the Cross to be affixed to his Duca^
Bonnet, that so it might be the more conspicuous and visible to all the
Beholders.

An Example so illustrious was presently followed by several of the principal
Persons of the Republic. And that which augmented the Joy was, that at the
same time there was seen to arrive a noble Troop of brave German Lords and
Brabamers, who had taken upon them the Cross, with Conrade Bishop of
Halberstad, and Berthold Count de Catzenelbogen. So that by the favor of these
Reinforcements, the Army found it self complete, and being all embarked, in the
Month of October, they parted from the Port of Venice upon the gallantest Fleet
which had ever spread Canvas upon those Seas, and which consisted in three
hundred Vessels charged with all manner of Warlike Engines and Munitions. Upon
the Eve of St. Martin they came within view of Zara; and though, considering
the height and thickness of the Walls, and the strength of its Towers, which
were defended by a strong Garrison, many of those who beheld it at a distance
judged it impregnable, yet the next Day they attacked the Port with so much
Fury, that having dispersed those who defended it with the mighty force of
Stones and Darts from the Engines, and having broken the Chain which defended
it, they gained it by main Force, and landed on the other Shore, Venetians, for
that the French, in Obedience to the Pope, were resolved to undertake nothing
against them. At the same time Guy, Abbot du Val de Sernay, the same Person who
had done such great Things against the Albigenses, and who was afterward
Bishop of Carcassone, went to speak with the Doge and the rest of the Princes;
and by a Zeal, which had like to have caused great Disorders, certainly a Zeal
which made him act very unseasonably, by unnecessarily exposing to Contempt the
Authority of the Holy See, he forbad them, in behalf of the Pope, to proceed
any further, or to enterprise any thing against Zara, declaring those who
should disobey this Order, to be Excommunicate by Virtue of the Apostolical
Letters, which he there presented to them: An Action so Surprising, did so
Exasperate the Venetians, that they had certainly cut this indiscreet Abbot in
a thousand Pieces, if Simon Earl of Montfort, who was of his Party, had not
stoutly opposed it, declaring himself his Protector, and protesting that he
would obey the Holy See, and never employ those Arms against Christians, which
in taking upon him the Cross, he had taken up to make War against the Infidels.

But the Princes, and other French Lords, to let the Venetians see that they
did not only condemn this Action, but that they were resolved, like Men of
Honor, and in despite of all those who opposed it, to perform, what they had
not promised, but that notwithstanding their Vow, they might well, both in
point of Conscience, and for very considerable Reasons do, gave such a furious
Assault to the City, both by Sea and Land, without Intermission, for five days
successively, that the Besieged were compelled to Surrender upon Discretion,
their Lives only saved. After this, the Season of the Year being too far
declined, to think of making War in Egypt, it was resolved to pass the Winter
at Zara, where the Marquis Boniface came, about fifteen days after the
Reduction of the Place; for he would not imbark with the rest, upon pretense of
giving some necessary Orders, concerning the pressing Affairs of his
Marquisate; but in reallity, that he might dexterously avoid appearing at the
Siege of Zara, and prevent the Displeasure of the Pope; tho not long after the
Pope received the Excuses which the French made him by their Deputies, and
granted them the Pardon which they demanded, for the greater Satisfaction of
their Consciences. He also permitted them, for the removing of all Scruples,
the Liberty of Treating at all times with the Venetians, who could not be
persuaded to believe themselves obliged, to desire from him the Absolution from
those Censures, which they thought they had not at all deserved; for which
Reason, some time after, he denounced them Excommunicated by a Decree, which
the Princes thought convenient to suppress, fearing that otherwise it might
give occasion entirely to ruin the Enterprise of the Holy War, as undoubtedly
it would have done.

It was for this Reason that this sage Pope, to whom the French Princes gave an
account of their Proceedings, by Letters respectful, but very resolute, after
having thoroughly weighed the Matter, approved the Prudence of their Conduct;
and some time after, their Spirits being sweetened by a more propitious
Conjuncture, a Reconciliation easily ensued, to the satisfaction of all
Parties. Thus it is, when Matters are managed with Charity, Sweetness, and
Descretion, and that Authority acts prudently and seasonably, it ever preserves
its own Rights, by preserving theirs whom it reduces by gentle Methods to their
Obedience, but when untuly Passion comes to intermedle, and to pour out its
Lightnings and Thunder, with more Precipitation than Reason, it loses it self,
making those become Rebels, who would easily have been brought back again to be
Subjects, and is at last obliged to have Recourse to Rigor, to make them submit
to the Yoke, which with good Usage they might have, with far less Difficulty,
have been persuaded to receive, Crusades had the leisure of the whole Winter,
in a rich City, and the Country about, abounding with all manner of Provisions,
to make the necessary Preparations against the Spring, for the Conquest of
Egypt; when the Ambassadors of the Emperor Philip of Suabia, and his
Brother-in-Law Alexis, Prince of Constantinople, made them suddenly alter their
Design, and undertake an Enterprise, which was most glorious to the French, to
whom God had designed the Empire of the East, which was translated from the
Greeks to the Latins, in this admirable Manner, which I am about to relate,
wherein I shall briefly recount the Cause, the Progress, the Consequence, the
Execution and Accomplishment of one of the most surprising and memorable
Adventures that ever was known in the World.

It was about seven Years before, that the Emperor Isaac Angelus, by the most
just Judgment of God, who was determined to punish so many horrible Crimes as
he had committed during the nine Years of his Reign, was tumbled from his
Throne by his own Brother Alexis, who took upon him the Surname of Comnenius,
and who after having barbarously put out his Eyes, caused him also inhumanly to
be put in Irons, with his Son Alexis, a young Prince, of about twelve Years of
Age. Now it being only his Ambition, which had rendered this Tyrant so Cruel,
who otherways was of a Nature Humane and Sweet enough, so soon as he believed
he was firmly Established in his unjust Domination, and that he had no reason
to fear that any thing Dangerous could be enterprized against him, he forgot
that Maxim of Tyrants, which informs them, That he who will peaceably and
securely enjoy his Usurpation, must not do his Work by halves. Insomuch that he
began to compassionate those whom he had despoiled of the Imperial Dignity, and
after some Years of severe Imprisonment, to restore them to a great share of
unexpected Liberty. He gave Permission to his Brother to live handsomely in a
Palace, which he assigned him out of the City, between the two Colomnes; and
suffered the young Alexis to hold the Rank of one of the Princes of his Court,
commanding him to attend upon his Person, and be his Companion in all his
Divertisements. But he learnt presently after, that the Policy of an Usurper
ought to take better Precautions, than to bestow that kind of Bounty upon those
whom he has injustly Oppressed, which may furnish them with an Opportunity of
doing themselves Reason for the Violence which they have suffered.

For Isaac having the Liberty to receive all such as came to visit him, treated
so secretly with the Latins, that by their means he found a safe way of
Corresponding with his Daughter Irene, the Wife of the Emperor Philip. And so
soon as that Princess had disposed the Spirit of her Husband, to take these
poor Princes into his Protection, and to receive the young Alexis her Brother,
a Merchant of Pisa undertook to carry him off in his Ship; To effect this, he
caused him to be disguised like an Italian Seaman, and when the Guards, which
the Tyrant sent to search in all the Ships, so soon as he understood his
Flight, came aboard the Pisan, who lying at the Mouth of the Hellespont, ready
to Sail, was searched with more Exactness than any of the rest: The disguished
Prince, with those of his Retinue, who were all on the sudden become Mariners,
boldly received them upon the Deck, and undertook himself to be their
Conductor, leading them into the most secret Places of the Vessel, and thus, by
not being hid, escaped most securely the Danger of being Found; so that the
Ship being thereupon discharged, passed the Strait, and the Prince was safely
landed in Sicily, from whence he went to Rome, to implore the Assistance of
Pope Innocent; from thence he passed by Land to the Court of his Brother-in-Law
into Germany, and in his Way coming to Verona, he met with abundance of
Pilgrims, who were going to join the Army of the Princes of the Crusade at
Venice; there some of his Retinue advised him to send Deputies to them, to lend
him their Assistance for the Recovery of his Empire. They arrived at the Army
whilst they were making their Preparations in Dalmatia, for their Voyage into
Egypt; but the Princes judged that before they came to any Conclusion in an
Affair of that Importance, it was necessary to send to the Emperor Philip into
Germany, to be informed from him, what Terms the Prince of Constantinople would
offer, and what was to be expected from him,

Philip, who had now upon his Hands great Affairs in Germany, to maintain
himself in the Empire, which he was still forced to dispute with Otho his
Competitor, and who notwithstanding extremely desired the Re-establishment of
Isaac and Alexis, Irene his Empress, of whom he was most passionately Amorous,
continually also pressing him with her powerful Solicitations, he acquainted
his Brother-in-Law, the Prince Alexis, that in the Posture of the Affairs of
Europe at present, he saw no manner of Hope of his Re-establishment, but by
engaging the French and Venetians to assist him, who had now a great Army on
Foot, for the Conquest of the Holy Land; and that therefore he ought for this
Purpose to offer them Conditions so Advantageous, that they might be tempted to
Comply with them, both out of Interest, Honor, and the public good of
Christendom; and thereupon, being it was not to cost him any thing, he was the
more Bold in proposing the Conditions, which the young Prince, how hard and
high soever they seemed, received with Joy, and instantly closed with them;
herein following the Example of those, who to deliver themselves from a present
Evil, and to draw themselves out of the last Extremity to which their Affairs
are reduced, promise whatever is demanded, without consulting either their own
Hearts, and future Intentions, or the possibility of their Performance; but
being seduced by the Hope of re-entring into the Possession of what they desire
above all things, they promise what they persuade themselves they are willing
to do, though in reallity they are resolved, though possibly at that time,
without being sensible of it, upon second Thoughts, never to perform. Philip
having after this Manner gained the Consent of Alexis, instantly dispatched the
Ambassadors of the Princes, together with his own, and those of his
Brother-in-Law Alexis, who arrived at Zara about the middle of December. The
Doge presently gave them Audience in his Palace at Zara, where all the Princes
and great Lords of the Crusade, being assembled, the principal of the
Embassage, who had order to omit nothing that might oblige the Republic and
the Princes, to conclude the Treaty, according to his Instructions addressed
his Discourse to that august Assembly, to this Effect.

My Lords, if you see appear in our Faces, more Assurance and more Joy than may
seem becoming poor and miserable dispoiled Persons, who come to implore your
Assistance, it is to be attributed to our Hopes; for besides the Knowledge
which we have of the Generosity of so many illustrious Princes and great
Personages as compose this August Assembly, we have Commission to assure you,
that we do not present our selves before you with the least intention, to
retard your glorious Enterprise for the Conquest of the Holy Land, but to
present you with a Way most Safe, Easy, and absolutely Necessary, not only
happily from this Moment to begin it, but in consequence, most certainly to
atchieve it, with all the Glory and Advantage which you can hope or desire: For
the Subject of our Ambassy is to request, that those Arms which you design to
carry into Egypt, and by that Way to enter into Palestine, may be employed to
render you Masters of Constantinople, by placing there the true Heir the Prince
Alexis, and by overturning the Imperial Throne of the Usurper, who has seized
upon it by the most perfidious Cowardice, and the most detestable Treason that
ever was. See my Lords, the shortest and most infallible Way of Conquering the
Holy Land, and without which, it will be always impossible. You know, generous
French, nor is it unknown to all Germany, what happened to the late King Lewis,
and to the Emperor Conrade, for want of assuring themselves of Constantinople,
before they passed any further, as they were advised by a most able Politician:
This very Oversight was the cause of the loss of two such flourishing Armies,
as might with ease have triumphed over all the East, if they had been Masters
of that great City, which is the very Key of Europe and Asia; without which,
one cannot, but with extreme Difficulty, and a thousand Dangers, receive,
either by Sea or Land, those Assistances which are absolutely necessary, for
the Maintenance of an Army, either in Egypt or Syria. Nor is it probable that
you can repose any sort of Confidence in that perfidious Man who is now Master
of it; for how can he be trusted, who has so basely betrayed his own Brother,
who has banished all the Latins; who has so barbarously affronted the Emperor
Philip, and Philip King of France, both the Allies of these two poor Princes,
Alexis shall be seen at the Head of this flourishing Army of French and
Venetians, at whose very Names the usurping Tyrant will grow pale and tremble,
all Greece, which groans under the load of his servitude, will declare
themselves for this amiable Prince whom they adore; and the Tyrant who is in
Execration with the whole World, believing that he is Surrounded with so many
Enemies, armed for his Destruction, as there are Men in Constantinople, will
endeavor, by an early Flight, to save himself, and leave you an easy Conquest
over a City willing to be Overcome. And for the Advantages which you shall draw
from a Conquest so Easy, and so Glorious, besides what I have already said that
it appears of absolute Necessity for the happy Accomplishing of the Holy War,
it is convenient to let you understand that you are to expect not only Words,
but real Performances, not altogether Contemptible: For this Purpose I am to
inform you, my noble Lords, that the Prince Offors, and we have ample and full
Power to treat with you upon these Conditions: First, That so soon as he shall
be Re-established in the imperial Throne of Constantinople, he will pay you two
hundred thousand Marks in Silver, to be divided between the Confederates, for
the Charges of the War, and to make Provision for the Army. Secondly, That he
will accompany you in Person, with an Army, to the Conquest of Egypt; or if it
shall please you better, that he shall send along with you ten thousand choice
Men, and maintain them at his own Charge there, for one Year; and further, that
he will, during his Life, maintain five hundred Knights well Armed, for the
Preservation of the Conquests which shall be made in the Holy Land. And lastly,
which ought doubtless to be the most powerful Argument of any which I have
hitherto used, he promises and engages inviolably upon his Faith, that if it
shall please God by your Assistance, to raise him to his Throne, that he will
reduce his whole Empire under the Obeisance of the Roman Church, from which it
has been so long time separated by the Heresy and Schism After this, my
Lords, Judge if the Means which we propose to you for the Execution of your
Enterprise of the Holy War, is not more Safe, more Easy, and most Advantageous
to you, and to the whole Church, and in short, the Thing of the World, most
capable to acquire for you Immortal Fame on Eurth, and Glory in Heaven.

This Discourse, which seemed so reasonable and persuasive, was very diversely
received by that Assembly, who resolved to take some time to deliberate upon
such sair Propositions. In truth, the Venetians and the greatest Party of the
French, who, besides the Interest of the public, and the common Cause of
Christianity, found also therein their own, made not the least doubt, but that
the Propositions ought to be accepted; but those who had before used their
utmost Efforts, to hinder the Seige of Zara, opposed them with abundance of
Heat; and, above all the rest, the Abbot du Val de Sernay, who was constantly
in the Head of the discontented Party, made a mighty Noise with his Monks,
protesting against this Diversion, and urging that they could not, with a safe
Conscience, turn those Arms against Christians, which they had taken up for a
Holy War against the Infidels, for the Deliverance of the Holy Sepulcher. On
the contrary, the Abbot de Los, of the same Order, a Man of great Estate and
Interest, who came along with the Marquis de Montferrat, together with several
other Abbots of his Party, did what was possible to confute all the Reasons of
the Abbot du Val de Sernay; and endeavored to persuade the whole Army, that
the only Means to make the Enterprise upon the Holy Land succeed, was this of
Constantinople, and to close with the Conditions proposed by Alexis and the
Ambassadors. Whereupon, before any thing was concluded, the Cardinal of Capua,
one of the Legates, at the Request of the Princes and the Confederates, went
immediately to consult the Pope; who put the Matter under the Deliberation of
the Sacred College at the same time, when, by an odd Adventure, the Ambassadors
of the Usurper Alexis Comnenius, who came to justify the Proceedings of their
Master, arrived at Rome. Isaac having been lawfully deposed for his apparent
Insufficiency, the Empire could not, by Right of Succession, appertain to the
young Alexis, by reason that he was born before his Father was Emperor; and
that therefore, of consequence, it must necessarily belong to his Uncle Alexis
Comnenius, who was legally chosen Emperor. That he therefore made it his
Request to the Pope, that he would not favor his Nephew, who was supported in
his unjust Pretenses by Philip Duke of Suabia, the declared Enemy of the Holy
See, as his Father and Grandfather had been, who had raised so many Wars
against the Popes, his Predecessors. And further, they desired that he would
prohibit the Crusades from going to attack Constantinople, contrary to the Vow
which they had made to endeavor the Conquest of the Holy Land: And then
following the Custom of the Greek Emperors, who, when they have any need of the
Assistance of the Popes, always promise the Reunion of the Church, they made a
thousand Protestations of the sincere Intentions of their Master; and that he
would cause that Obedience to be rendered to the Pope, throughout the whole
Eastern Empire, which was due unto him.

But whether the Pope hoped for that Reunion from Comnenius, who was in
Possession of the Empire, rather than from the young Alexis, who was a
banished, despoiled Prince; and that he apprehended that the Success of this
War would not prove fortunate; or that he could not, upon this Occasion,
persuade himself to favor the Pretensions of Philip of Suabia, whom he did not
love, and whose Competitor to the Empire he openly protected; or whether it was
the earnest desire which he had, that the Expedition to the Holy Land should be
more vigorously prosecuted, which made him disapprove these kind of Diversions
which were made of the Christian Arms against Christians, it is certain that he
received the Ambassadors of old Alexis very favorably, acknowledging their
Master as an Emperor. And further, He was so far from protecting the Prince, as
many of the Cardinals advised, that he sent back the Legate to the Army of the
Confederates, with Letters, by which he command them, in most peremptory Terms,
to march immediately to the War against the Infidels, for the Deliverance of
the Holy Land, and to give over the Enterprise of Constaminople, as apparently
contrary to their first Design. But in this time, the French Princes, and the
Venetians, who were of another Opinion, and believed this to be the readiest
Way to obtain that End; as also, considering that the Pope had said nothing in
his Letters to oppose that Reason, they believed that he had been misinformed
of their Intentions of making Constantinople the Way to Jerusalem: And
therefore, notwithstanding his Letters, they proceeded in the Treaty, and at
length finished it, by accepting of the Conditions offered by the Ambassadors
of Philip and the young Alexis; they reciprocally engaging to establish him
upon the Throne, and in order thereto, fifteen Days after Easter, to march with
the Army and Navy, to his Assistance. The Articles of which Treaty were on each
side ratified by mutual Oaths, and signed by the Doge, Marquis Boniface, the
Counts of Flanders, Blois and St. Paul, and eight of the principal Lords of
their Party, which, without Comparison, was much the strongest.

The Division, however, still continued, and was so far from being quieted by
these Letters of the Pope, that, on the contrary, it was more angmented by
them; and there being such a fair Color for a Separation, after this plain
Declaration of a Sovereign Pope, many thereupon took occasion to abandon the
Army; some to return into their Native Country, which notwithstanding, they
never did, but miserably perished, either by Shipwracks upon the Sea, or by
Thieves and the Peasants at Land, who fell upon them in their Passage, and
robbed them of all they had, even to their very Lives: Others left the Army, to
go directly into Palestine; as did Simon and Guy, Earls of Montfort, with their
Abbot du Val de Sernay; who were followed by the three Brothers, Enguerrand,
Robert and Hugh de Boves, and all those whom they could draw along with them,
either by their Example, their Persuasions, or the Authority they had upon
their Dependants. The Abbot de la Trappe, who, from the Beginning, fell in with
that Party, did not fail to follow it to the End, and accompanied them to join
in Pavia, Renard Count de Dampierre, with whom being passed into Syria, he
there soon learnt, as well as his Companions, by the unfortunate Success of
that Voyage, that it is always dangerous to join with those, who, under the
pretext of Piety and Religion, cause Divisions, by separating from the main
Body. Thus the Christian Army remained much weakened by the Retreat of so many
brave Men, who, had they been firmly united to their Head, might have done
considerable Services, and avoided those Misfortunes which, by their
Separation, fell upon them. As for the Pope, he took it so heinously that the
Confederates had not obeyed his Orders and Advice, that he commanded his two
Legates, the Cardinals of Capua and St. Praxede, to withdraw from the Army, and
sent them express Order to sail to Cyprus, and after into Syria, there, on his
Behalf, to negotiate with the Crusades who were gone from Hungary, and had
embarked in the Ports of Italy and Marseilles.

The Princes, notwithstanding this Defection, pursued their Enterprise with
more Courage and Resolution; and they had the Comfort presently after to
understand that the Pope, as they had hoped, being better informed, had at last
consented to their Design: So that the Venetians, after they had demolished
Zara, to prevent its Revolt for the future, caused the whole Army, consisting
in about forty thousand Combatants, to imbark immediately after Easter. The
Earls of Flanders, Blois and St. Paul sailed first, steering for the Isle of
Corfu, at that time belonging to the Eastern Empire, where the whole Navy was
appointed to rendezvous. The Doge and the Marquis de Montferrat stayed some
time longer at the Port of Zara, to attend the Prince Alexis, who in a few
days, according as had been agreed, arrived there, very handsomely attended.
There he was received by the Doge with all manner of Magnificence; there were
Galleys and other Vessels presented him, for himself, and those of his Retinue:
And the Marquis Boniface, who had the Honor to be his Ally, and to whom the
Emperor had extremely recommended the Care of him, after he had done him all
the Honors imaginable, protested to him, that he would sacrifice all for his
Service, and that he would never abandon him, till he saw him seated upon that
Throne which the Usurper so injuriously detained from him. After this, the
Fleet weighed; and, for a happy Beginning of this War, as they came before
Duras, anciently Dyrrachium, a most important City of Macedonia, and one of the
Keys of the Grecian Empire, the Inhabitants having learnt that the Prince
Alexis was on Board that Fleet, they carried him the Keys of the Place, and
swore an inviolable Fidelity to him. And with this happy Presage, they
proceeded, in a few days, to join the other part of the Army, which was already
landed upon the Isle of Corfu.

This Island is that of the ancient Pheaques, which Homer has rendered so
Famous, by the notable Description which he has given of the Shipwreck of
Ulysses upon it, the proud Palace, and the delicious Gardens of King Alcinous.
It lies between the Gulf of Venice and the Ionian Sea, five or six Miles
distant from Epyrus, being between twenty and thirty Leagues in Length from
North to South, and about nine or ten in Breadth, a Soil Rich and Plentiful,
with a City of the same Name, very Strong, and a Port very Commodious, in a
Peninsula on that side which looks toward Epyrus. It was returned to the
Obedience of the Greeks about fifty Years before, the Emperor Manuel by the Aid
of the Venetians, having recovered it from Roger King of Sicily, who had before
taken it from the Greeks. But those who kept it for the Emperor, having learnt
that the Army of the Crusades was going to re-establish the young Alexis, they
acknowledged him for their Master, and were so far from opposing the Descent of
the Army, that they promised to Surrender the City so soon as Constantinople
should be taken; so that the Army Landed, and without Hindrance encamped before
the City, from whence they received all manner of Necessaries for their
Refreshment; and so soon as they understood the Arrival of the rest of the
Fleet, they marched to meet the Prince Alexis, and conducted him to the Camp,
as it were in Triumph, through the Army, ranged in Battalia, amidst the loud
Acclamations of the Captains and the Soldiers, and with all the Testimonies of
a most extraordinary Joy.

Zara, had endeavored to break the Confederacy, either out of a De^^^e of
returning Home, or as they pretended, going immediately into Syria, by a Way of
their own Choosing, began here to renew their Trade of tampering with the Army,
heightning the Difficulties and Dangers which they said were inevitable in this
Enterprise upon Constantinople, which would engage them in a Work of many
Years. By these Arts they debauched a great Party of the Soldiers, of whom they
had Assurance upon Occasion, though for the present they durst not declare
themselves. The Princes, who perceived it, were dreadfully afraid of the Danger
which they apprehended might ensue upon their being Abandoned by the greatest
part of their Soldiers, and thereby seeing themselves reduced to a Disability
of pursuing the Enterprise which they had so happily begun. Whereupon after
mature Deliberation, and a clear Understanding of the Matter, they concluded,
that if upon this Occasion they should go about to make use of their Authority,
and think by Compulsion to procure Obedience, therebeing so many considerable
Lords and Gentlemen, who were not used to be so treated, it might make them run
the Hazard of destroying one another, and prove a Remedy incomparably worse
than the Disease; they resolved therefore upon an odd Experiment, which as it
was without all President, so in probability, it will never be an Example for
future Imitation. For immediately mounting on Horseback, with the Prince of
Constantinople, and all the Bishops and Abbots, which were of their Party, they
went to find out the principal of the Cabal, who were already separated from
the Army, the chief of which were Eudes de Champlite, James d' Avesnes, Peter
de Amiens, Guy de Coucy, William d' Aunoy, Guy de Chappes, Guy de Constans,
Richard, and Eudes de Dampierre. The Princes no sooner saw them but they
alighted from their Horses, which obliged the Malcontents to do the same,
being much surprised to see those great Princes come with so much Respect to
Gentlemen, who assuredly were much their Inferiors both in Birth and Quality;
but they were much more amazed, when the Princes being come up to them, threw
themselves at their Feet, and with Eyes bathed in Tears, conjured them in the
Name of God, not to abandon them in an Enterprise, upon which the Recovery of
the Holy Land absolutely depended; and protested that they would never rise
from that Posture, till they had obtained the Favor they desired.

In truth, this surprising way, so wholly Irregular, and so much below the
Dignity of Princes, had nothing of Policy in it, being apt to expose Majesty to
Contempt, and render Authority dispisable to Subjects and Soldiers, who by such
Submissions are usually made more Fierce, because they seem to make them more
Considerable: But there are certain Moments and Encounters, wherein a kind of
irregular Conduct, wholly extraordinary, and against all manner of Forms, shall
immediately gain that by Surprise, which all humane Prudence, managed by
Methods, and according to Rules of Art, shall never be able to obtain by the
strongest Force of Reason and Argument. These Gentlemen, afraid and ashamed to
see those Persons at their Feet, whom Nature had elevated above them, and their
own Choice had made their Heads, were so touched with this Action, that unable
to retain their Sobs and Tears, they prostrated themselves before the Princes,
and promised them entire Satisfaction of their Demands. And after having
consulted a few Minutes among themselves, that so they might act more firmly by
common Consent, they engaged to serve them with all their Troops, in the War of
Constantinople, till the end of September, provided the Princes would promise
upon Oath, upon the expiration of that Term, in fifteen days to furnish them
with such Shipping as was requisite for their Transportation from
Constantinople into Syria.

The Conditions being accepted, and mutual Faith on both Sides given, with all
the Marks of a perfect Reconciliation, they Embarked on the Eve of Whitsunday,
and after having coasted all Morea and Achaia, the Fleet came to an Anchor in
the Negropont, where being divided into two Squadrons, the first, wherein was
the Prince Alexis, with the Marquis Boniface, and Count Baldwin, sailed to the
Isle of Andros, where the Inhabitants immediately yielded themselves to their
Prince: The second sailed to rights to the Straits of the Hellespont, where
they made a Descent at the City of Abydus, Asia, the inhabitants immediately
presenting them with the Keys of their City. So that all the Fleet had the
Opportunity to assemble, as it did in eight Days after; and then passed the
Chanal which seemed all covered between Europe and Asia, with Ships and
Galleys, which composed the gallantest Fleet that the Christians had ever seen
upon those Seas; they came to an Anchor at the Port of the Abbey of St. Stephen
upon the Bank of the Propontis, on the Thracian Coast; about five or six miles
from Heptapyrgium, which is the famous Castle of seven Towers. From thence, as
they resolved to go to the Islands of those Seas, to secure themselves of
Provisions before they attempted to form a Siege by Land against so great and
strong a City, the Wind and the Current carried the Fleet from the West to the
East along by the Coast of the City which is situate upon the Propontis so near
the Walls, which were all crowded with Greek Soldiers, that with their Darts
they might reach the Ships. The Ships also came so near as to be able to strike
a Terror into the Hearts of the most undaunted, who might at one View discover
three hundred Vessels, in order of Battle, which made the fairest and yet one
of the most terrible Sights in the World; the Standards flying upon the Poops,
the Ensigns displaid, the Flags, and Pendants flying in the Wind, the Machines
mounted upon the Decks, and the Shields of the Knights painted with their Arms,
glittering with Gold and Silver, ranged all along the Hatches, seemed to
represent the Battlements of some glorious City. It was in this Condition that
this Gallant and formidable Navy bearing with full Sails before the Wind, was
carried to the Port of Chalcedon where the Army made an immediate Descent.

Chalcedon sometimes so famous for the fourth Universal Council, which was
there held under the Emperor Martian in the Papacy of St. Leo, in the
magnificent Church of St. Euphemia, was at this time an indifferent fair City,
situate in a Peninsula, which advancing it self into the Sea at the Entrance of
the Bosphorus over against Constantinople, forms upon its two sides two Ports,
whereof that which is upon the East, was very large and capable of receiving a
great number of ships; that which rendered it more considerable was the proud
Palace, which the Emperors had caused to be built, near that City, there to
enjoy the Beauty of the Place, and the Sweetness of the Country Air which has
the Reputation of being very healthful. But since the Turks are become Masters
of the Empire, they have in such manner ruined this poor City and all the
Country thereabout. That there remain scarcely any Footsteps either of Palaces
or so much as of any Walls; nor is it any thing but a wretched Village,
composed of the Cabins of a few pitiful Fishermen. The Port for want of use and
care being also now so grown up with Sand, that it admits of no other Vessels
but those poor Fisher Boots.

There it was that upon St. John Baptist's Day, the whole Army landed and
lodged themselves most commodiously, partly in the City, partly in the Palace,
and the remainder in the Country Houses, of Pleasure thereabouts where they
found abundance of Wealth which they put into the Ships, which had now only the
Mariners aboard them. Two days after this fair Fleet was conducted to the Port
of Scutari formerly known by the name of Chrysopolis, over against the
Promontory of Bosphorus, or that of Acropolis, now the Seraglio, which is
separated by the Strait not above a good mile. At the same time the whole Army
took its March by Land, in order of Battle, along the Bosphorus, having
Constantinople upon their left hand, which they fiercely beheld as their
approaching Conquest, and the Subject of their future glory, and went and
encamped below Scutari, upon the Bank of the Strait, fully resolved to pass it
in the Sight of their Enemies, as they did in the manner, which I shall relate,
so soon as I shall have given an Account of the Condition wherein the City of
Constantinople then was to resist such resolute Enemies, as came generously to
attack it and fully determined to carry it, or to perish.


BOOK II.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book.
The Condition wherein the City of Constantinople was when it was besieged by
the French and Venetian Crusades. The Defeat of the Usurpers Brother-in-Law by
a small Party of the French. The Passage and the Battle of the Bosphorus. The
taking of the Castle of Galatha. The Venetians force the Entry of the Port. An
Assault given both by Sea and Land, to Constantinople. The Venetians take five
and twenty Towers. A Sally made by the Emperor Alexis with a prodigious Army,
and his Infamous Cowardice. His Flight, and the Reduction of Constantinople.
The Establishment of Isaac and the young Alexis. A Prolongation of the Treaty,
for a Tear between that Emperor and the Confederate Princes. Their Exploits in
Thracia. A dreadful Fire at Constantinople. The History of the horrible Treason
of Murrzuphle. The young Alexis suffers himself to be surprised by the
Artifices of that Traitor, and breaks with the Confederates. The Speech of
Conon de Bethune to the Emperors, to oblige them to accomplish their Treaty.
War declared against them upon their Refusal. The Greeks attempt in Vain to
burn the Venetian Fleet. The Description of that wild Fire. Murtzuphle. The
Election of Cannabus. The double Treason of Murtzuphle; who makes himself be
proclaimed Emperor. The Death of Isaac, and of the young Alexis, whom
Murtzuphle strangles with his own Hands. The Confederates make War against the
Tyrant. His Defeat by Henry the Brother of Count Baldwin. The first Assault
given upon the Port side of Constantinople, wherein the Confederates are
repulsed. The Second Assault by which the City is taken by plain Force. The
Flight of Murtzuphle. The Greeks lay down their Arms. The City plundered, and
the Booty there gained. The Relics from thence transported to several
Churches of Europe. Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, chosen Emperor The Policy of the
Venetians in the Election of that Prince. His Elogy and Character. The Election
of a Patriarch. The Destribution of the Provinces of the Empire. The happy
beginning of the Emperor, who reduces all Thracia. Murtzuphle surprised, and
betrayed by the Old Alexis, who puts out his Eyes. The Flight of Alexis, and
the taking of Murtzuphle. He is brought back to Constantinople, where for the
Punishment of his Crimes, he is thrown headlong from a high Column. Old Alexis
taken. His End. The Glorious Success of this Crusade.

THE Imperial City of Constantinople, of which I have given the Survey and
exact Description, in the Second Book of the History of the Iconclastes,
conformable to the Condition, wherein it was under the Empire of Constantinus
Copronymus, was neither so strong, so fair, nor so well peopled at that time,
as it was now when the French and Venetians, undertook to make themselves
Masters of it by plain Force; as for the Multitude of Inhabitants, the Turks
having now overrun and conquered the greatest part of Natolia, except some
Maritime places upon the Bosphorus, the Propomis and the Aegean Sea, the
Asiatick Greeks came generally to inhabit at Constantinople, to secure
themselves from the Tyranny of the Infidels. And for its Beauty, it was so far
from having lost any, that it was mightily augmented by the great number of
Palaces, public Buildings and magnificent Churches, which since that time had
been built, which were so increased that one might count above five hundred of
them, which rearing their lofty Spires, and stately Towers, above the rest of
the City, showed at once a most pleasing and Majestic Prospect to the
Beholders; so that when the Crusades first discovered this great and
Illustrious City from the highest places of the Port of the Abbey of St.
Stephen, they were so pleasingly surprised, that they were forced to avow, that
they had never seen any thing comparable to it in the whole World.

And lastly for its Strength, it had all that Nature could contribute to it by
its incomparable Situation between three Seas, which environed it in the Nature
of a Peninsula of a Triangular Figure, the Propontis on the South, the
Bosphorus on the East, and the Gulf which makes the Port, upon the North. Nor
was there any thing wanting, which Art could add either toward the Sea or
Land, to render it impregnable; and though the Avarice and Negligence of some
of the later Emperors, had suffered it to be much weakened in the
Fortifications, yet was it in such a Condition, that the greatest Captains
among the Crusades, believed they had never seen any thing more difficult to be
undertaken than to besiege it. For to the Landward it was encompassed with
double Walls of hewn Stone mingled with Brick, with a Ditch of five and twenty
paces breadth, which was filled with a Spring which never suffered it to be
dry; the two Walls were eighteen Foot distance from each other, and extending
from the Angle of the Propontis on the South, to the seven Towers, and from
thence to the Gulf upon the North, joining the Palace and the Gate of
Blaquerness. The inward Wall was one hundred Foot high, Thracian side, being
near two Leagues in length. The Walls which were next the Sea were much lower,
but very thick, being above a good mile in length upon that side, which is
washed by the Propontis to the point of the Bosphorus, and defended by one
hundred eighty and eight Towers; that side of the Gulf, which stretches it
self toward the North, and makes the Port of Constantinople in the form of a
Crescent, being above two Leagues, reaches as far as Blaquerness, and is
defended by one hundred and ten Towers; so that admitting there were men enough
to guard so many Towers, which mutually defend one another, it must needs be a
very difficult attempt to take the City by Assault. Besides the Port was not
only defended by these Towers, and Walls, by the Acropolis or Fortress which
was upon the Point of the Promontory of the Bosphorus; but also by the strong
Town of Galatha, situate on the other side of the Gulf, but above all by the
Tower or Castle there, from whence a vast Chain, supported by great Timbers in
the Sea, was drawn to the Acropolis, and locked up the Entrance into the Haven.

And for the Multitude of those who were to defend the City, it was
innumerable; for there were then at Constantinople above a hundred thousand men
sit to serve on Horseback, and more than three times that number of Foot well
armed; besides the Soldiers of the Imperial Guard, which was very strong and
composed principally of the English-Danes, whom the Greeks call Barranges,
which being banished from England by Edward, who was descended from the Ancient
English Saxon Kings, had betaken themselves to the Greek Emperors, who had used
these People for above a hundred and fifty Years, as their Ordinary Guards.

This was the Condition wherein Constantinople then stood, to the Strength of
which Alexis Commenius too much trusted, believing it impossible for the Power
of the whole Earth, if it were assembled together to be able to force it. This
Prince had acquired the Reputation of a valiant man and a great Captain before
he came to the Empire; and that was one great reason that he met with no
greater Opposition in his Usurpation; for it was generally believed that he was
another kind of man for War and Business than his Brother Isaac Angelus, and
that therefore he would by his Arms, better support the Majesty of the Empire
and its Dominions against the Barbarians, who frequently attacked them with
great advantage. But it is too often seen that the Change of Fortune and a
happy State, produce also a Change in the manners, and the Conduct of men; and
those Vices, which before it was necessary to conceal, by the appearance of
Virtue, appear barefaced when they come to have Liberty fortified by Power, and
are from under the Curb and Discipline of Fear. So this Alexis was no sooner an
Emperor, but that he became the most cowardly and dissolute Person in the
World, never thinking of any thing but how to drown himself in Pleasures, and
abandoning the Care of the public Affairs to those who either wholly neglected
them, or at least regarded them only to search for opportunities of enriching
themselves out of the Spoils of the public. And indeed he was certainly now
become most stupid, for though it was the Town Discourse at Constantinople,
what great Preparations the French and Venetians were making, and that they had
undertaken to resettle the Young Alexis in the Throne, yet did he not make the
least Preparations for a War; only some times in the Jollity of his
Entertainments, and the Heat of his Wine, in which he plunged himself day after
day; when his Head was warm he would tell those who were the Companions of his
Debauches, that he would send out a Party of his Guards, who should bring this
handful of Hairbrain Fellows bound in Irons, who being weary of their Lives
were come so far to search for Death at so great a charge, to have the Honor to
die by his Commands. Nor did he recover out of this profound Lethargy, till he
understood that the Confederate Army, after the Reduction of Duras, had assured
themselves of the Isle of Corfu; and then indeed he began to give Orders for
the Defense of Constantinople, causing all the Soldiers which were quartered
round the Country to enter into the City; Arsenal by the Negligence or
Covetousness of his Brother-in-Law Michel Stryphnus, the high Admiral, who had
turned the Sails, the Cordage, the Anchors, and even the Bolts and Iron Nails
of his Navy into Gold and Silver.

Having in this manner provided for the Defense of Constantinople, so soon as
he saw the Confederate Army was landed at Scutari, he drew out and encamped
also with the greatest part of his Army upon the Bank of the Bosphorus,
opposite to the Camp of the Confederates, who took some days to refresh
themselves, before they resolved to pass the Arm of the Sea, in the sight of
the Emperor and his Army, which was incomparably more in number than theirs:
And in the mean time Alexis caused his Brother-in-Law with the choice of his
Cavalry to pass over three or four Leagues, below the two Camps, to hinder the
Latins from forraging, and to glean up such as they found straggling for
Forage in the Fields. This gave an occasion to some brave men to make a happy
Presage of this War, by such an uncommon Action of Galantry, as made it equally
apparent, how resolute and undaunted the French were, and what shameful Cowards
those were upon whom the Emperor depended as the most Valiant men of his Army.

For about fourscore Cavaliers under the Conduct of Eudes and William de
Champlite, the Count Gras, who came along with the Marquis Montferrat, of Oger
de Saint Cheron, and Manasses de L' Isle, being gone out to score the Fields
and Convoy the Forragers, discovered at a good distance this Brigade of Greeks,
wherein there was at least five hundred men at Arms, with a Proportionate
number of Foot, encamped at the Foot of a Hill which covered them. This great
in equality could not hinder these Valiant men from a sudden and generous
resolution to attack them even in their Camp. Having therefore divided
themselves into four little Squadrons, at the same time that the Greeks
dispising so final a number of Horse, who had no Infantry to sustain them,
were putting themselves in Battle without their Camp, with an Intention to
surround them, they marched to charge the Enemy, who made show of receiving
them; but upon the first shock these cowardly Greeks, unable to endure the
Sight of the Latins, whom they thought Devils rather than men, seeing with what
Heat and Fury they ran to the Charge, immediately routed themselves and betook
them to a shameful Flight, following the example of their Captains who were not
in the Rere at that time; so that the Squadrons who pursued them for a good
League killed a great many without resistance, whilst the rest saved
themselves upon their ships, leaving the Conquerors Masters of their Camp,
where they found a rich Booty, which infinitely rejoiced the whole Army, who
now regarded no more the Cowardly Multitude of their Enemies, but as a sort of
People with whose spoils they were to enrich themselves.

There is nothing so pitifully Timorous as a wicked man, who is attacked with a
potent Enemy without, at the same time that his guilty Conscience makes a cruel
War within his Soul; Alexis who was astonished at this unlucky beginning, and
who had now more than ever before his Eyes the terrible Image of his Crimes,
the dreadful Punishment whereof he feared the Latins were to execute, besieved
that it was his best way to endeavor to make a Peace and avoid an unpropitious
War, but withal without showing any Fear, that so he might obtain what he did
so earnestly hope. For this purpose the next day he sent to the Princes a
Gentleman of Lombardy, called Nicholas Rossi, who was an Inhabitant of
Constantinople. The Lombard after he had shown them his Letters of Credence,
the Confederates being Assembled in the Palace of Scutari, to give him
Audience, delivered himself after this manner. He acquainted them that the
Emperor his Master, was very well acquainted with their Merit and their
Quality, which did not give place to any in the World, except crowned Heads;
That he was well informed that they had taken upon them the Cross, and armed
themselves against the Sarasins, to recover the Holy Sepulcher of Jesus Christ
out of their wicked Hands; that therefore he was much amazed to, find that
instead of pursuing that glorious Design, they were entered upon the I
erritories of a Prince; a Christian Emperor.

This was what the Envoy had in charge to say, who by the cunning Artifice of
the Tyrant, was taught not to touch in the least upon that jarring String of
his violent Usurpation, which he very well knew was the sole Canse of this
Enterprise. It was for this reason that the Princes, after a Moments
Deliberation upon what was fit to be done upon this occasion, desired Conon de
Bethune, a Knight who had the Reputation to be one of the discreetest men and
best Speakers of his time to give an Answer to the Envoy, which with great
Majesty and Eloquence he did in these Terms. Tell your Master from the Princes
and Confederate Lords, that his Astonishment is neither rational nor sincere;
That he knows better than to need any Information, that it is not upon the
Lands of his Empire that we are entered, since the Empire does not appertain to
him; but to the Prince Alexis his Nephew, whom you see here present in this
August Assembly, and who is the only lawful Heir of the Emperor Isaac, from
whom his Brother has most unjustly and cruelly usurped the Empire. But that,
if repenting of this horrible Injustice, he will come and beg his Pardon of the
Prince, who has Arms in his Hand to punish him, and at the same time lay the
Crown at his Feet, which he has ravished from him, by the most detestable
Treason and Violence, the Princes hope they shall be able not only to procure
him that favor, but to prevail with the Emperor Alexis to make such a
Provision for him, as may enable him to pass the rest of his Days in peaceable
Honor; but that without this compliance they desired him not to be so rash as
to bring any more such Messages unto them. This was the answer which in the
name of the Princes, was returned by the Brave and Sage Conon de Bethune, whose
illustrious House, which before flourished in the Reign of Hugh Capet, in the
Person of Robert Lord de Bethune, protector of Arras, has not only hitherto
maintained its first Luster, but has been much augmented in his Descendants by
the great Employs, and the high Dignities, which their Merit and Services, have
acquired from the Bountiful acknowledgements of our Kings.

After this, that the Confederates might once more try what was to be done by
the Ways of sweetness, before they should come to make use of Force, they
resolved, to sail by the City, upon the side of the Propontis, and to show the
young Alexis to the People who would run to the Walls, and invite them to
declare in his Favor against the Usurper, thereby if it were possible to avoid
those Mischiefs of a War, which must of Necessity be severe to such as must
expect to be treated like Conquered Rebels, and Accomplices in the Crimes of the
detestable Tyrant, But when they perceived that either the Fear of the Power of
the Usurper, or the hatred which the Greeks had to the Latins, hindered the
Constantinopolitans from doing any thing in favor of the Prince, a great
Council of War was held the next day on Horseback in the open Field, where it
was resolved, that the French should attempt to pass over the Bosphorus below
Scutari, in sight of the great Army of Alexis Comnenius, which was encamped on
the further Bank, and that they should attack Galatha, to make themselves
Masters of the Port, at the same time that the Venetians should set upon the
Galleys, which desended the Chain at the Entry of it. For this purpose the
whole French Army was divided into six Bridages; the first was that of the Earl
of Flanders, who had the Van, in regard that he had under his Command, more
Archers and Cross-Bow men than any of the rest, who were most proper to
disperse the Enemies. Henry his Brother accompanied with Matthew de Valincourt
had the Second. The Count de St. Paul with his Nephew Peter de Amiens, led the
third The fourth was commanded by Lewis Earl of Blois. The Brave Matthew de
Montmorenci, the Son of the Constable Matthew the first, with Geoffry de
Ville-Hardouin, Mareshal of Champagne, was at the Head of the fifth. And the
Marquis Boniface brought up the Rear, French who inhabit betwixt the Alps and
the Rhone.

Never was there seen to appear greater Courage and Resolution, than to engage
in this Enterprise, which seemed to be the most rash Undertaking in the World,
among all the Captains and the Soldiers: For, to show that they were all
determined either to die or to force their Passage, in despite of the Army of
the Enemies, though ten times stronger than theirs, they made their Wills, and
received Absolution from the Bishops and Abbots; who, to encourage them to do
bravely, put themselves also aboard the Ships with the Princes and Soldiers.
There were about two hundred who were ranged in two great Lines: The Knights
and the Men at Arms went foremost upon the flat bottomed Boats, their Servants
holding their Horses, sadled and caparison'd with rich Housses of Taffata down
to their Feet, and, according to the manner of that Age, adorned with the Arms
of their Masters: Upon each side of them rowed the Long-Boats, filled with
Archers and Cross-Bows, who, as they advanced to the other side, discharged a
mortal Shower of Steel, without ceasing, upon their Enemies. The second Line
was composed of Galleys, every one of which towed a great Ship, that so they
might come up all together, and make the stronger Charge upon the Enemy, by
fighting all at once on the several parts of the Bank upon which they were
posted.

The whole Army being in this manner embarked, every one keeping the Order
wherein the six Squadrons were disposed upon the two Lines, early in the
Morning, the 8th Day of July, they began to row to rights against the Enemy;
who, on their side, advanced in good Order toward the Shore. Never could there
be seen any thing more terribly beautiful than this Spectacle: The Sky was
mighty serene, and the Sun, which now just began to raise his glorious Head
above the Hemisphere, darting his bright Beams upon the Helmets, the Bucklers,
and the naked Swords, which were advanced in the Air, made such a dreadful
Glittering, as being augmented by the Reflection of the Bosphorus, whose Waters
being as smooth as polished Glass by reason of the great Calm which then
happened, dazzled the Eyes of the Beholders, and appeared as if all the Air had
been on fire. That glorious Luminary, in this Rencounter, was doubly favorable
to the French, by reason that the Fleet rowing from East to West, they had it
on their Backs at the same time that he shot his kind Beams directly into the
Eyes of their Enemies: besides that, a small Easterly Wind rising with the Sun,
drove them gently toward the other Shore, which was at no great distance, the
Bosphorus, in that place, being not above half a League over: So that one might
easily distinguish the Squadrons and Battalions of the Greeks in very good
Order, and in prodigious numbers, drawn up all along the opposite Shore, and
the Emperor at the Head of them, endeavoring to animate them by his Voice and
Gesture, to repulse that handful of Pirates, as he called them in Contempt, who
had no other Force but what they borrowed from a Brutal Rashness, and the
little Esteem they had for their wretched Lives, which they might, without
trouble, be quickly eased of, by throwing them headlong from the steep Banks
which they endeavored to gain, and cooling their foolish and audacious Courage
in the Waters of the Bosphorus. The Shore echoed, and the Sea seemed to tremble
at the dreadful Sound of a thousand Trumpets and Cornets, and the Shouts of the
Soldiers, which were terribly repeated, thereby to encourage one another, and
to strike a Terror into their Enemies: The very Oars were not wanting to make
up the dreadful Harmony, clashing against the Water with an extraordinary
force, to gain the Shore; which they quickly did, with an incredible Heat, both
of the Mariners and Soldiers, and above all, the Captains, and the Gentlemen of
Quality.

For so soon as they came near the Land, the Knights, in their Complete Armor,
covered with their Shields, leaped up to the Middle into the Sea, with their
Swords in their Hands; and in despite of the dreadful Shower of Darts and
Arrows. which the Greeks from all Parts poured upon them, they ran to charge
the first Battalions, whilst the Soldiers, animated by their brave Examples,
threw themselves out of the Ships, some into the Sea, some upon the Shore,
every one having a desire of the Honor of being foremost to come to the
Combat; but the Cowardice of Commenius and his Greeks did not permit them that
Favor; French, without staying for the dis-imbarking of their Horses, march
directly toward them, with their Swords in their Hands; this infinite Rabble
turned Head, and sled with so much speed, that the Count de St. Paul, who was
one of the first that charged them, pleasantly writ in his Letter to the Duke
of Brabant, that they out-ran the very Arrows which were shot after them; so
swift were their Feet, by the sudden Terror which then siezed them; and put
all those Spirits, which should have actuated their Hands and Hearts, into
their Heels. So that the Army was constrained to give them over to their own
Fear, which pursued them, nothing else being able to overtake them, whilst the
Princes had leisure to throw out the Bridges, and disimbark the Horses, and
range the Army, as was before agreed, into six Squadrons.

Now they imagining that Alexis Comnenius, after his Flight, was retreated to
his Camp, they resolved immediately to attack him there; but he eased them of
that trouble, for they presently found that this Cowardly Prince had, for his
safety, abandoned it with so much Precipitation, that he had left behind him
his Tents and Equipage, and all the Baggage of his Army; with which the
Soldiers enriched themselves. After this, the Night approaching, they lodged
themselves commodiously in the Quarter of the Jews, which was upon the Bank of
the Bosphorus, near the Castle of Galatha, which they resolved the next Day to
attack, thereby to gain the Command of the Haven; but they were prevented by
the Garrison of the English-Danes, Pisans, and other Strangers, to whom the
Emperors had entrusted the Keeping of that Place; who, by the Order of
Comnenius, made a vigorous Sally the next Morning, being reinforced by an
infinite Multitude of Greek Soldiers and Burghers, who continually passed from
Pera to relieve them. Insomuch, that these Strangers, who were good Men, and
found few of the French prepared to receive them, had, at first, some
Advantage. The valiant James d' Avesnes, who was the first that advanced with
what Infantry he could get together to oppose them, received a great Wound in
his Face with a Lance, and had undoubtedly been slain, if he had not been
instantly succored by Nicholas de Laulain, one of his Knights, who drew him
out of the Press of his Enemies, with which he was surrounded; and by a
prodigious Valor, almost singly sustained the Brunt, till the rest of the
Troops came up, who hasted from all Parts, to the Combat. Then it was that they
furiously charged these Soldiers of the Garrison of Galatha, who sighting
bravely, were most of them cut in pieces; the rest, crowded by that confused
Multitude of Greeks, who presently took the Fright, sled with so great haste
and Disorder, that one part of them running toward the Port, to recover their
Barks, threw themselves into them with such Precipitation, that they sunk the
Vessels, and were drowned, whilst others thinking to save themselves in the
Castle of Galatha, did in such a manner, by their Multitude, stop up the
Passage of the Gate, every one being desirous to be the foremost, that those
who pursued them closely would not give them the liberty to shut it: so that,
after a bloody Combat, which was maintained by these miserable Men out of
perfect Necessity and Despair, and not by true Courage and Valor, the French
gained the Gate; and after they had either taken or slain all such as made any
Resistance, they remained Masters of the Fortress, and of the Chain.

At the same time also wherein the French performed this memorable Action, the
Venetians having drawn up their Fleet in Order, in the Chanal below Scutari,
turned the Prows of their Galleys and Ships against the Entry of the Haven; and
under the favor of a Tide-Wind, which blew from the East, just in their
Sterns, they bore up to the Chain, from their Engines, which threw Darts and
great Stones, battering and bruising the five and twenty Galleys, and other
Ships, which lay there to defend it: Insomuch, that one of the greatest Ships
coming up close to the Chain, whilst the others continually discharged against
the Greeks, they cut the Chain in two with prodigious Scissors of Steel, which
were opened and shut with an Engine. After which, having broken and chopped in
pieces the Timbers that supported the Chain, the whole Venetian Fleet freely
entered the Port, and all the Greek Vessels were either taken, disabled or sunk.

This was but the beginning of the most wonderful and hazardous Enterprise that
ever was undertaken; which was, to take a City, in which, for one that attacked
it, the Mareshal de Ville Hardouin tells us, there were two hundred to defend
it. However, in order thereunto, it was resolved that there should be two
Attacks; the one by Sea, on the Port side; and the other by Land, toward the
Palace of Blaquerness, near that end of the Wall which adjoyns to the Haven.
The Venetians undertook the first, and the French made Choice of the second,
because that, in those times, they were not acquainted with fighting on
Shipboard, as were the Venetians, who were then accounted the most potent and
able Seamen of the World, having, as it were, founded their Empire upon that
Watery Element. Having therefore, for four days, made all the Preparations
necessary for their Attacks, the French Army coasting along by the Fleet,
marched near two Leagues to the Stone Bridge, which is a little below the place
where the River Barbyses, joining its Streams with that of Cydaris, discharges
it self into the Bottom of the Haven. This Bridge was something longer than
that which is called the Small Bridge, at Paris; and so narrow, that not above
three Horsemen could pass abreast upon it: So that, if the Greeks had had any
Courage, they might easily have maintained it; but they contented themselves
with breaking it, and that being easily repaired in the Night, the whole Army
passed over it without Molestation; and having put themselves into the same
Order as before, of six Bodies, they encamped in the Valley of Blaquerness,
between the City and the Cosmidium or Monastery of St. Cosmus, which was
sometimes called Bohemond's Castle, because that Prince lodged there when he
was at Constantinople, in the first Crusade. The Camp was immediately
fortified, and the Engines prepared to batter the Courtain, and the Towers,
which were on the Right and Left, near the Palace, and the Gate of Blaquerness,
which was the only Quarter which could be besieged by such a small number of
Men; whereas the multitude of the Enemies was innumerable, and therefore made
continual Sallies, especially under the Conduct of Theodore Lascaris, the
Emperor's Son-in-Law, the most valiant Man of his Nation: So that the French
were obliged, almost Night and Day, to stand to their Arms, to repulse them;
which did so tire out the Army, and besides, they had no great quantity of
Provisions, that there was a necessity for them to do what could be done
quickly; otherwise, in a little time, they would be obliged to raise the Seige.

For this Reason, after having, for ten Days, continually battered the Walls,
it was with that Effect as gave them hopes they might carry the Place by Force.
It was therefore resolved to give a general Assault, both by Sea and Land;
accordingly, upon the 17th Day of July, by Break of Day, the whole Army fell on
with all the Courage and Resolution imaginable. The Venetians had drawn all
their great Ships along the Brink, in a great Line, about three Flight Shots in
length, with Intervals between them, for the Galleys which lay behind them,
when it was time to row close to the Shore, to make the Descent. All the great
Engines were placed upon the Decks, and the Round Tops of the Masts were filled
with Archers and Cross-Bows, who might shoot downwards, from that Height, with
great advantage: There were also, by the Main Masts, great Towers raised with
strong Timber, which surpassed the height of those of the City, upon the Tops
of which five or six Soldiers might go in a Front, by great and large Steps,
which were made from the Top to the Bottom: They were covered with raw Hides,
to preserve them from Fire; and they had long, large and strong Ladders, which
were so fastened to the Timbers, that by the help of certain Pullies, and other
little Engines, which were made for the purpose, they might have the furthest
end fall upon the Walls, like a Drawbridge, or be brought to rest upon the
Towers in those places where they jutted out toward the Sea. So soon as the
Signal was given, all the Engines, from the Ships, began to play in an instant,
and one might see an infinite of Stones, Darts and Arrows fly, to scatter those
who defended the Walls; and at the same time the Bridges were thrown upon the
Walls, and the Ladders clapped to the Towers, the Soldiers, three abreast,
Greeks, who being assisted both by their number, and the advantage of the
place, defended themselves successfully, by rolling great Stones and pieces of
Timber upon the Assailants, throwing abundance of Wild sire among them, and
discharging from all the Towers a prodigious Shower of Arrows, to hinder the
Galleys, who did what they could, from landing.

Here the famous Henry Dandolo did an Action which exacts the Justice of all
Posterity to his Memory, in celebrating his Name, as one of the greatest Men in
the World: For, quite worn with old Age, and blind as he was, yet was he to be
seen in complete Armor, with his naked Sword in his hand, upon the Forecastle
of the Capitana, or Admiral-Gally, having the great Standard of St. Mark born
before him. The old Prince, transported with a valiant Impatience, and and an
extreme Heat, with which he burnt, to have a share in the Combat, briskly
commanded the Seamen to use their utmost Skill and Force to get ashore, upon
peril of their Lives, telling them, if they did not land him presently, he
would hang them up every Man. This Command, given with such a terrible Menace,
and which Fear made still more strong, was followed with such a quick
Obedience, that the Gally was in an instant brought to the Shore, through a
terrible Storm of Stones, Darts and Arrows, which from all parts fell upon her.
Then was to be seen the Standard of St. Mark advance to the Walls, followed by
the brave Doge, who caused himself to be lead to the Assault: And at the same
time, by his Example and Heroic Courage, he drew the rest after him; for this
sight gave so much both of Shame and Courage to the other Galleys, who stood
yet aloof, that the Captains and Soldiers fearing they should fall under the
Infamy of having abandoned their General in such a noble Danger, they left
playing the good Husband, and rowed with all their force, like resolute Men
exposing themselves, to the utmost Perils, to gain the Shore, which they did
almost all at the same time; and throwing themselves with Precipitation out of
the Galleys, every Man as well as he could, striving who should get first
ashore, then ran like so many enraged Lions, after their General, to the
Assault. Never was any thing to be seen more furious or terrible; for the Walls
on that side being lowest, and having, for ten Days, been continually battered,
were in many places ruined; so that while some strove to enter by the Breaches,
others presented the Scaling Ladders: the number of those who defended the
Walls and Breaches far surpassed that of the Assailants; so that both the one
and the other found a stout Resistance: nor did it seem probable, that such a
small number were capable of surmounting such a difficult Enterprise; nor, in
probability, had it succeeded, but that, all of a sudden, the great Standard
of St. Mark was seen planted, and flying upon one of the Towers, no Man, to
this day, being ever able to give an Account how, or by whom it was carried
thither.

This made the Soldiers assume new Courage; for, according to the humor of
those Times, the Superstition whereof, which was so advantageous to them, the
wise Captains knew very well how to improve, they believed that S. Mark fought
for them, and commanded them to follow him; and the Enemies astonished to to
see it, lost both their Judgment, and their Courage; so that, believing that
the City was taken, and that the French were upon their Backs, they forsook the
Walls, and giving all for lost, ran to secure themselves in their Houses: so
that the Venetians finding no more Resistance, siezed upon a great part of the
Walls, and made themselves Masters of twenty five of the hundred and ten Towers
which were on the side of the Haven; and when they saw the Greeks, who had
recovered their Consternation, return, with the Soldiers of the Garrison, in a
prodigious number, and good Order, to dislodge them, sinding it impossible,
with so small a Force, to be able to maintain their Post against so many
Enemies, they set fire to the adjacent Houses; which being driven with extreme
Violence, by a strong North Wind which then blew, the whirling Flames were
carried full in the Faces of the Greeks, which obliged them to stop, and
endeavor by all Means, immediately to extinguish the Fire.

French made prodigious Attempts on their side, to gain the double Wall which
they attacked near the Palace of Blaquerness. Of the six Battalious, those two
which were commanded by the Marquis Boniface, and Matthew de Montmorency, were
placed in Battalia between the City and the Camp, as well to guard it from
Surprise, as to sustain those who made the Attack. The four others, commanded
by the Earl of Flanders, and Prince Henry his Brother, the Counts of Blois and
St. Paul, gave a furious Assault to the out Wall, which was vigorously defended
by the stranger Soldiers, whose Courage was quite different from that of the
Greeks; the Combat was long and obstinately maintained on both Sides; the
Engines all this time playing with horrible Fury, and one of the Towers, which
was half overthrown by Mining, and a part of the Wall, was gained; fifteen
brave Knights, with two stout Soldiers, being the first that mounted them,
presently planting their Ensigns there; they fought for some time with their
Swords and Battle-Axes, against those, who in great Numbers came to dislodge
them, but not receiving timely Succors, being oppressed by Multitude, they were
at last forced to leap from the Walls, leaving two of their Company Prisoners
with the Enemies, who immediately carried them to the Emperor as a mighty Pawn
of an assured Victory. But the News which was at the same time brought of the
good Success of the Venetians on their side, gave so much Joy, and so inflamed
the Hearts of the French with Courage and Emulation, that they renewed the
Attack with more Fury than before, till such time as a terrible Cloud of Dust,
which advanced toward them from the West, and the sound of the Trumpets, the
neighing of Horses, and the noise of an infinite number of People, which they
heard, but could not well descern, obliged them to quit the Assault, and put
themselves in a posture of Defense.

It was the Emperor Alexis, who compelled by the Cries and the Murmurs of the
People and Soldiers, who openly reproached him with his Cowardice, and by the
Fear which he had, lest they should fall upon him and pull him in pieces, was
at last sallied out of Constantinople with above sixty great Battalions,
sustained by all his Cavalry, to charge the Army in the Rere, if they should
continue the Assault, or to give them Battle in the open Field if they should
dare to expect it, not doubting in the least, but that he should be able to
surround them, and cut them in pieces; it being very improbable that six
Battalions wearied with a desperate Assault, should be able to resist sixty of
fresh Men, the least of which was incomparably greater than the biggest of the
other. For this reason the Princes, that they might not be attacked but in
Front, ranged their Troops before the Barriers and Palisado's of their Camp, at
the Foot of the Hill of Blaquerness, resolving there, firmly to expect and
receive their Enemies, without being the least astonished at their Numbers;
which, by Experience, they knew consisted in a great many Men, but a few
Soldiers. In the Front stood the Archers and Cross-bows, who were sustained by
a seventh Battalion, composed of two hundred Knights, who were Dismounted; The
other six Bodies followed according to their Order, which they had always
observed since their Passage over the Bosphorus; there were some Companies left
in the Camp, to prevent its being surprised, during the Combat. As they were
thus drawing up their Troops, the Army received, with incredible Joy, the
Reinforcement which the generous Henry Dandolo brought to their Assistance; for
having understood that the Emperor had made this Sally, he caused himself to be
immediately Conducted to the Camp, which was at no great Distance from his
Post, with all the Force which he could rally, drawing what could be spared
from the Towers which he had taken, and protesting that he would live and die
with his Brethren and brave Companions in Arms.

That which was still more favorable to the Confederate Army, was, that the
Greeks had no other General, but this miserable cowardly Alexis; for by a
little Frieque of Jealousy and Glory, and by a sottish Vanity, he would not
suffer his Son-in-Law Theodore Lascaris, to make one in the Sally; for had he
Commanded, being both a Soldier and a Captain, he would with Advantage against
so few Enemies, have made use of that infinite Number of Hands, which remained
wholly Unprofitable that Day, by reason that their Commander had neither
Courage nor Skill enough to manage them to the best Advantage. And in reallity,
Bosphorus and the Euxin Sea, to Zagora, anciently called Debeltus, a City of
Thracia, at the Foot of Mount Hemus, where, by reason of his Guilt, his
Cowardice, and the Contempt into which he was fallen, having reason to fear
some great Revolution in his Fortune, he had beforehand assured himself of a
Retreat.

Before Day, this Flight was discovered, and the People detesting this infamous
Cowardice, and fearing moreover, lest the Army of the Latins, making Advantage
of this Disorder, and such a favorable Conjuncture, should by a second Assault
take the City by Force, ran by Shoals to the Prison where the Tyrant, after the
Escape of the young Alexis, had caused Isaac to be detained; and seizing upon
the Empress Euphrosine and her Children, whom the unhappy Comnenius had
brutishly abandoned, his excessive Fear having extinguished in his Soul all the
Sentiments of Tenderness, as a Father and a Husband, they resolved to Sacrifice
them in his Room, to the blind Fury of the People. They instantly knocked off
the Manacles of poor Isaac, who had been so barbarously treated by his own
Brother; and Fortune, who plays with the Destinies of Men, whom she mounts up
and throws down, as she is pleased to turn her slippery Wheel, continuing her
old Trade, she mounted upon the imperial Throne, the same Isaac, whom about
eight years before, she had so tragically tumbled out of it. After which, all
the Orders of the City, with the Consent of this poor old Man, who in truth,
was nothing but the Shadow of an Emperor, sent Deputies to the Princes, to give
them an account of the happy Change of their Affairs by the Flight of the
Usurper, and the Re-establishment of the Emperor Isaac, and to desire the young
Prince to come and take part of the good Fortune, and the Empire of his Father.

The Princes pleasingly surprised by a thing so little expected, and which was
confirmed to them by those who came from Constantinople, one after another,
striving who should be the first to joy the young Alexis with this good
Fortune; yet nevertheless acted with their wonted Prudence upon this Occasion,
and omitted no necessary Precautions, as being suspicious of the Greeks, whom
by Experience they had no reason to trust; and therefore they followed the
Maxim of those, who believe that one can never act more securely than by acting
cautiously, and early the next Morning drew out the Army in Battalia, as if
they had been going to the Combat; and then they acquainted the young Alexis,
that if this good Fortune of his was true, being procured by their Arms, they
did, before any other Marters were considered, expect from him an Assurance of
the Performance of the Treaty, and that the Emperor his Father, should ratify
it to them; whereupon the Mareshal de Ville Hardouin, and Matthew de
Montmorency, with two Venetian Noblemen, Blaquerness. After which, having in a
particular Audience proposed the Articles to him, though he found them very
hard, yet was he so Overjoyed to see himself Re-established; and so fearful to
lose his Empire a second time, if he should make his Deliverers and Benefactors
become his Enemies, that he instantly ratified them, and caused his Letters
Patents, with the golden Bulla's, to be expedited, and delivered to the
Ambassadors, wherein he promised, with most solemn Oaths, that he would
inviolably fulfill and perform those Articles of the Treaty. Whereupon the young
Alexis was conducted by the Princes and Confederate Lords, as it were in
Triumph, into Constantinople, where, after he had been received by the Emperor
his Father, and the Empress his Mother-in-Law, the Daughter of Bela, King of
Hungary, with all the Marks of Tenderness, and those Transports of Joy, which
it is impossible to express, he was associated with his Father in the Empire,
and with all Magnificence and Solemnity, upon the first day of August, crowned
in the stately Church of Sancta Sophia.

This noble Ceremony being over, as the Confederates had accomplished their
Part of the Treaty, it was also necessary that Alexis should take Care of the
performance of his Engagements. And immediately therefore, that he might
satisfy the Princes in one of the most important Articles of the Treaty, he
writ mighty handsome Letters to Pope Innocent, in which he renounced the Schism
of his Ancestors, and acknowledged him to be Christ's Vicar upon Earth, and
supreme Pastor and Head of the Universal Church; promising to render to him and
his Successors, that filial Obedience which was their Due; and to employ all
his Power to oblige the Greek Church to follow his Example, and to reunite it
self to the Head. He also obliged the Patriarch to consent to the Reunion, and
to promise him, with an Oath, that he would in Person go to Rome, to acknowledge
the Pope's Supremacy, and to receive the Pall from his Hands. But these were
only Letters and Promises, and Words, which were very cheap to a Greek; and
Alexis easily, by this Artifice, drew himself out of this Article, in regard it
was not reasonable to desire more from him upon that Point for the present; but
it was not so easy for him to disengage himself from the other Articles, in
which he had obliged to satisfy them with more than Words, to pay them good
Money, and furnish the Troops, which he had promised to maintain in the Holy
War: But however, he was dexterous enough to deliver himself, at least, for
some time, from those too, hoping still, that if he could but delay the
Performance, Fortune would furnish him with some Convenience or other, wholly
to free himself from those hard Conditions.

After he had therefore, to make a Show that he acted with great Sincerity, by
doing all that he could for the present, paid them a considerable part of the
Money which he owed them; one day, as he was wont, going to make the Princes a
Visit in their Camp, without the Gate, by the Banks of the Bosphorus, he took
occasion to Remonstrate to them on this Manner; That he acknowledged himself
obliged to them for every thing, his Life, his Honor, and his Empire, and that
there was nothing which he did so passionately Desire, as to manifest to them
his Gratitude, by the Performance of what he had promised by his Treaty; but
that if according to their Resolution, they should the next Month quit him, and
retire to the Isle of Corsu, in order to the Pursuit of their Voyage to the
Holy Land, it was absolutely impossible for him to satisfy his Engagements, or
in so short a time to furnish them with Money, Shipping, and the Troops which
he had promised them: That they very well knew he was not firmly established in
his Empire, for, that his Uncle was still in Thracia, where he had a strong
Party, who still owned him as Emperor, and that Theodore Lascaris had another
also on the other side the Bosphorus, in Bithynia; and that for his own
particular, it was too evident, that he was extremely hated by the Greeks for
the Treaty which he had made with them, and that the Antipathy and Hatred which
they had to the Latins, was so great, that the very Discourse of it would make
them Sullen and out of Humor; and consequently, that besides, that he was not
in a Condition to force them to do what was necessary for the Accomplishment of
the Treaty, he should by attempting it expose himself to their Hatred, and
possibly to be outraged by them, and run the manifest hazard of losing the
Empire, Syria, without being able to do any thing; where they would be in
danger of losing their Army for want of Provisions, which in that tempestuous
and dangerous Season of the Year, they could not expect from Italy; nor if they
left him in that uncertain State, could he assure them of Supplies from
Constantinople. That therefore it appeared of absolute necessity, both for
their own Affairs and his, to prolong the Confederacy for one Year more; or
however, to defer their Voyage till the Spring: And that in that time he hoped
to put his Affairs into so good a Posture, by their kind Assistance, as not to
fear any thing from his Subjects, and to be able, without difficulty, to
perform all the Articles of the Treaty, and to accompany them to the Conquest
of the Holy Land, with an Army becoming an Emperor of Constantinople. And that
in this time he would plentifully furnish them with whatsoever was requisite
for the Subsistence of their Army, and pay the Venetians all their Charges in
maintaining their Fleet during the War.

This Discourse of Alexis found the Princes of the Crusade easily inclinable to
to comply with it, for they plainly discovered in it both his and their own
Interest, and that no other rational Choice could be made; but there was a
necessity of proposing it to those who were under no Obligation longer than
September, and, it was very probable, would not agree to it. The next Day
therefore it was proposed before the whole Army, and with so much force and
efficacy, by demonstrating the strength of the Reasons which supported it, that
notwithstanding all the Endeavors of the discontented Party, who had so often
attempted to divide the Army, who now also opposed this Offer with all their
power, it nevertheless passed at last, by the general Approbation of the whole
Army, in favor of the most prudent and wholesome Opinion: So that the
Confederation was renewed for another Year, and the Voyage to the Holy Land
deferred till the Easter following. But the Joy of this new Union was much
diminished, by the unhappy Loss which then happened, by the death of the brave
Matthew de Montmorency, one of the most amiable and valiant Knights of France;
and who, by the glorious Advantages which his Ancestors, the Lords of that
illustrious House, had acquired, and by their extraordinary Merits preserved,
was infinitely esteemed, beloved, and even adored by the Soldiers. He died
spent with the mighty Toils and Fatigues which he had suffered in that
laborious Campaign; and was interred, with a magnificent Funeral, and general
Grief, in the Church of St. John of Jerusalem.

After this, That they might employ the Remainder of the Year to the best
advantage, the young Emperor, accompanied with Marquis Boniface, the Count de
St. Paul, and Henry, the Brother of Count Baldwin, with a considerable number
of French and Flemish Troops, joined with a great Army of Greeks, marched
against his Uncle, who had siezed upon Adrianople. He was easily defeated, and
forced elsewhere to search for a more secure Retreat. After which, he reduced
the greatest part of the Cities of Thracia under his Obeisance; and all the
Revolted, both on this and the other side the Bosphorus, except the Bulgarians,
who, about twenty Years before, had thrown off the Grecian Yoke, under the
Conduct of their famous King Joannize. The Winter then approaching, he returned
full of Glory to Constantinople, where the solemn Entry which he made lost much
of its Splendor, by reason of the piteous Estate to which a dreadful
Conflagration, during his Absence, had reduced the Capital City of his Empire;
which happened in this manner.

Among the great number of Strangers of all Nations who traded at
Constantinople, there were a many rich Sarasin Merchants, to whom the Greek
Emperors, by an infamous Avarice, Mosquee, to the great Scandal of the Latins
who inhabited the City, and to the common People, who, a little before, had
pulled down their Houses. Now it happened that some Flemish Soldiers, joined
with a Company of Venetians and Pisans, upon whom Isaac, to please the Latins,
and regain their Esteem, had bestowed a good Largess, after a Debauch at
Galatha, they resolved, either out of Zeal or Revenge, or rather the Heat of
Brutish Wine, to fall upon the plunder the Houses and Mosquee of these
Sarasins. The Sarasins, at first surprised by the unexpectedness of the Action,
gave way to the Outrage; but seeing themselves supported by the Greeks, who
from all Quarters ran to their Defense, they took heart upon the matter, and in
a Crowd flew upon this small number of Madmen who attacked them in Disorder;
and charging them at once with Curses, and lusty Blows, they repulsed them, and
put them to flight: But some or other among these Brutes, desperately mad to
see themselves thus disappointed of the Booty, and beaten too, and it may be,
to give a stop to those who pursued them, and would have treated them severely,
if they had fallen into the hands of an incensed Rabble, they set fire to some
Wooden Houses which were upon the Key; and immediately getting into their
Barks, they repassed the Gulf. It is impossible to express the horrible Ravage
this dreadful Fire made, for expanding its Flames in an instant in these Tinder
Buildings, it attacked the next with a horrible Impetuosity; and instantly
leaping from them to others, it run on in a Train like Wildfire, from Street to
Street, till it became so masterless and raging, that there seemed no Remedy
for a Mischief which looked as if it proceeded from some supernatural Cause;
and, in short, it surmounted all the Power and Industry of Men, nothing being
able to give a Check to its Force and Violence; for, as if some malicious
Demons had managed it, one might behold the rolling Flames send out, as it
were, their Detachments from the main Body of the Conflagration, and terribly
throw themselves over the Tops of the Houses, cross the Streets, to a great
distance, and instantly setting those all in a terrible Blaze, as if they acted
by Consent, turn back again, and re-joyn with the main Fire from whence they
came, consuming all that they had thus surrounded between them. It happened
also, by a kind of Prodigy, the Hand of God seeming to be stretched out against
this unfortunate City, that the Wind which before blew from the North, and
carried the Flames to the South, as far as the Propontis, came about to the
South and South-West, and carried the Fire into the other Quarters of the City,
which before seemed out of danger, by lying from the Wind. So that the Fire,
which began about the middle of the Haven, being pushed, by these contrary
Winds, higher to the West and North, extended its Rage from Sea to Sea, above a
League, passing by the famous Church of Sancta Sophia, without touching it; the
furious Element seeming to pay a Respect, even in its greatest Violence, to
that goodly Pile, at the same time that it manifested no Compassion to the
great and wealthy Streets of the Merchants which were round about it, nor the
Palaces, or other Churches, or the proud and stately Edifices of the Imperial
Place of the great Constantine; all which, in a little time, were reduced to
Ruins, Rubbidge and Cynders.

Such a horrible Conflagration, which continued all that Night, and the two
following Days, in its full Rage and Fury, and which was not in a Weeks time
wholly extinguished, was a most miserable Spectacle to the Princes, who, from
the Eminencies of Galatha, saw with an extreme Trouble, what was not in theirs,
nor any Humane Power to help. One may say, however, that it was a Presage of
the Ruin of the Grecian Empire, whom God was pleased thus to punish for so many
infamous Treasons which they had plotted and executed against the Latins in the
first Crusades, and to translate their Empire to the French, as he did
presently after, in the manner which I am going to relate.

There was at the Court of Constantinople a Lord of the first Quality of the
Illustrious House of Ducas, nearly related to the Emperors, whose Name was
Alexis, and commonly called Murtzuphle, by reason that his Eyebrows joining,
and very thick, hung over his Eyes; which has always been looked upon as a
Mark of a very ill Man: And in truth, one shall difficultly find one in all
History more wicked, or who had a blacker Soul, a Nature more savage and cruel,
Alexis Comnenius, whom he had served against Isaac, he might make himself
Emperor, provided he durst undertake the Enterprise, without scrupling the
greatest Crimes, to lay hold quickly of the Opportunity which seemed to favor
his wicked Projection, considering in what manner of Disposition the Spirits of
the Greeks were at present, in regard to the two Emperors and the Latins. And
certainly, as for Isaac, besides that he had ever been one of the most
fantastical Men in the World, and least capable of Governing, as may be seen by
his Character, which I have given in the fifth Book of this History, he seemed,
by his Imprisonment, to have lost all that little Soul which he had before; for
he acted and said so many extravagant things, after he had once entertained
these crazed Imaginations, that he was guilty of the most pleasant Dotage in
the World; for he sancied that he was destined, one day, to be the Universal
Monarch of the World, and that he should also recover his Sight, together with
the Vigor and Beauty of a flourishing Youth, and become, in a manner, a
Demi-God. This was confirmed to him by his Astrologers, who made a mere Fool of
him, and by the Monks of Constantinople, the most of which, since their Schism,
had shaken hands with Truth, Honor and good Manners, and studied nothing so
much as the servile and unmanly Art of Flattering their Emperors, even in their
most sottish Follies, thereby to procure good Entertainment for their Bellies,
which was the chief thing which these lazy Cheats and Hypocrites regarded.
These Extravagancies of the poor old Dotard brought him into the very last
degrees of Contempt with the People, who made no manner of account of him, and
in all public Ceremonies and Transactions, boldly named his Son before him.
Nor was the Son in much better Terms, in the Opinion of his Subjects, than the
Father; for, by reason of the Confederacy which he had made with the Latins,
they had changed that Love which before they had for him, into the most
implacable Hatred: the very name of the Latins was so odious to them, that they
could not hear it without Grief and Horror, esteeming them the Cause of all
their Miseries, and those Exactions which were made to satisfy the Treaty. And
to augment this Detestation, the last Desolation of their City, they knew, was
wholly owing to those lewd Fellows whom they protected in their Army, although
it was no fault of the Princes that Justice was not done upon them; but so long
as they kept themselves concealed, the impossibility of Discovery who were the
Authors of that horrible Fact, which protected them from the Hand of Justice.

Murtzuphle therefore, to make his Advantage of this great Aversion which the
People had for the Emperors, believed that his first Step was, by Popularity,
to ingratiate himself with the discontented Multitude: And this was no
difficult matter; for it was no more but his declaring himself a mortal Enemy
of the Latins, and he was sure of the People. And the next thing was, to find
some way to create a Difference between the young Emperor and the Princes; but
yet so, as that the Quarrel with the Latins might not diminish the People's
Hatred against the Emperor, which such a Difference, he foresaw, would be apt
to do. This, indeed, seemed no easy matter to do; but yet, notwithstanding all
the difficulty, he found the opportunity, in a little time, to effect it. For
this purpose, being a Man of a most supple and smooth Conversation, cunning,
complaisant and assiduous; and besides, having got the Reputation of being a
Man of Spirit and Courage, he presently conveyed himself into the Esteem and
Affections of Alexis: Insomuch, that the young Prince, who had not too much
Soul, nor was over-burdened with the Talent of Conduct and Government, made
this wicked Traitor his only Confident; and that he might have him constantly
near his Person, he made him the great Master of the Wardrobe. The insinuating
Murtzuphle being thus got into his Bosom, made use of all the Artifices which
an ambitious Cheat could invent, to render the Prince jealous, and the Latins
odious and suspected to him, and to efface out of his Mind all the Obligations
of his Benefactors; and, in short, to oblige him to an open Breach, and to
declare War against them; pretending that he did not doubt but to be able to
furnish him with all things necessary for the carrying it on,

He labored, however, some time in vain, in regard that though he had gained a
mighty Ascendant upon the feeble Spirit of the Prince, yet that very weakness
of Spirit, which had delivered him up into his Hands, to dispose of him at his
pleasure, proved the main Obstacle to his Design. For the Prince, who was
thoroughly acquainted with the Courage of the Confederates, was in the most
dreadful Apprehensions of Fear, that if he should render those, who had
established him in the Throne, his Enemies, he should certainly sink under the
Power and the Justice of their Arms: And this Fear was much too predominant for
all the other Passions with which this Traitor endeavored to possess and
fortify his Soul. But as there is nothing so proper to beget, in low and
debased Minds, Presumption, Ingratitude, Oblivion of good Offices, and take off
even the fear of Vengeance, as Prosperity, which many times, by a strange kind
of Injustice, makes Men seek for the Opportunities of defeating those to whom
they owe it, and quitting the Score of Obligations by the Payment of Injuries;
so did it happen to Alexis: For, so soon as he was returned from the Thracian
Expedition, which was so much to his Glory and Advantage, Murtzuphle presently
fell to his old Trade of buzzing into his Ears, That he had now nothing further
to fear: That he was as absolute Master of the Empire as he could wish: That
now he might easily quit himself of this handful of Latins, who had only been
strong, because the Greeks were weak with their own Intestine Divisions: That
under the specious name of Protectors, they covered the most cruel Tyranny over
himself and Subjects, by insisting upon the performance of those shameful
Conditions, and insupportable Articles, which, making Advantage of his Fortune,
they had extorted from him. And, in short, by his Solicitations, he so
prevailed upon the young Emperor, elated by his little Prosperity, that he
brought him to the Resolution of shaking off the Yoke, as he called it, which
he had imposed upon his own Neck; and to endeavor to destroy those who had
saved him.

The Princes quickly perceived by his Carriage, wholly differing from what it
used to be, that there was a manifest Change; but in a short time they plainly
discovered, that, besides the Intention which he had to perform nothing of what
he had promised, he also sought all Opportunities of destroying them by some
sudden Surprise; and therefore they resolved to oblige him to deal clearly
with them, and either to give them just Satisfaction, or to declare War.
Whereupon they sent six Deputies, three French, and three Venetians, who
received their Audience of the Emperors in the Palace of Blaquerness; where
Conon de Bethune, who spoke for them all, addressed himself to the young
Emperor, with whom only they had treated, and spoke to him in a manner
extremely bold and Majestic, in these Terms. My Lord, We come hither in behalf
of the Princes and Lords of the Crusade, both French and Venetians, to let you
understand, that after the great and signal Services, which all the World knows
we have rendered to you, they have it in extreme Admiration that you should do
nothing for their Satisfaction, according to the Treaty which you your self
have sworn to perform, and which the Emperor, your Father, has also ratified.
They have often required of you the performance of those Stipulations; and we
do here, this day, in their Names, peremptorily require you, for the last time,
to be at last Master of your Word, and presently to accomplish the Articles of
your Treaty, without longer abusing of their Patience: If you do, you shall do
only what you are obliged to do, which is the only Satisfaction they expect
from you: But if you refuse, we are, from them, to declare to you, that they
will do themselves Justice by the same Arms which have been so auspicious to
you; and that from hence forward they will esteem you their Enemy, and declare
War against you; which they were resolved not to begin, till they had given you
this solemn Defiance, according to the Custom of their Country, which does not
allow them to steal a Victory by surprising their Enemies, but which they
resolve to gain nobly, by defying you to the Combat. This, my Lord, is what we
have in Commission to say to you. We have, I think, sufficiently explained our
Intentions; it remains on your part, immediately to give your Resolution, and
to let us know which part you choose, whether Peace or War.

Greek Empire, immediately raised a fearful Tumult in the Hall, where all began
to exclaim, that this was an insufferable Violation of the Majesty of the
Emperors, to talk with so much Confidence and Insolence; and to desie them,
even upon the Throne, was an Attempt, which, since the Foundation of the
Empire, never any Person before had the Presumption to execute. Above all, the
young Emperor was the loudest; and foaming with Madness and Choler, broke out
into most outrageous Language: Insomuch, that they who before had declared
themselves most highly in favor of the Latins, now appeared the most heated
and violent against them. In the mean time, whilst the Debate was hot what
Measures were to be taken, and that nothing was to be heard but the fearful and
confused Cries of People, who were all Speakers, the Deputies seeing there was
no Conclusion, in probability, to be expected, but rather some Indignities and
Outrages to their Persons, they gently descended from the Hall, and presently
mounting on Horseback, returned to the Camp; and now nothing was thought on by
either side, but the ensuing War.

It was immediately begun by little Skirmishes between the Greeks and Latins,
wherein the last always carried the Advantage. But the Greeks believing that
the main of their Success depended upon destroying the Venetian Fleet, and that
if they could effect that, it was impossible for the Confederates to subsist
long, but that they should have them, in a little time, at their Discretion;
they therefore resolved to attempt the siring of the Navy, as they lay at
Anchor in the Gulf. They therefore took seventeen great Vessels of a long
Built, which the Greeks call Chelandies, which they were accustomed to make use
of for Fireships: These they filled with Faggots, and all sorts of Combustible
Materials, and especially with Barrels of Rosin, Pitch and Grease, to put to
them their Greek Fire, or Wildfire, when the time should serve. This Wildfire
was called Greek Fire, by reason that the Greeks were the first that made use
of it. It was invented about the seventh Century, by an Engineer of Heliopolis
in Syria, whose name was Callinicus, who made such admirable use of it in the
famous Battle, which the Admirals of the Navy of the Emperor Constantine
Pogonatus fought against the Sarasins, near Cizicum, upon the Hellespont, that
he burnt their whole Fleet, and thirty thousand Men which were aboard it, in
the midst of the Sea; for it was the property of this Fire, not only to burn
till it came to the Water, but to burn in the Water, which seemed to increase
its Force and Violence; and by a Prodigy, quite contrary to the nature of these
two Elements, which are Enemies one to the other, it seemed to make use of it
for its Food and Nourishment. It had also a Movement wholly contrary to that of
common Fire, which always raises it self, and with its pointed Head, aspires
upward, as it were, tending to its Sphere: But this joining to its extreme
Quickness, the property of heavy and Terrestrial Bodies burnt downwards, and
all along to the Right and Left, with an Impetuosity proportionable to the
Impression which it received from those who had the Art to manage it; for they
might either throw it a great distance, by the Machines, which were made for
that purpose, after the same manner as they threw Darts and great Stones; or
they might blow it by long Trunks and Pipes of Copper, through which they
discharged this liquid Fire, with Impetuosity, like Water out of a Syringe,
either against Men, or any thing which they intended to set on fire; and where
it once laid hold, it would stick so fast, that there was no way to extinguish
it, but with Vinegar, mingled with Urine and Sand; or, which is more wonderful,
Oil, which is the proper Nourishment of other Fire, and which makes it more
quick and violent, would extinguish this. Thus Art, whose Perfection, we
commonly say, consists in the Imitation of Nature, is never more admirable,
than when, in its Operations, it is so far from imitating her, that it bestows
upon them Properties wholly different, and even contrary to those of Nature.
For the main, this wondrous Fire was composed of Brimstone, Naphta, Pitch, the
Gums of certain Trees, and Bitumen, tempered with the Water of a Fountain which
had this particular Quality, and some other Ingredients, which served to
produce this mavelous Effect. But this Invention is now quite lost, Grecian
Fire, with its Engines, Blasts and Pipes.

The Greeks having in this manner prepared their seventeen great Fireships,
and charged them with the Wildfire, one Night, when the Wind blew for their
purpose, a good stiff Gale at West, they sent them adrift toward the middle of
the Venetian Fleet, which lay to the Leeward, at the Entrance of the Haven. All
these Ships, having a Stern Wind, and all their Sails filled with it, appeared
in an instant all on fire, like so many glowing Furnaces, driven before the
Wind with mighty Violence, upon the Venetian Fleet; and advancing still with
their whirling Flames toward them, seemed ready to set them on fire, there
appearing to the distant Spectators, almost no possibility of avoiding the
threatening danger. All the City ran to the Port, and to the Towers and Walls,
to have the pleasure of the burning of the Navy, every one impatiently
expecting the agreeable Show which they believed was ready to appear, and all
of them together, as upon an Amphitheatre, clapping their Hands, and making
great Shouts of Joy, with a most horrible Noise, as if all had been their own.
But this Joy was quickly changed into Shame and Grief, when they saw all these
artificial Fires, from which they stood gaping for such Miracles, vanish into
Smoke, by the Skill and Dexterity of the Venetians, who, so soon as they saw
them, leaped into their Skiffs and Long-Boats, and, with an incredible
diligence, having run the Fireships one upon another, in despite of all the
Showers of Darts and Arrows, which were discharged upon them, by the force of
mighty Hooks and Grappling Irons, they drew them out of the Port, into the
Chanal, where leaving them to the Wind and Current, they were carried into the
Propontis, where at length they spent themselves in unprofitable Flames. So
that the Venetians lost not so much as one Skiff; nor was there more than one
single Merchant-man of Pisa, which being unluckily in their Way, could not so
suddenly avoid them, but that she was quite burnt down.

Murtzuphle a fair Opportunity of finishing the Ruin of the poor Alexis, by the
blackest and most detestable Treason that the wickedest of Mankind could be
capable of: For as he had a most absolute power over the Soul of this miserable
Prince, who acted wholly by his Counsels, and esteemed him as an Oracle, he
told him, that to secure himself from the danger wherein he was of falling,
like his Uncle, under the hands of the Latins, it was necessary that he should
endeavor to amuse them, by sending secretly to them, and protesting, that
whatever he had done against them, was purely the Effect of Constraint; and
that, for his own part, he was readily disposed to do more than he had
promised, provided that they would assist him against his Subjects, who took
from him the liberty and the power of keeping his Word; and that if they would
assist him to become Master of Constantinople, as he ought to be, he should
then be in a Condition most faithfully to perform, as he most earnestly
desired, all the Articles of the Treaty.

Poor Alexis immediately fell into the Snare, which was so artfully placed for
him, for he instantly dispatched Envoys, charged with this Commission, to the
Princes; when, at the same time, the Traitor having, by his Emissaries, blazed
it all about the City, he, that very Day, being the 25th of January, raised
such a furious and general Insurrection throughout the Town, that believing
themselves betrayed, after having, with the greatest Insolence, charged the
Emperor with a thousand Imprecations, calling him a Slave to the Latins, and a
Traitor to the Empire, they ran tumultuously to the Church of Sancta Sophia,
there presently to make Choice of a new Emperor. The Historian Nicetas, who was
at that time Lord Chancellor, although he does, with Passion enough, declare
himself an Enemy to the Latins, yet upon this Occasion, did whatever lay in his
Power to oppose this Resolution; remonstrating to the People, that they were in
no manner of Condition to defend the Emperor whom they should choose, against
the Army of the Crusades. But the Populace, which after it is once heated, is
no longer capable of Reason, or of following any other Conduct, but that of
their blind and impetuous Passions, Nicholas Cannabus, and notwithstanding all
that he could do to oppose it, they carried him to the Imperial Throne which
was in the Body of the Church upon the right side over against the Tribunal and
proclaimed him Emperor, compelling the Patriarch also to Crown him.

Alexis astonished at this News, ran to consult his Oracle, the Traitor, and he
resolving to push his Treason to the utmost, to the end that he might procure
himself to be elected Emperor in the place of Cannabus, got a Deputation
instantly for himself to go to the Marquis Boniface, to whom he promised, on
the Behalf of Alexis, who implored his Assistance in this pressing Necessity,
to deliver to him the Palace and Fortress of Blaquerness, as a pawn of his
Fidelity, provided he would instantly come with all his Forces to deliver him
out of this extreme Danger in which he was. The Marquis not doubting but that
the rest of the Princes would be in this particular in his opinion accepted the
Proposition; but before he had the Leisure to confer with them, the
Perfidious Murtzuphle being returned, failed not the Night following to
advertise the Principal Persons of the City and of the Militia of this Treaty:
And as he had a great Party of his Friends and Relations, so having assured
himself of the Guards of Strangers, by the Lord Treasurers Interest whom he had
gained, he caused the People to be put in Arms before the Palace, to hinder the
Effect of this Treason of Alexis, who as they were made to believe, had sold
the City to the Latins, and for other Matters he took upon him so to order
them, that they should have nothing to fear; then the Traitor making use of the
Power which his Place about the Emperor gave him, entered at Midnight into the
Bedchamber where the poor Prince was fast asleep, without dreaming of his
horrible Treachery; he instantly awakned him, and with a trembling Voice,
intercepted with Sighs, as if he had been quite out of his Senses, he told him
that all was lost, that all the City was in Arms, that the Commonalty, the
Nobility and Gentry with the Guards were all ready to fall upon the Palace with
intent to cut him in Pieces, having understood by some of their Spies, who were
come from the Camp, that he had a Design to deliver up the City to the Latins.
Whereupon the amazed Prince wholly abandoning himself to the Conduct of
Murtzuphle, that Perfidious Villain, who pressed him to save himself, throwing
about him a Morning Gown, he carried him through many windings into a strait
Place, in the remotest and most obscure part of the Palace, whither he was no
sooner come, but he found men posted by this wicked Traitor, who instantly
seized upon him, and clapping Irons upon his Hands and Feet, dragged him into
the most horrible Prison that was in that place.

This being done he went and immediately presented himself to the People, and
in a cunning Harangue gave them an Account of what had passed, and what he had
done to deliver them from the terrible Danger wherein they were, of losing
their Liberty; he exhorted them generously with their Arms to assist him in
preserving it, and the Glory of the Empire against the Latins, and to choose an
Emperor, who had Courage to defend them against these Tyrants, who endeavored
to oppress them. Hereupon the Guards, and all those who were of his Faction
having saluted him Emperor with mighty Acclamations, the People, who are wont
in Tumults, blindly to take those Impressions which are given them, did so too,
never thinking of the poor Cannabus, the late Idol of their own making, who was
presently by this new Tyrant Unemperor'd again, and sent to the Prison from the
Throne, to bear Alexis Company. As for that other Fantome of an Emperor the
miserable Isaac, who was desperately Sick, when the news was brought him of
this sudden Revolution, he died in a few hours after, either of Fear or Grief,
or as some believe, by the Cruelty of Murtzuphle, whose Impatience of
Competitors, or even the Shadow of them, would not permit him to wait till the
Disease should put an end to the Destiny of this deplorable old man. Barbarian
being in continual Fears, lest the Latins should once more endeavor to restore
the Prince Alexis, after he had two or three times given Poison to this young,
unfortunate Emperor, to ease himself of the Disquiets which might rise from
that Quarter, finding that they did not dispatch him so quickly as he expected,
he himself went to the Prison where he was kept, and by an execrable Cruelty,
which is scarcely to be found among all the Examples of the most Sanguinary
Tyrants, which are branded with Infamy by Historians, he there strangled him
with his own Hands. A notable Instruction for all Crowned Heads, and which may
inform them, of how dangerous Consequence it is, blindly to commit themselves
to the Conduct of one single Person, who having no Companions in his Ministry,
has the Opportunity of betraying them without being perceived; and that there
can be nothing more fatally dangerous to them, than to trust to those who have
once violated their Faith, which they had given them, as this wicked man had
done, who was one of the first that had declared himself for the Usurper Alexis
Comnenius, when he seized upon his Brothers Diadem. Thus miserably perished the
Young Alexis, who having by a manifest Perjury broken the Oath which he had
solemnly sworn to the Confederates, who came to establish him in his Empire,
God the just Avenger of the Persidy of Princes, of whom he is the sole Judge,
permitting him to lose his Empire and his Life by another Persidy more
Execrable, and by the Hands of the same Person, whom he had raised so high, and
who by his wicked Counsels had persuaded him to that Perjury to destroy him.
Thus one may in all Ages see, by a multitude of Examples, that great Crimes,
especially of great men, are usually punished even in this Life, and most
commonly by the very Instruments and Causes of those Crimes.

This Abominable Parricide being in a little time discovered, notwithstanding
all the Artifices with which Murtzuphle endeavored to conceal it, the Princes,
the Prelates and Confederate Lords assembled themselves to take a firm and the
last Resolution upon an Affair so little foreseen or expected by them; and it
was at length concluded by them, that for the present, laying aside the
Enterprise of the Holy Land, they should endeavor to take Constantinople, and
employ their Forces about it for the remainder of the Year of their
Confederation; and that for three Reasons, first to revenge the horrible Murder
committed upon the Person of him, whom they had made Emperor, and to overthrow
the Throne of the Usurper, who had seized upon it by such abominable Crimes.
Secondly, to do themselves Justice, by taking that by Force, which it was in
vain for them to expect from the Tyrant, and which was really due to them in
Virtue of the Treaty which they had made with the late Emperor Alexis. And in
the last place to make themselves Masters of Constantinople, and consequently
of all the Empire of the East, which was the thing of the World, the most
glorious for the Crusades, the most advantageous to the Church, and the most
necessary for the Conquest of the Holy Land; as had been but too evident in all
the other Crusades, and without which they could difficultly Expect to be
Successful, and especially when they should have this Tyrant, their mortal
Enemy, possessed of it, who would certainly employ all his Power and his Malice
for their Destruction; especially since now there could not be the same
Scruple, which was made against the Advice of the wise Bishop of Langress, who
counseled Lewis the Young, by all means to seize upon Constantinople, before
he passed any further; in regard that there could not be the least Color that
the War against an Usurper, and a Parricide, against Rebels and Traitors was
unjust or unlawful. All the Bishops the Abbots, and even the Friends of the
Pope were so far from opposing this Resolution, that they endeavored to
promote it with all their Power, assuring the Army that in the Execution of
this Enterprise they should obtain the same Indulgences, which the Pope had
granted to those who went to combat against the Infidels. So that all men's
minds being perfectly well disposed to it, and the Army fully resolved to
perform their Duty, the War was again begun both by Land and Sea; and to
encourage them, in the very beginning they met with a lucky Presage of the
Success of the Enterprise, by a most signal Victory which was obtained against
the Tyrant Murtzuphle.

Henry the Brother of Count Baldwin, accompanied with James de Avesnes, Baldwin
de Beavoir, Eudes and William de Chamlite, with a good Party of the most
Valiant men of the Army, resolved to endeavor the surprise of the City Philea,
anciently Phinopolis, situate some five or six Leagues from the Camp, on the
Thracian Side near the Mouth of the Bosphorus, upon the Euxine Sea. After they
had in order to it marched all night, early in the morning they came before the
Place without being discovered, and presently presented the Scalade, and
notwithstanding all the Resistance of the Inhabitants, who as soon as they
perceived their Danger ran from all parts to repulse them, these brave men took
it by Force. And the City being a Place of great Traffic and consequently very
rich, they made there a mighty Booty, which, together with the Prisoners, and
abundance of Provisions which they found there, they sent down the Chanal in
their Barks to the Camp. And having refreshed themselves for two days, they
returned laden with the Spoils, the remainder of their Booty, toward the
Camp. But Murtzuphle being advertised thereof, by Night drew out of
Constantinople with a great Party of his Army, and having placed himself in
Ambush near a Wood by which they must of Necessity return, he suffered the
first Squadrons to pass by, and immediately with all his Forces fell upon the
Rereguard which was led by Prince Henry. Now although this Surprise was very
sudden and unexpected, yet this Brave Prince showed his great Courage, and
admirable Resolution; for without being in the least daunted, to see so great
an Army ready to charge him, and the Emperor in Person at the Head of them, or
to find himself with such a Handful of men, divided from the rest, who were
already advanced a good way into the Forest, and who could not come up to him
in any Order but by filing off in small Parties by reason of the Straitness of
the Passage; he notwithstanding all these disadvantages, made Head against the
Enemy, and generously sustained their first Charge, when it came to his turn,
charging them also so vigorously that he still gained Ground of them till such
time as his Companions hearing the Noise of the Combat, made have to his
Assistance, and drew up in Order without the Wood.

Then seeing that he should be seconded by his Party, he charged with so much
Fury upon the Greeks, who were already in Disorder, that they all took the Rout
and followed the Emperor, who to make more have in his Flight, lightened
himself of his Buckler and his Arms, and yet notwithstanding had like to have
left his Life too behind him, had it not been for the Swiftness of an excellent
Horse, to whose Heels and the Spurs of his own Fear, he that day owed his Life.
He left however twenty of the most principal Men of his Army among the Slain,
together with a great Number of private Soldiers, and many Prisoners with all
his Baggage; and that which most rejoiced the Army was, that together with the
Great Standard of the Empire, they took that famous Image of the Blessed
Virgin, which the Grecian Emperors, were accustomed to have carried before them
in all their Battles as the invincible Companion of the Romans, as Nicetas
says, who tells us that the Emperor Zimisces after he had conquered the
Bulgarians, caused it to be carried in the Triumphant Chariot, which was
prepared for himself, protesting that it was to the Virgin represented by that
Image, to whom he ought to render that Honor, since to her he owed the Victory.
However the taking of this Banner and Image was looked upon as a happy Presage
that they should gain the Empire of Constantinople, since the Blessed Virgin,
to whom that Imperial City was dedicated by the mighty Constantine, seemed to
forsake it to pass into the French Camp, as it were to guide and conduct them
in their Entrance into the City. Murtzuphle astonished with this Blow, began
now to think of attempting the ways of Artifice, having for that purpose
obtained a Conference with the Doge of Venice; but with all his Arts he was not
able to delude this clear sighted, blind old man, who by the Eyes of his Soul
saw through all his Juggles and Slight of Hand. So that all things were
prepared to give a general Assault upon the City by Sea; for in regard that on
that side there was only a single Wall, it was believed that the French, who
were to land upon the Key, making their Attack there, whilst at the same time
the Venetians should make theirs by sighting upon their Ships, the place might
soon and most easily be carried.

Latins in the best manner that he could; he marched quite through the City in
his Habiliments of War, his Sword by his side, and a huge Horsemans Mace in his
Hand, encompassed with his Guards, and with a mind fierce and resolute, he
endeavored to encourage the Greeks to defend their Liberty, with a stern and
menacing tone reproaching the Great men of the Empire with their Effeminate and
Voluptuous way of living, and obliged them more by the fear of his Savage
Humor, than by the hopes of Victory, or his Example, to betake themselves to
their Arms. And as he imagined that the Latins intended to storm the City, he
forgot nothing that might contribute to its Defense; he fortified the Walls and
Towers; he raised them where they were low with Parapets, made of strong Timber
and floored with boards two or three Stories high, that so his men might under
Shelter discharge upon the Assailants. All the Curtain and the Platforms of the
Towers, were stored with such a great number of all kinds of Engines, that one
could scarcely believe there was in the whole World a City so well fortified
and provided, or which could be more difficult to be taken. But the Princes who
were not much concerned at these Preparations, knowing they signified nothing
unless they were defended by men of Courage, after they had labored in making
all things ready, till Thursday, the Week after mid-lent, upon that day, being
the eighth of April, they caused all the Army to be embarked upon the Ships
which were ranged into two Lines, extending half a League in their Front.

The Great Ships were in the first with their long Ladders in manner of a
Drawbridge, which were fastened to the Masts and the Wooden Towers of an
extraordinary Height. The Galleys and Flat Bottoms were in the Second, and were
to advance through the Intervals which were left between Ship and Ship. Early
in the next Morning all the Fleet weighed, and with the Help of Sails and Oars,
crossing the Gulf in good Order, they presented themselves before the Walls:
They had all the Success they could have hoped; for in Despite of the
Discharge of the Enemies Engines, and the Infinite number of Darts and Arrows
which were powered upon them from the Curtain and the Towers, those who were
aboard the Galleys and the flat Bottoms, observing their order of passing
between the great Ships, got safely ashore, and planting their Engines all
along the Key, they clapped their Ladders to the Walls; and then the great Ships
coming up close, the Venetians throwing out their Bridges made of Masts and
Yards, placed them against the Towers, and both the one and the other mounting
Courageously went to the Assault with their Swords in their Hands. The Combat
was maintained on both sides with an Incredible Fury; the Assaillants animated
by the Ardent Desire which they had, and the certain hope they entertained that
they should that day take the richest City in the World: And the Defendants
forced by the Necessity whereto they were reduced either to Vanquish or lose
all. But in Conclusion the number of these Desperate Defendants being Infinite
in Comparison of the Assailants, and the Emperor who had pitched his Tents in a
spacious place upon a rising Ground in the City, near the Walls, continually
sending fresh Supplies, to refresh those who were weary, and the Towers which
he had raised upon the Walls surpassing those Wooden ones to which they had
applied the scaling Ladders; so that the Greeks fought with all manner of
Advantage in discharging their Darts, Arrows and stones from the higher place,
the Assailants were every where repulsed, and about three of the Clock in the
Afternoon they were forced to retreat with the loss of many Soldiers and a
great many Engines of Battery. This ill success did a little trouble the
Princes, but it was so far from abating their Courage, that it raised it much
higher, by inflaming it with a generous Despite to find themselves obliged to
yield to those whom they had so often beaten. And the same Night they held a
Council of War, where it was resolved that all things should be disposed within
two days, to give a second Assault upon the same side, and not on that of the
Propontis, as the French proposed, in regard that part of the City was not so
well fortified; for the Venetians, who better understood the Sea, made them
apprehend, that if they once went out of the Port, the Current would undoutedly
carry them into the Chanal of the Bosphorus, French should be intermixed with
the Venetians, both by Sea and Land, that so the two Nations might not lay the
Blame of a Miscarriage if any should happen upon one another. Upon Monday
therefore the twelth of April, they came to the Assault with greater Vigor,
resolution and sierceness than before, notwithstanding that they saw all the
Towers and the Walls covered with an Infinite of Soldiers. This consident
Approach struck a Terror into the Greeks, who believed they should have
terrified the Assailants with that number or men, and little expected the
Latins would so suddenly make another Attempt, of which they so assured
themselves, that they had spent the two days with great rejoycings, and
abundance of Bonsires, for the Joy of the Victory.

The Assault was extremely furious, and continued a long time without the
French and Venetians advancing any thing more than in the first Assault or
giving it over for the obstinate resistance with which they met; they sought on
both sides every where with an equal desire and resolution of being the
Victors, and the advantage seemed till noon to continue with the Greeks; but
then a Gale arising from the Norward, proved mighty favorable to the
Assailants, by driving the Ships close up to the very Walls; Whereupon two
great Ships, one called the Pilgrim, the other the Paradise, being tied
together by a good Omen for the Crusades, having on board of them among other
French Lords, the Bishops of Soissons and Troyes, were carried so near to a
Tower adjoining to the Hill where the Tyrant was posted, that they applied
their Bridges and Ladders without any difficulty; immediately then two of the
most Valiant Knights, one a French man, whose name was Andrew d' Vrboise, a
Domestic of the Bishop of Soissons; the other a Venetian, who was called Peter
Alberti, mounted courageously well covered with their Shields, and with their
Scimiters in their Hands, they both leaped down together into the Tower, and
were upon a signal immediately followed by John de Choisy and all the brave men
which were aboard those two Ships.

It some times happens in War, that there is but one single Moment, and one
brave Action of some Valiant man to decide a day; those who defended this
Tower, were so terrified with this Heroic Confidence of these two men, and
much more by the dreadful Blows which they bestowed, making Heads, Arms and
Legs fly off where ever they sell, that losing their Courage and Judgment they
made all the have they could to get out of their reach, and with Precipitation
abandoned the Tower to these two Heroes and those who thronged up after them
with desire to partake of the Honor of the Action. Those who sought ashore, and
those who were upon the Galleys to support them, seeing that those who were
aboard these two Ships, had planted their Ensigns upon this Tower, and the
Greeks already took the Fright, were so ashamed to see themselves behind hand,
that some of them with Precipitation throwing themselves ashore, whilst others
planted the Ladders against the Walls, the one and the other mounting in
Shoals, pushing, overthrowing with their Bucklers, and with huge Blows killing
all those, who in this horrible disorder, into which Fear and Despair had
driven the Greeks, made any resistance; and continually pursuing their Point,
with a Courage extremely heightened by the Hopes of Victory, they quickly made
themselves Masters of four other Towers, and there planted their Victorious
Ensigns.

At the same time they who fought upon the Key, and they who descended from the
Galleys and Ships, where they were employed continually to shoot against the
Curtain, enraged to think that they should be the last in the taking of
Constantinople, ran to the Gates, and with their Rams broak three of them open;
they also who were already gotten into the Town over the Walls, having opened
the others which were between the Towers, which they had taken, the whole Army
entered, Greeks did no sooner see the Knights in their glittering Armor mount
their charging Horses, with the Visors of their Helmets down, and the Lance in
the rest begin to move, to run against them, having at the Head of them a brave
Lord of great Stature, whom their fear made them magnify into a Giant, but
they instantly disbanded, and with all the have they could, began to run and
save themselves, some out of the City by the Dorean Gate, others in the Palace,
and in the Churches which they Barricadoed to defend themselves. The Emperor at
full Speed threw himself into the great Palace, which had one Gate upon the
Propontis; and the greatest part of the Lords and Officers, retrenched
themselves in that Quarter, and in the Palace of Blaquerness. All the rest,
following that Example, ran in a dreadful disorder through the Streets to gain
their Houses, the Victors still being at their Heels, who in this first fury,
which was not easy to be stopped in the taking of a City by Assault, overthrew
and killed all that they could reach, making a most horrible Slaughter among
these miserable People; and above all the Latins who had inhabited
Constantinople, made the most cruel carnage to revenge themselves, for having
been banished out of it upon the great Conflagration of that unfortunate City.

The Night, which now came on apace, favorably for the Greeks, stopped the
Current of this Fury; a retreat was sounded, and the Princes having rallied
their men in an open Place, distributed them into three Quarters and ordered
them to fortify themselves there, not doubting, but that they must have more
fighting work to gain the rest of the City, and that the Greeks would not fail
to retrench themselves in so many advantageous Posts, which they might very
easily be able to defend; as in our time we have known the People of Naples and
the Spaniards retrench one against the other, in diverse Quarters of the Streets
and in the Monasteries, and to fight for several Months in one City, as if it
had been a great Province, in which one is obliged to take several Cities and
Forts, to make a Conquest of the whole. Thus the whole Army was posted near the
Towers and the Wall which they had taken, and which they were able to defend;
the Duke of Venice encamped close by the Walls to be near his Ships, if any
Attempt should in the Night be made against them. The Earl of Flanders by a
happy Presage, lodged himself in the Imperial Tents, which Murtzuphle had lest
ready for him upon the Hill, where he was posted during the Assault. Prince
Henry and the Earl of Blois his men lay upon his right, and retrenched
themselves before the Palace of Blaquerness; and Marquis Boniface took his
Lodgement to the left in a quarter lying more to the East, where certain
Soldiers, fearing to be surprised by the Greeks, set sire to some Houses, that,
as they thought, lay too near them, and so occasioned a third sire which
reduced the greatest part of that quarter of the City into Ashes. As for the
Earl of Blois he was not at the taking of the City being extremely ill that day
with a sit of a terrible Quartane Ague which kept him in his Bed, and hindered
him from being at the Attack, which was no small Affliction to him, who was as
desirous of being present there as he was stout and courageous, being esteemed,
as he really was, one of the most Brave and Valiant men of his time.

But all these Precautions of the Confederates were unnecessary, for early the
next morning being drawn up in Battalia, and expecting to be incountred with at
least a hundred thousand Enemies, they were met with nothing but Processions,
which from all Quarters came before them, bearing the Crosses, Murtzuphle, who
had ordered all things ready for his concealed Design, issuing out of the
Palace, ran about the Streets and the Market Places, animating the People to
defend their Liberty against this Handful of Desperado's, as he termed them,
who had now shut themselves into a Place from whence it was impossible for them
to escape, provided they could find Courage enough to oppose them, and telling
them it was the easiest matter in the World to surround them, and take them
alive and make them all Slaves; this he spoak with so much assurance, and
protested that he would march at the head of those who had the Courage to
follow him to a most undoubted Victory, that a great many of the People and all
the Soldiers, resolved the next morning under his Conduct, to attack the French
in their Quarters. But this Infamous Coward was so far from the Intention of
executing what he pretended, that retiring to the great palace, as he said, a
little to repose himself, he followed the Example of his usurping Predecessor
old Alexis, and in the night made his escape upon a Ship which he had caused to
be made ready for him. He took along with him the Empress Euphrosine, Wife to
Alexis, and her Daughter the Princess Eudoxia, of whom he was so desperately
Amorous, that he chose rather to lose his Honor and his Empire, than to expose
himself to the Danger of missing the Satisfaction of his Passion, which, cost
what it would, he was resolved to gratify, as he did, by abandoning his Lawful
Wife to espouse that foolish Princess. So blind and Tyrannous, is irregular
Love, in a Heart which yields it self up to its Usurpation, where, when once
those Gross and Earthy Flames prevail, they extinguish all the Lights of
Reason, and Virtue, and even those more common Principles of good sense and
Nature.

So soon as this Shameful Flight of Murtzuphle was known, the People ran
thundering to the Church of Sancta Sophia to make a new Emperor, and in the
Tumult Theodore Lascaris, who was just returned to Constantinople was instantly
chosen, and compelled to take the Helm of this Ship of the Government which was
now agitated by such a Furious Tempest. But in a few Moments after this new
Prince perceiving that this Ardor of the People began to slag, and that instead
of following him to oppose the Enemy, every man began to think of saving one,
he also took the same Measures, and before day made his Escape in the best
manner that he could. Upon this the whole City threw down their Arms and fell
to their Prayers and Processions, to implore the Mercy and Compassion of the
Conquerors; addressing themselves principally to the Marquis of Montferrat, who
was known among them, and to whom the flattering Greeks already gave the Title
of Emperor, believing that he ought to be the man. Thus by the most astonishing
and prodigious Event which has nothing comparable to it in all History, the
greatest City of the World, the richest and according to the manner of those
times, the best fortified, and defended by above four hundred thousand men, was
taken by Assault, and peaceably possessed by the Confederates, whose Army did
not consist in above twenty thousand Combatants. Which may inform the
Christians, That this very same City, which at this day is neither so strong,
so well furnished, nor peopled, by far as it was then, and upon the taking
whereof the Conquest of the Eastern Empire would most certainly depend, could
never be able to resist one of those great Armies, which their Divisions, so
fatal to the Interest of Christian Religion, oblige them so often to bring into
the Field for their mutual Destruction. But this is an Evil which for a long
time we have deplored, and must still lament, unless it shall please Almighty
God, in whose hands are the Hearts of Princes, to give a firm and solid Peace
among them, and inspire the Heart of some generous Hero with Courage equal to
this of these Brave French Princes, who with so few Forces accomplished this
glorious Enterprise; which would not be so great an Impossibility even for
their Descendants to undertake if they were in a Condition of Assurance from
the Hatred, the Ambition and the Jealousy of their Neighbors.

The Princes pleasingly surprised to find that they had nothing but Suppliants,
where they expected Enemies, immediately, with the Generosity which always
accompanies true Valor, Montferrat went to the great Pal^ce of the Emperors,
where were the two Empresses, Agnes the Sister of Philip the August, the Widow
of the two Emperors, Alexis the Son of Manuel, and Andronicus, and Margaret the
Widow of the Emperor Isaac, and most of the Ladies of the first Quality who
were retired thither. The Marquis treated them with all imaginable Honor and
Civility due to their Character, and not long after married the Empress
Margaret. At the same time Prince Henry having presented himself before the
Palace of Blaquerness, whither the greatest part of the Nobility and men of
Condition were retired, they rendered themselves to him as Prisoners of War,
their Lives only saved. There were found in these two Palaces most Inestimable
Riches, which the two Princes caused to be most carefully guarded from Spoil
and Imbezlement. As for the Soldiers, who dispersed themselves all over the
City as they pleased, no man daring to resist them, the Historian Nicetas, who
was present, affirms, that they committed all the most horrible Excesses that
can be imagined, by all sorts of Violence, Cruelty, Avarice, Lust and Impiety,
not sparing so much as the Churches, the Shrines, the Images, the Relics, the
Holy Vessels, the very Boxes where the consecrated Host was kept, nor the most
Sacred Mysteries of Religion, but profaned them with a thousand such abominable
Sacriledges, as the very thought of them is sufficient to raise in devout Minds
the greatest Horror and detestation, but on the contrary, those of our
Historians, who have with the greatest Exactness given us the Relation of all
the Circumstances of the taking and plundring of Constantinople, say nothing at
all of this disorder, although they were more likely to know the Truth than
Nicetas, who, during the first Tumult, together with the Patriarch, John
Camaterus, saved himself with his Family at Selyvrea. They only assure us, that
the Soldiers made there the greatest Booty in Gold, Silver, Vessels, Pearls,
precious Stones, Cloth of Gold, Silks, Rich Furs, and in all sorts of precious
Movables, that ever was made at the taking of any City since the Creation of
the World, as the Mareshal de Ville Hardouin after his manner ingeniously
expresses himself. But to speak without Dissimulation, I believe, after the
matter is thoroughly considered, one may affirm that one of them says too much,
and the other too little. For as to what concerns Nicetas, it is but reading
this part of his History, and one shall be perfectly convinced, that the Excess
of his Grief, and the hatred, which upon all Occasions he makes appear against
the Latins, transported him beyond all Limits whatsoever, not only to speak
sharply, but with a kind of Fury in Exaggerations, mingled with Invectives,
injurious reproaches and most tragical Exclamations, which as they are
insupportable even in a Declamer upon a feigned Subject, who is paid for making
Lies and Scurrilities, are intolerable, and wholly unworthy of an Historian,
who ought not to be credited when he writes after such a manner. As for our
Writers who most assuredly were men of Honor and Honesty, as it is below all
men of Spirit and Courage, there is great Probability that they would not be
guilty of so base a Vice as lying, and cheatting the World with Falsities;
though it is impossible they might think themselves dispensable, if they did
not relate all the ill things, which were done, and which are impossible to be
prevented in such dismal Events, as the taking of Cities by Assault. For as it
is very likely that all the Soldiers, who were not Saints, though they were
Crusades, might commit disorders, like to those which in our time, we have
known upon such occasions; so this is certain, that the report was too public,
not to be too true; for Pope Innocent, in a Letter, which some time after he
writ to the Marquis of Montferrat, the General of the Army, although he at last
approved of the taking of Constantinople, as a means to make the Enterprise of
the Holy Land succeed, French, after all their Debts to the Venetians were
paid, and they too had half of the Spoil, above four hundred thousand Marks in
Silver, to be distributed among them; besides that a fourth part of what was
thus brought to the common Stock, was reserved for him who should be chosen
Emperor. And nevertheless the Greeks had time enough during the Night after the
Assault, to hide, as they did, the greatest part of their Silver and best
things, which they afterward peaceably enjoyed. Besides the three dreadful
Fires, must needs be supposed to have consumed an infinite of Goods and
Treasure; and the Emperors, and most eminent Persons of the Empire, who made
their Escape both by Sea and Land, had carried with them whatever they had,
that was most portable and precious. So that hereby one may judge of the Riches
of this imperial City, which fell under the Power of the Crusades, without any
other Loss in the taking, than of one single Knight, who in too eagerly
pursuing the flying Greeks, fell into a Ditch which they had cut in the Street,
and was slain by his Fall.

But in my Opinion, the best part of this great Booty, was the precious
Treasure of an infinite number of holy Relics, which the Emperors, after great
Constantine, had caused to be transported from the whole East, and especially
from Palestine to Constantinople, and which since the taking thereof, have
enriched many famous Churches in Italy, Germany, Flanders, and all Europe,
especially France. For from thence came the greatest part of those which are in
the Royal Church of St. Dennis, Philip the August, to whom the Emperor Baldwin
sent them, in Person receiving them, and transporting them thither, with a Pomp
and Magnificence worthy of the Piety of so great a King: From thence we have
the sacred Crown of Thorns, the true Cross, the top of the Spear with which
our Savior's precious Side was pierced, and the other holy Relics, which are
reverenced in the sacred Chapel of Paris, where they were put by St. Lewis,
who by the Consent of the Emperor Baldwin de Courtenai, his Kinsman, redeemed
them out of the Hands of the Venetians, to whom they were pawned. And that I
may not trouble the Reader with a long Catalogue, those which are possessed by
the Churches of Soissons, Troyes, Beauvais, Langres, Chartres, Laon, and so
many others, as appears by the Deeds of those Churches, came all from hence;
and from hence it was that the Church of Amiens had the Head of that Divine
Precursor of Christ Jesus, St. John the Baptist, which renders it so Famous:
Nor can the Truth of that precious Depositum be longer doubted, since that
Monsieur Cange, in the excellent Treatise which he has written about that
Relick, has so solidly Established, and so cleared the Truth, by dissipating
all the Clouds which have been raised to obscure it, that in my Opinion there
are none but those who are wilfully Blind, but must see the Truth of it.

There remained nothing now to be done, but to create a new Emperor; and for
this Purpose there had been twelve Electors named, so soon as the Siege of
Constantinople was resolved upon. There were six Venetians which were, the
Admiral, Vitalis Dandolo, Otho Quirini, Bertaccio Contarini, Nicholas
Navagieri, Pantaleon Barbo, and John Basegio; the French also named as many on
their Part, which were the Bishops of Soissons, Troyes, and Halberstad, the
Bishop of Bethlehem, whom the Pope had caused to pass from Palestine to the
Army, to be his Agent there, John Bishop Elect of Acre, and the new Abbot of
Los in Montserrat. An Election of this Nature was without doubt a very tender
Affair, in regard that there being many Pretenders to this extraordinary Honor,
there was great reason to fear, that those who were excluded by the Choice of
their Competitors, should abandon the new Emperor, French would be mightily
divided, by reason of the underhand Influence of the Pretenders upon them, and
that consequently the Venetians would indubitably be the Masters of the
Election, who would all concur to place that Honor upon the Person of the Doge,
who, notwithstanding the loss of his Sight, was most capable of Governing a
great Empire, as for a long time he had made it apparent by his most admirable
Government of that flourishing Republic. Notwithstanding all these Appearances
to the contrary, by the mavelous Prudence of the Venetians, the Election was
made in the most peacable manner in the World, and to the great Satisfaction of
all Parties.

For these People being most wise and able Politicians, considered, that if
they should choose a Venetian for the Emperor, they should run the Hazard of
Overthrowing their Republic, which without doubt would be swallowed up in
Monarchy, the inseparable Companion of the Empire; and besides, they saw
plainly, that they were not in a Condition long to maintain this Empire without
the Assistance of the French, and that also a new Emperor would be obliged
mutually to depend of them, it being impossible for him long to subsist without
their Maritim Succors. Hereupon they had no further Thoughts of placing one of
their own Nation upon the imperial Throne, but turned their Endeavors and Aims
wholly to the Point of making all the Advantage they could of this new
Conquest, for the Increase of their Republic: On the other side, the French
did themselves all the Justice imaginable, and were unanimous in their Opinion,
that the Election ought to fall either upon the Marquis Boniface, who was their
General, or upon Count Baldwin, in regard, that without Dispute these two
Princes were the most potent of all the Confederates, and consequently, most
capable of maintaining and defending the new Empire. Whereupon to avoid all
manner of Disputes and Differences, which might happen betwixt them after the
Election, it was by their Consent agreed, that whichsoever of them two should
be Chosen, should bestow upon the other, to be held in fee of the Empire, all
those Territories which formerly belonged to the Greek Empire, on the other
side the Bosphorus, together with the Isle of Candia.

This being done, the twelve Electors being assembled in the Chapel of the
great Imperial Palace, called Bucoleon, to proceed to the Election, the six
Venetians nominated Baldwin Earl of Flanders, herein following the Counsel of
their Doge, with whom they had before conferred about it. That wise Prince,
besides that he tenderly loved this young Prince, who used to treat the old
Doge with that Respect, as if he had been his Father, believed also that he was
the most proper Person to hold the Empire, as well by reason that he was in the
prime of his Age, as of his Power, wherein he did assuredly much surpass the
Marquis, both in the extent of his Dominions, number of Men, and in Estate; he
also, by a profound Policy, wisely considered, that it was much more conducive
to the good of the Republic, to choose a Prince, whose Dominions lay remote
from those of Venice, as did Flanders and Hainault, whereas the Marquis of
Montferrat, who was their near Neighbor, and a great Soldier, might prove a
terrible Enemy, in case of any Breach between them, and being strengthened with
the Forces of so great an Empire, might be in a Condition to do them much
Damage both by Sea and Land. For these Reasons, the six Venetians, without any
Hesitation, named Baldwin Earl of Flanders, for the Emperor, and those who were
of his Party among the French, at the same time joining with them in the
Choice; the others, who were for the Marquis, perceiving that it was but lost
Labor to give their Votes for him, and that it would be to no purpose, but to
manifest an unprofitable Imprudence to oppose them, they also closed with them,
and declared themselves for Prince Baldwin; so that by common Consent of the
twelve Electors, Baldwin Prince of Flanders and Hainault, was solemnly
proclaimed Emperor of Constantinople, the second Sunday after Easter, and in
eight days after he was solemnly Crowned in the Church of Sancta Sophia, with
all the magnificent Ceremonies which were used to be observed at the Coronation
of the Emperors, and with the Applause and general Acclamations of the Latins
and the Greeks.

Nicetas himself is constrained to acknowledge, of a rare Piety toward God,
and of admirable Charity and Goodness toward his Subjects, especially toward
the Poor and Miserable, for whose Comfort and Relief he spared nothing; he was
a passionate Lover of Justice, which he did indifferently distribute to all
Persons; he was Free and Sincere, easy in his Conversation, willingly hearing
what was the Opinion of those who took the Liberty to differ from his
Sentiments; plain and mighty Moderate about his own Person, tho wonderful
Magnificent in all other things; Liberal and Bountiful to all except himself:
and that which infinitely heightened all these admirable Qualities, he was so
Chaste, that he never bestowed any amorous Glances upon any other Woman besides
the Empress, his Wife; nor would he suffer any Lewdness or Debauchery among his
Domestics, or permit such as were convicted to have in any manner violated the
Laws of Chastity, to remain in his Court. This is the true Pourtraict of the
Emperor Baldwin, who was the first of the Latins who held the Empire of
Constantinople, which had been so gloriously Conquered by the Crusades.

The first thing which he did, that so he might inviolably keep and observe
what was decreed before this Election, was to cause one of the Venetian
Ecclesiastics to be chosen Patriarch; this was Thomas Moresini, whose
Election, tho at first it was declared null and contrary to the Canons by Pope
Innocent, yet at the Instance of the Emperor, he did anew create him Patriarch;
and then it was that the Greek Church was reunited with the Latin, by the
Obedience which it rendered to the Pope, as Head of the Universal Church, from
which it had been so long separated by Schism and Heresy.

After this, there was a Division and Distribution made of the Lands and
Provinces of the Empire: The Marquis Boniface exchanged the Provinces which he
was to have had in Asia, for the new Kingdom of Thessaly, which he desired,
that so he might be nearer his Brother-in-Law, the King of Hungary. The
Venetians had the Isles of the Archipelagus, and a great part of Peloponnesus,
or Morea, with many Cities upon the Coasts of the Hellespont, and Phrygia,
together with the Isle of Candia, which they purchased of the Marquis of
Montferrat, to whom it had been given by the young Alexis. Bithynia, under the
Title of a Duchy, fell to the Share of the Count de Blois; William de
Champlite of Champagne, had the Principality of Achaia and Peloponnesus, which
he Conquered, and at his Death left to Geoffry de Ville Hardouin, Nephew to the
Mareshal of Champagne, who had also for his Share the Province of Romania.
There were also several other Principalities, Lands, and great Cities, both in
Europe and Asia, conferred upon the most considerable Persons in the Army.
After this, the Emperor taking the Field, before the Winter, reduced all the
Cities of Thracia under his Obeisance; and to complete his good Fortune, the
old Alexis, and the persidious Murtzuphle, who still carried themselves as
Emperors in that Province, fell alive into his victorious Hands, and received
Justice according to their Demerits.

Murtzuphle, after his Flight, was retired into a City of Thracia, about four
days March from Constantinople, and having rallied some Troops, he, with them,
seized upon Tzurulum, at this day called Chiorli, between the imperial City and
Adrianople; But when he perceived that all Places surrendered themselves to
Prince Henry, Messinople, anciently and truly called Maximinianopolis, in the
Province of Rhodope, where the old Alexis had made himself be acknowledged as
Emperor during the Siege of Constantinople. Murtzuphle sent to him, to offer
him his Troops and his Service against the common Enemy, and entreated him to
do him the Honor, to consider him, and receive him as his Son-in-Law, who could
have no other Interests but his. But Alexis, whether it were that he hated him
because he was more wicked than himself, or that he distrusted him, or that he
was resolved to revenge the Affront and Dishonor that had been done by him to
his Daughter, or possibly, that wholly Miserable as he was himself, yet he
could not endure that another should call himself Emperor, he resolved to
destroy him, and to punish his Perfidy by another Treason. For as the Devils in
the other World are the Executioners of God's Decrees upon the Damned; so the
Crimes of wicked Men in this Life, serve his Justice, in the punishing of those
Offenses which other wicked Men have committed. This dissembling and
treacherous old Man, therefore made show of receiving these Offers of his
Son-in-Law, with all the Marks of Tenderness and Affection which he could have
wished; he went in Person to Confer with him, they embraced, they kissed, and
reciprocally gave to each other their Faith, protesting that they would
hereafter never have any other but the same Interest and the same Heart. After
which Murtzuphle made no difficulty entirely to trust his Father-in-Law, and
went confidently to an Entertainment, to which he was invited by him; but as he
was conducted into a Chamber, where the Trap was set for him, the People of
Alexis, who were in Readiness for that Purpose, fell upon him, and overthrowing
him, they immediately pulled his Eyes out of his Head. Thus divine Justice, the
wise Disposer of all things, ordered it, that one Tyrant should execute upon
another, the same Cruelty which he himself had, about nine Years before,
advised him to act upon his own Brother, the Emperor Isaac.

Not long after, Alexis understanding that Baldwin, to whom all Thracia
submitted, was coming against him, he fled into Macedon with so much
Precipitation and Disorder, that some of the Friends of Murtzuphle, all whose
Troops were disbanded, found the Means to procure his Escape: But after he had
for some time wandered in Disguise with a small Attendance, intending to pass
the Strait of the Hellespont, to save himself in Asia, he was surprised by
Thierri de Los, who had got notice of him, and carried Prisoner to
Constantinople, where the Emperor would have him proceeded against in due
course of Law. He was therefore accused before the Princes of an infinite
number of Crimes, and above all, of being guilty of the most detestable
Parricide upon the Person of the young Emperor Alexis, who he had strangled
with his own Hands. The Fact was publicly notorious, nor could he deny it; but
yet he had the audacious Confidence to endeavor to justify himself, by
maintaining that he had done nothing but what was most Just, and what was
approved by the Greeks, and even the Relations of Alexis, who had lost his
Right to the Empire, and deserved Death for having betrayed his Country in
selling it to Strangers. But as his insolent Answers, were so far from
diminishing his Crime, that they rendered him more Odious, so he was condemned
to a Death, which might strike a Terror into all those who were the Accomplices
or Approvers of his Parricide. For this Purpose he was led into the great
Square, called that of the Bull, in the middle of which, the great Theodosius
had erected a marble Column of extraordinary Height, which being hollow, had a
Staircase within, by which they might go to the Top, upon which that Emperor
had caused his Statue in Brass, upon Horseback, to be placed; but that
happening to be thrown down by an Earthquake in the Reign of Zeno, Anastatius
his Successor, caused his to be set up in the Room of it, and that having also
the same Fate, there was nothing after set up, but it remained as a little
Lodge, which was inhabited by a new Stylite, who by the means of that Retreat
enjoyed a Solitude in the midst of the greatest and most populous City in the
World. It was to the Top of this high Column that the Unfortunate Murtzuphle
was carried, and in the view of the whole City, which might easily see it from
all parts, this Square of the Bull being one of the most eminent of the seven.
Hills upon which Constantinople stands,

That which is most strange in this terrible Execution, is, that among other
Figures which were carved round about this Column, there was to be seen that of
an Emperor thrown down in that very manner from a Column, which the People took
for a Prophetic Mark of the Destiny of this miserable Prince, conformable to
an ancient Oracle, which ran current by Tradition among them at Constantinople,
That the Ox should bellow, and the Bull should weep. It is true, that the
Combats and the Victories of the great Theodosius, were represented upon this
Column, as are to be seen at this day at Rome, those of Trajan and Antoninus
upon the two famous Columns there, which bear their Names; and thus it is
possible, that among those Figures there may be the Representation of some
barbarous Prince falling headlong from a high Tower, which they took for a
Prediction of this Emperor's Destiny; but that there should be any real
Prediction, either in this Figure, or in the Story of the Bull's weeping, to
forebode the Death of Murtzuphle, is what I cannot easily believe. For in
short, these sort of Prophecys, of which there are numerous Examples, are so
obscure, that they either signify nothing at all, or all that one would have
them signify; and that commonly they are taken in a Sense far different, from
that, wherein by the Event they explain themselves. Witness that Prediction
which they had, and upon which the Greeks so much relied, that the Latins
should never take Constantinople by Force, because the Prophecy told them that
the City should never be taken but by an Angel. But the foolish Greeks were
mightily mistaken in their Interpretation, as the Event showed, there being the
Picture of an Angel in the very place where the City was forced. And this ought
to teach Christians, not to amuse themselves with these Predictions, which are
not at all authorized by the Holy Scripture, or the Church; and ordinarily
those over curious Persons, in their own Sottishness and Credulity find their
own Punishment, the Event deceiving them, by proving contrary to their Hopes
and Expectation, which are cheated by the Ambiguous Riddles, such as were
formerly the Oracles of the Pagans.

This was the tragical End of one of the Tyrants; as for the other, the old
Alexis, it is true indeed, that his was not altogether so sad, but altogether
as unhappy. For having for some time followed Leon Scurus, one of his
Sons-in-Law, who pretended to oppose the Progress of Marquis Boniface in
Macedon and Greece, when he saw that all things stooped under the Arms of this
Victorious Prince, he despaired of being able to save himself; to prevent his
being taken therefore he voluntarily yielded himself and the Empress
Euphrosine, with the imperial Ornaments, to the Marquis, who instantly sent
them to the Emperor. After which, the poor Alexis only desiring wherewith to
pass the rest of his miserable Age in some sort of Repose, there were some
Lands assigned him for that purpose, but it being found out that he fell to his
old trade of secret Caballing, the Marquis, to take from him the means of doing
Mischief, since he could not cure him of the Will to do it, sent him Prisoner
to Montferrat: Some say that he found Means to escape from thence, and to pass
over into Asia, to his other Son-in-Law Lascaris, who had seized upon Nice, and
against whom, this perfidious Dotard stirred up the Turks, so that he was
forced to take him and clap him into a Monastery, where he had time to finish
his Life in Repentance.

Thus the Empire of Constantinople, about nine hundred Years after its
Establishment under the great Constantine, was translated from the Greeks to
the French, by the strangest and most memorable Conquest that ever was made by
so small a Force, and in so little a time, being undertaken and accomplished in
one Campaign. Crusade was not prosperous; and certainly four great Estates
established for the Christians between the Sea and the River Tygris, Egypt and
Armenia, and all the Eastern Empire reduced under the Power of the Crusades,
are Conquests worthy the Fortune and the Glory of the Caesar's and the
Alexanders. And if those who succeeded them failed of that good Fortune, or the
Conduct to preserve them, it is not to be attribute to them, who did so
gloriously accomplish these noble Enterprises. But as the Matters which
happened afterward, under the French Emperors of Constantinople, are not at
all related to the Crusade, it is not requisite that I speak further of them,
but proceed regularly to pursue the Course of my History, and to describe the
Success of those who took the other Way, and followed other Designs.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land. PART III.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS of the Third Book.
The unfortunate Success of those who abandoned the Confederates to pass into
Syria. The Care of the Pope for Constantinople, who sends Doctors from Paris to
reduce the Schismatics. The Death of Mary the Empress, Wife of Baldwin. The
Death of Isabella Queen of Jerusalem. The Princess Mary her Daughter succeeds
in the Realm, and Marries Count John de Brienne. The Relation how that Prince
and Count Gautier his Brother conquered the Kingdom of Naples. The Exploits of
King John de Brienne. The Pope procures him Aid. A piteous Adventure of some
young Men, who by a strange Illusion took upon them the Cross. The Design of
Pope Innocent to procure a general Crusade, favored by the Victory of Philip
the August against the Emperor Otho. The Battle of Bovines. The Relation of the
Council of Lateran, where the Crusade is Decreed. The Pope himself Preaches
it. His Death in that Holy Exercise. A Fable concerning his Purgatory. The
Election of Pope Honorius III of that Name. His Zeal and Industry to promote
the Crusade. Andrew King of Hungary the Head thereof. The Princes that
Accompanied him, and their Voyage. Their Conjunction with King John de Brienne.
Their Expedition against Coradin. The Description of Thabor, and the Relation
of the Siege of that Fortress, which had been built there by Coradin. The
Return of the King into Hungary. The Arrival of the Northern Fleet of the
Crusades, under the Earl of Holland. The Relation of their Adventures and
Exploits against the Moors in Portugal. The Siege and Battle of Alcazar. The
Victory of the Crusades. Their Voyage to Ptolemais. The Reasons of the
Resolution which they took to attack Egypt. The Description of Damiata. The
Account of that memorable Siege, which lasted eighteen Months. The Attack and
taking of the Tower of Pharus. A Description of certain Engines of a new
Invention. The Death of Saphadin upon the News of the taking of that Place. His
Elogy and Character. Meledin succeeds him. An Error of the Christians after the
taking of Pharus. Cardinal Albano arrives with a potent Reinforcement to the
Crusades. The Division between the King and the Legate, and the Cause of it. An
heroic Action of certain Soldiers, who break the Enemies Bridge. The Army
passes the Nile. Sultan Meledin flies. The City Besieged by Land. Two great
Armies of Sarasins besiege the Camp. They attack the Lines and force them. A
great Combat within the Lines. The Enemy at last repulsed. The Arrival of St.
Francis before Damiata. His Conference with the Sultan. The Battle without the
Lines lost by the Crusades. An advantageous Peace offered to the Christians by
the Sultan. The Reasons for and against it. It is at last rejected by the
Legate. Damiata taken by Night.

Palestine, or who had taken other ways to put themselves under other
Commanders, met with all manner of ill Success; and were so far from supporting
that tottering State, that in conclusion, they did nothing but weaken the poor
remainders of the Christian Power in the Holy Land. The Truce which had for
some time continued between them and the Sarasins, having been broaken by one
of the Admirals of Egypt, and no sort of Satisfaction to be obtained for it,
the War broke out more furiously than before, between King Emeri, and Coradin
the Son of Saphadin, who was as great a Captain as his Father: By Saphadin's
Orders therefore, he immediately advanced with a powerful Army, and encamped
within a League of Ptolemais. Now John de Nele, who commanded the great Fleet
which had been equipped in Flanders, and who staid at Marseilles to Winter,
having heard this News, made have from thence, and whereas he should have
joined the Princes who besieged Constantinople, as Count Baldwin had ordered
him, he sailed directly for Ptolemais, where he landed, having more Soldiers
aboard his Fleet, than there was in the whole Army of the Consederate Princes:
So that with those who were already passed by the Ports of Brindes and Otranto,
under Simon de Montfort, Renard de Dampierre, and the other Lords who had
quitted the Confederates before they left Venice, together with that great
Multitude of Bretons who followed the Monk Herloin thither, there were more
Forces than might have chased the Infidels out of Palestine.

But there happened so many ill Accidents to them, as ruined all their Designs;
for the Plague, which began a little before in Ptolemais, raged so furiously
among these new Comers, that it is reported, there died in that City at one
time, above two thousand Persons in an Hour; so that almost one half of them
perished of that terrible Disease, and the remainder to avoid that Danger,
Europe. There was also a fearful Dissension between the Christians themselves
and the Crusades, occasioned by a War betwixt Livon King of Armenia, and
Bohemond Earl of Tripolis, and Prince of Antioch, for the Principality of that
State; and as many great Lords, and among others Renard de Dampierre, with whom
Theobald Count de Champagne, at his Death had entrusted his Troops, took the
Part of Bohemond, and marched to his Assistance, they were surprised by the
Sultan of Alepo, who defeated them so entirely, that there was scarce one who
escaped either being taken or flain. Villain de Nevilly, one of the most
valiant Men of his time, was there unfortunately slain; and his Bother William
de Nevilly, Bernard de Montmirail, and John de Villiers, were taken, as Renard
de Dampierre, General of the Champenois, who was led to Alepo, where he
remained a Prisoner for thirty Years; as for the poor Bretons, they having only
the Monk to lead them, and he knowing better how to persuade them to take Arms,
than how to manage them; they, like those who followed Peter the Hermit, were
quickly dispersed, and neither knowing what they had to do, nor how to do it,
they perished either by the Plague, or Famine, or the Swords of the Infidels;
and the poor remainders of that great number, did not, without great
Difficulty, at last regain their Country of Bretany, without having done any
thing worthy of the great Zeal and Courage, which carried them out of it. But
it has been an old Observation, that Lions, with a timorous Stagg for their
Captain, will all prove Hearts, and that even fearful Deer, when led by a Lion,
will do like Lions. But in short, there was not one of those who separated from
the Army of the Confederates, to go without them into the Holy Land, who had
not sufficient Reason of Repentance, either for the Disgrace, or the Damage
which he suffered. Even Simon de Momfort, who before this had done so many
Wonders in the War against the Albigenses, was forced to return into France,
without bringing home with him from the Voyage, any thing except the Trouble to
have done nothing. So dangerous it is to quit the main Body to which one is
related, and from which no better Fortune is to be expected, but like a Branch
cut from the Stem of a Tree, to be blasted and withered.

In this miserable Estate were the Christians in the East, and almost reduced
to the utmost Despair, when they received the News of the taking of
Constantinople by the Confederate Princes, of whom, even those, who had
abandoned them, were constrained to demand Help from those to whom they had
before denied theirs, tho it was not to be expected, that so small a Number,
engaged in so great an Enterprise, as the settling of their new Conquests, and
enlarging them, could, for the present, be able to afford them. It is
impossible however to express the Joy which this News gave the Christians of
Palestine, who now, did not question in the least, but the Way was opened for
the most short and certain Deliverance of the Holy Land, from the Oppression of
the barbarous Infidels. But in regard of the Fear they were in of losing all,
after so many Misfortunes, as one upon the Neck of another had fallen upon
them, King Emeri had before made a most disadvantageous Truce with the
Infidels, for six Years; whereupon all the Crusades who were in Palestine, went
to wait upon the new Emperor at Constantinople. The Legate himself, Peter de
Capua, Cardinal of St. Marcellus, being sent for thither by Baldwin, to
regulate the Affairs of the Church, sailed thither, and was followed by his
Colleague, the Cardinal of St. Praxede, and such a multitude of the Oriental
Christians, of all Conditions, that the King was, almost, left quite alone,
without any Forces considerable enough to oppose the Infidels, if they should
attempt to break the Truce, as they quickly after did.

The Pope was hereupon mightily afraid, and extremely troubled, that his Legates
should also without his Order, abandon the Holy Land. But the Providence of God
averted this threatened Misfortune, by a War, which presently broke out among
the Sarasins, one against another; and the Pope comforted himself with the
Conquest of Constantinople, which was altogether so unexpected to him. He now
no longer condemned this Enterprise of the Crusades, as he had done formerly,
the fortunate Success thereof fully justifying the Undertaking; And besides,
Holy Land. And for this purpose, that such a Conquest might be preserved,
whereupon that of Palestine depended, he writ his Circular Letters to all the
Archbishops of France, and their Suffragans, by which he exhorted and commanded
them to persuade the French to take Arms, and march to the Assistance of their
Brethren at Constantinople: And, above all, he desired that they would send
some zealous, learned Men, furnished with Books, to labor in the Conversion of
the Greeks. The University of Paris, which Philip the August had taken such
care of, that it might flourish in all manner of Learning and Knowledge, was
then in high Reputation throughout the World; and this wise Pope, who had
himself been sometimes a Member of that great Body, writ to them upon this
Subject with so much force, that many Doctors and Batchellors, persuaded by his
Reasons, and inflamed with a Zeal truly Apostolical, went to propagate the
Light of Truth, and the Orthodox Doctrine in the Greek Empire, which had been
obscured by many Errors of the Schism. Thus the Divine Providence, which, with
infinite Wisdom, takes care of all things, so disposed Matters, that, upon this
Occasion, it seemed to make a Retalliation, by ordering that Paris should
render the same Service to Greece, which Greece had sometime bestowed upon
France, by sending thither St. Denis, to be an Apostle for that Country. The
Pope also, at that time, did not fail to write to the victorious Army, which
had so gloriously executed that mavelous Enterprise, to oblige them to stay
another Year in that Empire, to assure those Conquests, provided that, by the
Infidels breaking of the Truce, there was not an absolute necessity that they
should speedily repair to Palestine, to succor the Christians there, against
the Barbarians.

But whilst the Pope labored with so much diligence for the Good of
Christendom in the East, there happened in the Holy Land two deplorable
Accidents, which very much disturbed the Joy of that happy Success of the Arms
of the Confederates. The first was, the Death of the Countess Mary, Sister of
the deceased Count de Champagne, Niece to Philip the August, and Wife to
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who had so generously taken up the Cross with her
Husband, resolving to run the same Fortunes with him; but being big with Child,
she was not at that time in a Condition to go along with him; and therefore,
after she had lain in, she embarked upon the Fleet which was commanded by John
de Nele. She had not been long at Ptolemais, where she landed in expectation of
her Husband, Count Baldwin, before she received the News, that, after the
Taking of Constantinople, he was elevated to the Imperial Throne. The Joy which
this News occasioned, made such a violent Impression upon her Body, extremely
infeebled with the Fatigues of so long a Voyage, that not being able to
surmount it, she died of the two Excesses of Joy and Weakness. So that the
Ships which were sent by the Emperor, to conduct her with Pomp to
Constantinople, to receive the Crown Imperial with her dearest Husband,
transported her Body only thither, to be, as it was, with the most magnificent
Ceremonies, usual upon such sad Occasions, interred in the Church of Sancta
Sophia.

Jerusalem: For King Emeri de Lusignan dying in the City of Acre, and the
little Emeri, his Son, not long surviving him, Isabella, his Mother, the Wife
of Emeri, at the same time also following them to the Tomb, the Crown, by Right
of Succession, descended to the Princess Mary, her eldest Daughter, who was
usually called the Marchioness, because she was born to her of the famous
Marquis de Montferrat, Prince of Tire, her second Husband. Hereupon the Estates
being assembled, to provide a Husband for the young Queen, who might be able to
act and govern the Realm, in a time wherein there was such need of a King of
great Abilities, to supply the defect of Forces which remained in the Realm,
after so many Disasters: But the Jealousy and Ambition of so many Great Men of
the same Realm, not permitting them to agree in an Election of one of their own
number, they being all Rivals, and resolved not to give place one to another,
at last, France, from whence the first Kings of Jerusalem came, and into no
other Country, and from thence desire one of Philip the August; and thereupon
they dispatched the Bishop of Ptolemais, and the Lord of Cesarea, as their
Ambassadors, France, upon whom, together with the young Queen, they might
confer the Crown of Jerusalem.

There was, no question, something very surprising and unaccountable in the
Conduct of Philip in this Encounter; for there were in France many great
Princes and Lords of very high Quality, upon whom he might have cast his Eyes;
yet, nevertheless, whether their illustrious Merit, his own particular
Inclination, or some unknown politic Reasons governed him in his Choice, two
several times successively, he chose, it is true, out of a very Noble House,
though something inferior in Quality to many others, two Brothers, whom upon
two Occasions he preferred in the Disposal of two Crowns: They were Gautier II.
Count de Brienne in Champagne; and his Brother John de Brienne, the Son of
Erard II. Count de Brienne, and Agnes de Montheliard. He married Gautier to
Alberia, eldest Daughter of Tancred King of Sicily, who, with her Mother
Sybilla, escaping out of the Prison, wherein they had been kept by the Emperor
Henry IV. in Germany, had sled for Refuge into France. This valiant Man,
accompanied with no more than threescore Knights, and forty Esquires of the
Crusades, who resolved to follow his Fortune, instead of going to Venice with
the Princes, had the Confidence to pursue the Rights of his Wife, and
re-conquer a Kingdom, without any other Fond than twenty thousand Livres, which
he received from King Philip, and five hundred Ounces of Gold which he had from
the Pope, which would raise but a very inconsiderable number of Troops, but
notwithstanding this, with his few Men, he acted with so much Courage and
Conduct, that after having defeated the Emperor's Lieutenants in several
Encounters, he made himself Master of Pavia, Calabria, Capua, and even Naples
it self, and, in a manner, the whole Realm, the Germans not daring to appear in
the Field. But after so many Victories, as he besieged their General Diepold in
a certain Castle to which he had driven him, the Contempt which he had of his
Enemies was the occasion of his falling into their Hands; for in the Night the
General surprised him in his Tent, and carried him Prisoner to the Castle, all
covered in Blood, where he shortly after died, more of Grief than of his
Wounds; so much nearer than their Swords had done did the Trouble and
Affliction go to his heart, to see himself in the power of those whom he had so
despised; complaining that he had so ill guarded himself against the Cowardly
Germans, who, he said, by Daylight, though in complete Armor, durst not
venture to attack the French stark naked, and unarmed. Thus, by his
Presumption, he lost that in a Moment, which, by his Valor and great
Abilities, he had acquired by abundance of gallant Actions, which he had
performed in four Years before.

As for his Brother, John de Brienne, who, among all the great Lords of France,
was chosen by King Philip the August, to marry the young Queen of Jerusalem; he
received that Honor with all the marks of a profound Acknowledgment, and
promised the Ambassadors, before their Parting, that he would, with all the
Forces he could raise, come for Palestine before the Expiration of the Truce.
Now Saphadin, who apprehended there would be a new Crusade, to accompany this
King, who was sent for from France, offered the Christians to prolong the
Truce; but the Templers rejecting his Proposition, the War was broke out afresh
when John de Brienne arrived there, which was the 3d of September, in the Year
1210. Saphadin believed that this new King would bring a great Army with him,
he found that he had only brought a few Troops, together with about three
hundred Knights, who had embarked with him at Marseilles, to serve at their own
Charges against the Infidels: For the Troubles of Germany and Italy, by
occasion of the new Schism in the Empire, and the War which was breaking out
between Philip the August, Otho, who was excommunicated by the Pope; together
with the famous Crusade which then began to be set on foot in France, against
the Albigenses, hindered the raising of one to accompany King John de Brienne
into the Holy Land. So that he was able to raise no greater Fond of Money than
forty thousand Livres, which he had from the French King; and as many more
which the Pope procured him from the Romans, upon his Estate, the Earldom of
Brienne, which he was forced to mortgage for it. He did not, however, fail,
with his small Power, to do all that could be expected from a Prince equally
wise and valiant; for, presently after his Coronation, which was celebrated at
Tire, he took the Field; and entering upon the Territories of the Infidels, he
took diverse places from them, and returned without Loss, bringing a
considerable Booty from them to Ptolemais. But so soon as the Sarasins
understood what a small number of Men he had brought with him out of Europe,
they joined all their Forces, and came to encamp about that City with a mighty
Army, commanded by Coradin; so that the Christians durst not stir out, but were
in a manner besieged; especially after the Sultan had seized upon all the
neighboring Places, principally the Mountain of Thabor, upon which he built a
Fortress, from whence they made continual Incursions, Ptolemais. Hereupon the
Knights, and Persons of Quality, who came along with the King, seeing they were
too weak to sally and sight their Enemies in the plain Field, and being unable
to suffer themselves to be locked in the City, without doing any thing, they
returned, before the Winter, into France; so that this poor Prince remained
almost all alone, in danger to have taken Possession of a Kingdom, only to have
the Displeasure and the Shame to see himself driven out of it, unless he
received some seasonable Assistance.

Holy Land, would be wholly ruined by being so long delayed; he resolved
therefore, after the Example of Pope Urban II. the first Author of the
Crusades, to employ his utmost power to procure one by calling a General
Council, that thereby he might engage all the Christian States and Kingdoms in
it. But in regard, that, considering the present posture of Affairs in Europe,
Palestine: And after having renewed the Prohibitions which he had so often made
before, That, upon pain of Excommunication, none should presume to sell any
Merchandise, more especially any Arms, to the Sarasins, he commanded certain
Prayers, with Fasting and Alms, to be used in the Church, for the imploring the
Mercy and Pity of God, and his Blessing upon the Council which was to be held
for the taking care of the Necessities of the Church, and, above all other
things, the Relief of the Holy Land. He also resolved to try other Ways, since
he saw those which had before been made use of, did not prosper, and addressed
himself to Saphadin, Sultan of Babylon and Damascus, who was now become almost
as potent as his Brother, the great Saladin, had been, who took Jerusalem. He
writ to him, to exhort him to restore that holy City to the Christians, which,
besides that of it self it brought no considerable Advantage to him, put him to
vast Expenses, to be always in a Condition to resist the whole Powers of
Christendom, who would eternally arm themselves to take it from him. He
remonstrated to him, That it was much better for him, as a wise Politician,
freely, and by Reason, to do that which he must one day be constrained to do,
whether he would or not, with the loss of his Honor, and possibly, all that he
might, upon the Surrender of that City, quietly and peaceably be permitted to
possess in the East. That it was impossible but he must, at last, fall under
those Arms, whose invincible Force he was sufficiently sensible of already, and
whose Courage and Valor were above all fear of Danger. That they esteemed it
not only a point of Honor, but of Religion, to re-conquer that holy City,
which their Ancestors had taken by Force, with not above twenty thousand Men,
from forty thousand Defendants, and in the very sight of an Army incomparably
greater than theirs. That in restoring to the Christians that City, which he
could not long defend against them, he would thereby assure himself of the rest
of his Dominions by the Peace which was offered him, upon Condition that the
Prisoners on both sides should be set at liberty.

But these Letters of the Pope produced not those Effects which he hoped, and
promised himself; for Saphadin, who had so frequently combated against the
Christians, knew by Experience that the Crusades would overthrow themselves, if
the fury of their first Efforts were but prevented; and, above all, having the
Courage, the good Fortune, and the Success of Saladin, he was not much moved by
the Remonstrances of Innocent, for whom he had no great Consideration. And for
the other Letters which the Pope writ to all Christian People, they came to
nothing at last, but to raise those great Disorders which had happened in the
former Crusades: For it happened by a strange Illusion, or rather, a kind of
Frensy, which, like a Plague, spread it self over all France and Germany, the
Youths of all sorts of Conditions, taking a strong Impression in their Minds
that God would make use of their Hands, to deliver the Holy Sepulcher out of
the Hands of the Sarasins; and that he commanded them to go to Jerusalem, to
atchieve that high Enterprise, they assembled to the number of thirty thousand
in France, and twenty thousand in Germany, who took upon them the Cross. There
were many Monks and Priests, who undertook to justify this Folly by another
which was greater; and, as if God had commanded it, put themselves at the Head
of these Boys, and other Vagabonds, who maliciously followed them, to make some
advantage of this Disorder; and it being impossible to stop the Torrent of this
furious Folly, they pleasantly marched along, singing and crying all together,
with all their power, Lord Jesus, bestow upon us thy Holy Cross. The greatest
part of those of Germany taking disserent Roads, either perished miserably on
the Way, or were dispoiled by Thieves and Robbers. Those of France, who could
escape to Marseilles, were there miserably cheated by two Merchants, whose
Names were Hugh le Fer, and William Porc, notorious Villains; who, having
promised to transport them into Palestine for nothing, putting them on Board
seven of their Ships, two of the Vessels were shipwrack'd, with the loss of all
those poor Boys with which they were charged: and for those who were upon the
other sive, these Traitors carried them into Egypt, and there sold them for
Slaves to the Sarasins.

It is true that God, who alone can bring Good out of Evil, for his Glory, drew
this Advantage from this great Disorder, and horrible Treachery, that diverse of
these Innocents, whom the Infidels endeavored to force to deny and renounce
their Faith, persisted so constantly to confess Jesus Christ, for whose sake
they had taken the Cross, that they chose rather to be cut in pieces, than to
renounce their Faith; and by this irregular and frantic Action, came at last
to obtain the Crown of Martyrdom. At last, the memorable Victory which Philip
the August obtained against Otho, who, having been crowned after the Death of
the Emperor Philip, troubled all Europe, gave the Pope the occasion to
accomplish, by the General Council, the great Design of the Crusade, which he
had begun by his Letters, and which the Preachers, by his Orders, published
every where.

This Emperor Otho made a most cruel War against the Pope, who had always been
his Protector, so that he was, at last, constrained, by his extreme
Ingratitude, to excommunicate him; as also, for his openly invading the
Churches Patrimony, seizing upon what the Holy See had received from the
magnificent Liberality of the Kings of France. Philip the August, who, besides
that he hated Otho, as being the Nephew of his Enemy, the King of England,
thought himself obliged to maintain what his Predecessors had done in favor of
the Holy See, sailed not to declare himself for the Pope; and negotiated so
powerfully with diverse Princes of the Empire, the principal whereof were the
King of Bohemia, the Dukes of Austria and Bavaria, the Archbishops of Treves,
Mayence and Cologne, that they deposed this ungrateful, excommunicate Prince,
and elected Frederick, whom his Father, the Emperor Henry VI. had caused to be
declared King of the Romans, at the Age of three Years, and who was also King
of Naples and Sicily, in Right of the Empress Constantia, his Mother. He came
soon after into Germany, where he was received by the Princes, and crowned
Emperor at Aix-la-Chapelle, Thierri Bishop of Cologne: And that he might
support his Right by the Arms of his Protector, he came directly to Vaucouleur,
where, after a Conference with Lewis, the Son of King Philip, he made a new
Treaty with the King, and renewed the ancient Alliance, which had been between
his Predecessors and the Crown of France. Otho, on his side, who had a powerful
Party in Germany, believing that if he could but ruin Philip, he should be able
easily to manage Frederick and the Pope, made a League against France, with the
English, Ferrand de Portugal Earl of Flanders, who had revolted against his
Master, and his Benefactor, who had married him to the Heiress of Flanders;
English and Flemmings, which, together with his own, composed an Army of above
two hundred thousand Men: So that making no doubt but that he should be able to
cut the French Army in pieces, who were not a third part so numerous, he
assailed them, when they least expected a Battle, as they were passing the
Bridge of Bovines. But Philip, without being dismayed at this Surprise, having
put himself at the Head of the Rereguard, whilst the Vant-guard re-passed the
Bridge, sustained their first Shock, and gave a Check to the Enemies, till such
time as the other Troops were drawn up in Battalia upon his Right and Left,
according to the Orders which he had given: And then the French, animated by
the Sight, the Words, but much more by the Example of their King, who this Day
behaved himself like one of the ancient Heroes, charged with so much fury every
where, that, after having fought victoriously in all places, from Noon till
Night, the Army of the Enemies was totally routed. All the principal Captains
lay stretched out at length upon the place, or else were taken Prisoners, Otho
only excepted, who escaped by the swiftness of his Horse, and retreated into
the Lower Saxony, where, about two Years after, he died with Grief to see
himself forsaken by all the Princes of the Empire, and another Emperor
generally acknowledged and received by all the Germans. This great Victory of
Philip, and that which Prince Lewis, his Son, obtained, almost at the same
time, in Poitou, against the King of England, having made a great Calm in the
Church and the Empire, the Pope, who, during the Wars, which troubled all
Europe, could not assemble the Council, now caused it to be called; Lateran at
Rome.

This was the twelfth Ecumenical Council, and the fourth of Lateran, and one
of the greatest which the Church had ever had; for, besides the Pope, who
presided in Person, the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem, and the
Deputies of those of Antioch and Alexandria were present at it, together with
seventy one Archbishops, four hundred and twelve Bishops, with the Proxies of
diverse others, above eight hundred Abbots and Priors, and the Ambassadors of
the Emperor Frederick II. Henry the Emperor of Constantinople, of the Kings of
England, France, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus and Aragon. The Pope, who was a Man
very learned and eloquent, opened the Session by a Speech which is verbatim
inserted into the Acts of the Council, as he spoke it; and therein, after he
had acquainted them, that the principal Reason why he had assembled them, was
to consider how they might relieve the Holy Land, he brought in Jerusalem
addressing her self to the Christians of the West, and to implore their
Assistance, in the Language of the holy Scripture; representing, in a manner so
pathetick and moving, the piteous Estate to which she was reduced under the
Tyrannick Dominion of the Sarasins, to the shame of the Christian Name, that it
was impossible but the whole Assembly should be moved with it, or refuse taking
the generous Resolution of employing all things for the Deliverance of the holy
City from that cruel Servitude. So that, after they had established the
Doctrines of the Faith, against the Heresies of Berengarius, Amauri de
Chartres, the Albigenses, and the Abbot Joachim, without meddling with his
Person, by reason that he submitted himself to the Judgment of the Holy See;
and after they had regulated such Matters as concerned Discipline, and the
Reformation of Manners, the Fathers, with the Consent of the Ambassadors of the
Princes, made these following Orders for the Crusade: That the Bishops should
cause it to be preached in their respective Diocesses; above all, enjoining the
Preachers to press it as a thing necessary for all those who took it upon them,
to put themselves, by true Repentance, into a State of Grace, thereby to
preserve themselves in the Favor of God, Crusade. And to excite others, by his
Example, to this Liberality, the Pope promised, that, besides this Tax, he
would provide Shipping, and great Sums of Money for the particular Maintenance
of such of the Romans as should take upon them the Cross. That the Crusades
should have all the same Privileges, Spiritual and Temporal, which the former
Popes had indulged to the first Crusades. That they should all be in readiness
to pass into Palestine by the 1st Day of June, in the following Year. That, in
the Interim, those who resolved to be of the Land-Army should come to the
Rendezvous which should be appointed, whither the Pope would send his Legate;
and that those who chose rather to go by Sea, should repair to the Port of
Brindes in Pavia, or to Messina in Sicily, where he himself would be present,
to take care, and give Orders, for what should be needful, since he was not, as
he passionately desired, permitted to pass beyond the Seas, and take the Voyage
with the Crusades. That there should be either a Peace, or a Truce among the
Christian Princes for four Years; and that, during that time, all public
Sports and Tournaments should be straightly prohibited. That those who aided the
Crusades, or furnished them with Equipage, should enjoy the Benefits of the
Indulgences. And, on the contrary, that such as favored the Pirates, and such
Christian Merchants as betrayed their Brethren, by selling Arms and Ammunition
to the Sarasins, should, as impious Traitors to God and Religion, be exposed to
all the Censures of the Church.

It must be avowed that our Ancestors, who acted as exactly and prudently, but
with far fewer Intrigues of Nicity and Ceremony than we do at this Day, were
far more expeditious in the concluding of their greatest Affairs, than in the
succeeding Ages. This great Council, wherein so many, and such important
Matters were debated, both in relation to Faith and Manners, so many things of
a differing Nature, as the Policy and the Discipline of the Church, the Peace
among the Christian Princes, and the War against the Insidels, and almost the
general Interests of all Europe, was terminated in less than three Weeks,
continuing only between the Feast of St. Martin, and that of St. Andrew: a time
which now would scarcely be thought sufficient for the regulating of one single
Preliminary Article in an Assembly of far less importance than this was: And
that which is still more admirable, the Execution immediately succeeded the
Debates and Determinations, no manner of Considerations, Passions or Interests
being capable of stopping, or even so much as retarding it; every one gladly
contributing what was his part, toward the Performance and Accomplishment of
the whole Design. The Bishops preached the Crusade in all places, Rome, went to
preach it himself in Tuscany, where there was an insinite of Crusades, every
one desiring to have the Honor to receive the Cross from his own Hands.

But as he was going to Pisa, to accord the Differences between that Republic,
and the other of Genoa, which did something hinder the Effect of the Crusade,
in his Passage by Perusa, he was seized with a violent Fever, occasioned by his
great Pains, and the excessive Heats of the Season, which, in a few days,
carried him out of the World. He died the 6th Day of July, in the 19th Year of
his Pontificate, and the 49th of his Life, after having performed all the
Duties of a Sovereign Pope, in such perfection, that there have been few of his
Successors, I do not say, that have surpassed him, but that have been equal to
him; and if we may give Credit to the unanimous Consent of all the Authors that
write of him, none greater, either in Learning, in Prudence, in Firmness of
Resolution, in Authority, over all the Powers of the Earth, for the maintaining
the Discipline of the Church in its Force and Vigor; or any more zealous for
the Purity of the Faith, or more conversant than himself in all manner of
virtuous Actions, which, as they are the Effects, so they are, upon Earth, the
most certain Marks of a most eminent Sanctity. And from hence, doubtless, we
may conclude,

The Cardinal Cencius, a Roman of the illustrious House of Savelli, a Person of
a great Estate, and as great Learning, succeeded Innocent within two days, by
the Name of Honorius the III, and imitating his Predecessor in his Zeal for the
Deliverance of the Holy Land, he at the same time writ Letters to the Princes
and Prelates throughout all Europe, exhorting them powerfully not to cool in
their Zeal, which they had till then manifested for the Execution of what had
been Decreed in the Holy Council, in reserence to the Crusade. And the
Consequence of these Letters, and the Negotiations of his Legates which he sent
to all places, to press the Accomplishment of this great Affair, which lay so
near his Heart, and which he followed so closely with his utmost Application
and Diligence, was so successful, that an infinite number of Crusades,
particularly among the Northern Nations, were ready to pass both by Sea and
Land into the Holy Land, at the time appointed. He who ought to have Headed
them, was the Emperor Frederick the II. who had with the first taken upon him
the Cross, then when he stood in need of the Assistance of the late Pope
Innocent, for his Establishment against Otho, in the imperial Dignity. He took
it upon him with more Solemnity, the year after the Battle of Bovine, when all
things being at Peace in Germany, he was by the Authority of Pope Innocent, the
second time crowned at Aix, by the Hands of Siffride Archbishop of Mayence:
There he renewed his Vow, and with a great deal of Reverence and Submission,
received the Decree of the Council for the Crusade. But as he had a specious
Pretext to deser his Voyage, in regard he had not been at Rome to receive the
imperial Crown, nor to regulate the Affairs of Italy, the Pope thought it was
not convenient at that time to press him further with the Accomplishment of his
Vow.

Andrew King of Hungary was taken in to supply his Place, upon this great
Occasion, being the only King of Europe who was in a Condition to march at the
Head of the Crusades. For Peter de Courtenay, the Emperor of Constantinople,
had by Treachery been taken Prisoner in Macedon, by Theodore Comnenius, who had
seized upon Thessaly. Philip the August, who had already fulfilled his Vow, did
not believe that he was obliged to engage himself in another Crusade, at a time
when France stood in need of him to oppose the Albigenses. England, Scotland,
and Ireland were extremely agitated by the Troubles which the Fury of Civil War
had raised in them. The Kings of Castile, Portugal, and Navarre, were in Arms
against the Moors, who always prevented the People of Spain from entering into
the Crusades with other Nations, for the Deliverance of the Holy Sepulcher, by
obliging them in continual Action against those Infidels, who were possessed of
many of their Provinces. And the King of Arragon, was so far from joining with
the Crusades, that he had taken Arms in favor of the Heretics, the
Albigenses, against whom there was another Crusade at the same time. And the
King of Norway, who had caused a great many Men of War to be fitted out for the
Holy War, would not abandon his Realm by taking the Cross, although he obliged
many of his Subjects to undertake it, Hungary was therefore the only Prince of
Europe, who in Person made that Holy Voyage, and the principal Princes and
Prelates who accompanied him in the Undertaking, were the Dukes of Austria,
Bavaria, Moravia, Brabant, Limbourg, the Counts Palatin of the Rhine, of Los,
of Juliers, of Holland, and Wida, the Marquis of Baden, the Archbishop of
Mayence, and the Bishops of Bamberge, Passau, Strasbourg, Munster, and Vtrecht,
as also the greatest part of the Prelates of Hungary, who would accompany their
King in this War.

The Cousades, whose Number increased daily, without expecting those, who not
being yet ready, might well enough follow after to Reinforce the Army in
Palestine, divided themselves into several Bodies for the greater Convenience
of Passage. Andrew King of Hungary, with Leopold Duke of Austria, Lewis Duke of
Bavaria, and the greatest part of the other Princes, took their Way by Land to
Venice, where they embarked upon the Shipping of the Republic, which expected
them to transport them to the Island of Cyprus, which was appointed by the Pope
for the Place of Rendezvous: It is said that upon this Occasion, to pay the
Charges of their Passage, the King quitted Dalmatia to the Venetians. Another
Party of the Crusades were embarked at Genoa, Messina and Brindes; where they
received Orders from the Pope, by which he commanded them, with all possible
Expedition to join the King of Hungary in Cyprus, and to follow him
whithersoever he should judge it necessary to lead them; expressly prohibiting
them, upon pain of Excommunication, to separate from the Gross of the Army,
under pretense of going as Pilgrims to visit the Holy Sepulcher, in regard that
he feared that this irregular Devotion, at such an unseasonable time, might
weaken the Army, and enrich the Infidels, by the great Tributes which they
exacted of the Pilgrims, and the continual Excursions which they made, at last,
to rob them of all they had. Those of Cologne, and the Frisons, animated by the
sight of three wonderful Crosses which miraculously appeared in Heaven, whilst
the Crusade was preaching upon the Friday before Whitsunday, put to Sea with a
gallant Fleet of three hundred Ships, and about the end of May, joining in the
Mouth of the Maze, with that of William Earl of Holland, and George Count of
Wida, they all together set Sail for Ptolemais by the Straits of Gibraltar.

The King of Hungary arrived first at Cyprus, about the Feast of the Nativity
of our Lady, and those who embarked at the Ports of Brindes, Messina, and
Genoa, coming up within a few days, he parted from thence, accompanied with
Hugh de Lusignan, King of Cyprus, and the Archbishop of Nicosia, who had taken
upon them the Cross, and all together came happily to an Anchor in the Port of
Acre. After the Army had for some time refreshed themselves about the City,
where the Bavarians, by an ill Beginning, and an unlucky Presage of this War,
committed fearful Disorders upon the Lands of the Christians, whom they treated
most inhumanely. King John de Brienne, joined himself with the Kings of Hungary
and Cyprus, with those few Troops which he had, accompanied with the Knights of
the Temple, the Hospital, and the Teutonick Order. And the Truce which had been
made with the Sarasins being expired, they went and encamped in a convenient
Place, near the Brook Kison, there to take a general Review of their Troops,
and then to march directly to find out Coradin, who had already passed the
River Jordan with a powerful Army, and made a show, as if he would give the
Christians Battle. The Patriarch of Jerusalem, whose Residence was now in the
City of Acre, believing that upon this Occasion he ought to imitate his
Predecessors, who were used to carry the sacred Cross in their Wars, before the
Kings, therefore in the beginning of November, being followed by all the Clergy
in Procession, went to the Camp carrying a part of that sacred Wood which the
Christians had preserved. For James de Vitri, who was afterward a Cardinal,
and who before had been Curate of Argentucil near Paris, and then of Ogniez in
the Diocese of Liege, where he was made Canon Regular, and at this time was
Bishop of Acre, and accompanied the Kings in this War, assures us that he had
heard it of some ancient People in Palestine, that before the Battle of
Tiberias, where they fought so unfortunately against Saladin, they being
according to custom, Guy de Lusignan, he was advised, by a certain Presage of
the future Loss, to cause the sacred Wood to be cut, and one part of it to be
kept, that such a precious Treasure, in case it should be taken in the Battle,
as it happened, might not be wholly lost.

Upon the Approach of the Patriarch, the Kings and Princes came out of the
Camp, and walked barefooted to meet him, to receive that sacred Pledge, the
Instrument whereupon our Salvation was wrought, with a mavelous Devotion, and
perfect Confidence in Jesus Christ, who, they hoped, would in that Sign give
them Power to overcome all the Enemies of his holy Name, as he had upon it
overcome all the Enemies of our Salvation. The next Morning, the Army being
drawn up in Battalia, passed the Torrent, marching Eastward toward the great
Valley of Esdrelon, anciently called Megiddo, now called the Plain of Faba, and
that Day advanced as far as the Fountain of Tubany, in old time called Jesreel,
near the City of that Name. There the Couriers, who were sent to discover the
Enemy, brought word that they had seen great Clouds of Dust, so that it was
believed Coradin was advancing to give them Battle. That was then the thing
which the Army most desired, so that very early the next Morning, the Army
marched to meet the Enemy, and entered into the great Valley of Jesreel, having
the Mountains of Gilboa on the right Hand, and the Mount Hermon upon the left,
with a great Morass at the Foot of it. This was a very commodious Post, where
they might advantageously make the Field of Battle; but no Enemy appearing,
they advanced as far as Bethshan, otherwise called Sythopolis, a great City,
lying in a Plain very convenient for the giving Battle, between the Mountain of
Gilboa and the River Jordan. Coradin had been there, and encamped in the Plain,
boasting that there he would fight the Christian Army; but when he understood
that the Kings were there in Person, and that their Army was stronger than his,
he durst not tempt Fortune by a decisive Blow; and therefore following the
Orders and the Example of his Father Saphadin, who kept himself at Babylon,
expecting till the Christians should have weakened themselves, he was already
retired beyond the River the Day before, which was the Occasion of the Dust
which the Scouts had discovered, and thought he had been therefore approaching
to meet the Christians. But it was the quite contrary, for he was then
retreating, leaving the Country to the Kings, who after they had, with the
whole Army, with great Devotion, washed themselves in the Waters of Jordan, and
coasted along the Sea of Tiberias, or the great Lake of Genasareth, to visit
the Places consecrated by the Presence and the Miracles of Jesus Christ, they
returned about the end of the Month to Ptolemais, with a very rich Booty, and
abundance of Prisoners, which they had taken in the Country of the Sarasins.
But this not being what was expected from so great an Army, and there appearing
no Enemy to combat with in the Field, they resolved to besiege the Fortress
which Coradin had built upon the top of Mount Tabor, which did extremely
inconvenience the City of Acre.

This Tabor, which is so famous in both the old and new Testament, is one of
the fairest and most pleasant Mountains of the World: It raises its lofty Head
in the middle of a fair Plain in Galilee, about some thirty Furlongs in height,
which is near a League and half of our Measure, so that like a Pharus or watch
Tower, it may be seen at a great Distance by those who sail upon the Sea, and
also from the top of this Mountain one may discover a great part of the Holy
Land, especially all the Champion of Galilee, the main Ocean, the Sea of
Tiberias, and the Course of the River Jordan. All this Prospect lay so exactly
round about it, that Nature seemed to have pleased herself in forming this
pleasant round Circle, from the Base whereof Mount Tabor raises it self by
small Degrees, lessening the new Circles with an equal Roundness to the very
Top, which by reason of its Height looks like a mighty Pyramid to those who are
at the Bottom of it. It is on all sides very steep, and on the North side
wholly inaccessible, and there is no coming up to it on the other sides, but by
very strait and difficult Passages. And tho it be thus steep and high, yet
receiving continually the most pure Due of Heaven, which falls sweetly from its
Top, and expands it self downwards, it is clothed particularly toward the
West and South, with abundance of Trees which are continually Green,

From the Foot of this Mountain rises the famous Brook of Kison, which after
having for a while slowed Southward, divides it self into two Rivolets near the
City of Endor, about the Place where Barak descending from Mount Tabor,
overthrew the mighty Host of Sisera. The lesser of these Rivulets, rowls gently
toward the East, all along by the famous Hill of Hermon, receiving the smaller
Springs, which fall from thence in abundance, and at last loses it self in the
Sea of Tiberias, near the City of Bethshan; the greater of these two Brooks
takes a quite contrary Course toward the West, along by the Mountain of Son,
and the little City Naim, and after having traversed the greatest part of the
Valley of Megiddo, and growing proud with the Tribute of several little Torrents
which descending from Mount Ephraim, swell its Streams, at last it discharges
it self into the Phenician Sea, about a Mile from Caiphas, at the Foot of Mount
Carmel. There was formerly a Fortress upon the top of this Mount Tabor, which
Josephus, as he himself tells us, caused in forty days to be encompassed by a
Wall, thereby to defend himself against the Romans, who notwithstanding took
it, and demolished it. The Empress Helena, a long time after that built a fair
and magnificent Church there, in the place where the Son of God was
transfigured before the three Disciples; and that there might be there three
Tabernacles, according to the Wish of St. Peter; there were also two fair
Monasteries, consecrated to the Memory of those two great Prophets, Moses and
Elias, who had the honor to participate of the Glory of Jesus Christ's
Transsiguration. The Christians had always preserved these sacred Places, as
well as diverse others in Palestine, even during the Domination of the Turks and
Sarasins, to whom they paid Tribute for their Possessing of them. But Saladin,
after the Battle of Tiberias becoming Master of them, caused them to be
demolished, together with all the remaining Fortifications; and Coradin his
Nephew becoming Master of the Field after the Retreat of those few Troops which
King John de Brienne had brought with him, at his Arrival in the Holy Land,
built there a strong Fortress, environed with seventy seven Towers, and put
into it a strong Garrison, who by their continual Excursions, laid wast all the
Country for seven or eight Leagues around Mount Tabor, even to the very Gates
of Ptolemais.

The Princes therefore being resolved to attack that Place, they marched the
Army thither about the beginning of December; they presently found the Ascent
so Difficult, that it was thought the Enterprise was next to impossible. But
the Patriarch who carried the Cross, which he showed to the whole Army, marched
at the Head of them with so much Resolution, followed by the Bishops, and the
Clergy, singing of Hymns, that the Princes, the Officers and Soldiers were
ashamed to stay behind: But, above all, the King of Jerusalem, who animated all
the rest by his Example, having, at last, gained the Top of the Mountain before
the rest, charged so furiously upon those who were sallied out of the Fortress,
to defend the Avenues, that, after having slain the two Captains who commanded
them, he forced them to turn their Backs, and make more haste into the
Fortress, to save themselves, than they had done to come out of it, to repulse
him; and so terrified were they by his prodigious Valor, that they abandoned
those Posts, which they might easily have maintained against him, only by
rolling down great Stones upon such as should attempt to mount the Hill.

But this Valor signified nothing by reason of the Obstinacy, the Jealousy,
and, it may be, the Treachery of Bohemond Earl of Tripolis; for a Council being
held, in what manner they should attack the place, he maintained stiffly, that
this Siege could by no means be undertaken, without manifestly exposing
themselves to the danger of being besieged by the Army of Coradin, Coradin
could come up to relieve it. But still he persisted so pertinaciously in his
Opinion, and found himself backed by such a strong Party, whom he had gained,
that, at length, his Advice was taken, and by one of the most unaccountable
Adventures which ever was seen in War, the same day that they had, by main
force, with their Swords in their Hands, gained the Top of the Mountain, in
order to attack the Fortress, as they might successfully have done, they coldly
descended from thence without doing any thing, as if they had fought for
nothing else but to get upon the Top of Mount Tabor, to walk, and take the Air,
and look about them from that delightful Prospect. The Enemies, whom they had
beaten in mounting the Hill, now also took Courage; and when they saw this
unexpected Retreat, took occasion to return their Visit, and beat their
Vanquishers down the Hill again, killing many valiant Men with their Darts and
Arrows as they descended with difficulty down those strait and troublesome
Passages. This so enraged the Patriarch, that he would no longer march with the
Cross at the Head of an Army, whom such a sacred Sign could not animate with
more Courage. After this also, the Kings undertaking to make a third Irruption
into the Countries of the Infidels in Phenicia, received there a new Disgrace,
and a greater Loss than before, both by the Rigor of the Season, which was so
extreme cold that many of their Soldiers were benumbed and frozen to death by
the way, and by the continual Ambushes which the wild Arabian Robbers laid for
them in all the Passes: But, above all, upon Christmas-Eve, they were surprised
in the plain Field, between Tire and Sarepta, by such a fearful Tempest of
Wind, Rain, Hail, Whirl-blasts, mingled with most terrible Thunder and
Lightning, that they had all like to have been there lost.

After these unhappy Accidents, the Army, which could not subsist in such
narrow Quarters as were in and about Acre, was divided into four Bodies, which
separated in such a manner, that it was easy to foresee they would never meet
together again: For those who were disgusted at the Proceedings of the War,
which were the greatest number, remained at Acre, expecting the Convenience of
returning into Europe. Jerusalem, the Duke of Austria, the great Master of the
Hospital, with the greatest part of the Bishops, went and encamped about
Cesarea, where they caused the Citadel which formerly joined to that great
City, and which had been demolished, to be rebuilt with so much Expedition and
Diligence, that they had wholly finished it before the Army of the Sarasins
could draw together to interrupt them in the Work. The great Masters of the
Temple and the Teutonick Order, with a small number of Crusades, under the
Conduct of Gautier d' Avesnes, remained between the City of Acre and Cesarea,
and there fortified an old Castle of the Pilgrims, upon a Promontory which
advances it self into the Sea, near Mount Carmel; and in the clearing of the
Ruins, found a Treasure which defrayed the Charges they were at in the
repairing of it. The Kings of Hungary and Cyprus, with the greatest part of the
Pilgrims, and Earl Bohemond, retired to Tripolis, where, a few days after, the
King of Cyprus died in the very Flower of his Age. And for the King of Hungary,
believing that he had accomplished his Vow, he only staid till the Season was
convenient to pass the Seas, and then returned with his Men, and all the Booty
they had gotten, into his own Kingdom, where his Presence was become mighty
necessary, by reason of the dangerous Troubles which had been raised during his
Absence, and a deplorable Accident which happened to his House, which is not at
all relating to this History; and that was the true Reason why nothing was able
to prevail with him to make a longer Stay, neither the Entreaties of the
Patriarch, nor the Excommunication which he thundered out against him, and all
such as should follow him into Europe. But this Prince, who doubted not but the
too zealous Prelate had herein exceeded the Bounds of his Power, gave himself
no trouble for the severe Censure, being satisfied that he had no Power or
Jurisdiction over him, and that no Power upon earth had any right over Kings in
the Temporal Affairs of the Realms,

This Loss of the Assistance of two such considerable Kings, accompanied with
so many brave Men, was quickly after repaired by another Re-inforcement, which
came very seasonably to begin the next Campaigne; for almost at the same time
that King John de Brienne, Leopold Duke of Austria, and the three great Masters
of the Military Orders, after they had sinished the Fortresses of Cesarea and
the Pilgrims Castle, were come to Ptolemais, to deliberate upon what was to be
done in the posture wherein their Affairs then stood, they were agreeably
surprised to see the greatest part of the Northern Fleet arrive, for they had
utterly despaired of it, there having not been the least Account what was
become of it since the time that it first put to Sea.

This great Fleet had weighed from the Mouth of the Mase, the 29th Day of May,
and had happily passed the Coasts of England and France, but they were a long
time stayed, by contrary Winds, upon the Coast of Spain; and after they had
been bruised by a furious Tempest, in which they lost several Ships, upon the
Coast of Portugal, the rest of the Fleet, which had been separated by the
Storm, had been, with great difficulty, at last met together about the middle
of July, in the River of Lisbon. Now as the Earls of Holland and Wida, who were
gotten up to the Port of this great City, had given Order to re-sit their
Ships, the Bishops of Lisbon and d' Evora, the great Priors of the Temple and
Hospital, and the Commander of the Order of the Knights of St. James of the
Sword, or Palmela, and many great Lords of the Realm, came to wait upon them
from Alphonsus II. King of Portugal, to remonstrate to them, That it was by a
most particular Disposal of the Divine Providence, for the Good of Portugal,
that the Tempest had thrown them upon the Port of Lisbon, and that it shill
continued to stay them there. That thereby it appeared manifestly that God
would make use of them, to drive the Moors out of the Realm; who, having seized
upon the Fortress of Alcazar, held all the Country, from Algarves to the Tagus,
in Subjection. That before their Fleet could be repaired so as to be put into a
Condition of going to Sea, the Season for Navigation would be past: And that if
they should resolutely pursue their Voyage, yet would it be ineffectual, in
regard that, before they could arrive at Palestine, it would be far advanced in
the Year; that they must pass the Winter there unprofuably. That therefore it
would be more advantageous and glorious for them to pass it in Portugal, and
lend them their Assistance to take Alcazar from the Sarasins, which they
conjured them to do by the Zeal which they had to Religion; assuring them, that
this Enterprise, of which they would give an Account to the Pope, would be most
pleasing to him; and that thereby they should merit the Recompense of a Crusade.

The Earls having proposed this Affair to the Council of the Crusades, there
were many that opposed it; protesting that they would immediately go to
accomplish their Vow. The Frisons, above all, appeared most determined in this
Resolution; and the Matter went so far that they separated from the Earls, and
parted with the first fair Wind, the twenty sixth of July, with above eighty
Ships, who were followed by some others of several Nations, and tho the Weather
for some time proved favorable to them, they were constrained to Winter at
Corneta, at Gaieta, and several other Ports of Italy. But the Earls, who after
that Separation, and those which had been lost during the Tempest, had not
above a hundred Ships, believed that they could not more profitably serve
Christendom than upon this Occasion, resolved to undertake the Siege of
Alcazar, which accordingly therefore they undertook with the Portuguese, in the
beginning of the Month of August: They first attempted to storm the Place, but
that Attempt not Succeeding, in regard that the Garrison, which was very
strong, defended themselves with abundance of Vigor, they found themselves
obliged to besiege it according to the regular Way, by Sapping and Mining; this
they followed without making any great Progress, till the ninth of September,
at which time a great Succor of four Moorish Kings of Andalusia, appeared
within a League of the Christian Army. The Battle was not long deferred, for
the Christians,

The Battle began early in the Morning, the eleventh Day of September, with an
incredible Heat on both Sides; the Christians trusting in the Aid of Heaven,
which the Cross they had seen, seemed to promise them; and the Sarasins in
their Multitude; and besides being ranged in Battalia toward the East, they
had the Sun upon their Backs, and the Christians full in their Eyes. Thus the
Combat was very obstinate on both sides, Victory continuing in Suspense for a
long time to which side she would incline; till at last, the Sarasins, struck
with a pannick Fear, as if new Enemies had fallen upon them, began to stagger
and recoil, and in a short time to throw down their Arms, and betake themselves
to Flight, with all the Have the desire of Safety could lend them.

It is said that in the heat of the Battle, there appeared new Squadrons of
Cavaleers in white Armor, who advanced at the Head of the Christians, and
charged upon the Sarasins with an infinite Storm of Darts and Lances, and that
the brightness of their glittering Arms and Shields so dazzled the Infidels,
that they were not able to endure the shining Beams, or the furious Shock they
gave them, but that they instantly threw away their Arms and fled. However it
happened, it is most certain that their whole Army was entirely defeated, and
that there remained above fourteen thousand Sarasins dead upon the Place, with
two of their Kings; that they pursued the Fugitives for three Leagues, gleaning
up abundance of Straglers, who all fell by the Daughter of the Sword. They lost
all their Tents and Baggage, together with a number of Prisoners, who all
inquired who those white Horsemen were, who with the Luster of their Bucklers
had so blinded them, and put them into Disorder. And it is said that Pope
Honorius seemed by one of his Letters to give credit to this miraculous Event.
For my own particular, as I do not pretend to give all these sorts of
Apparitions for Truths, which I find in some credulous Authors, which is a
great though too frequent Weakness; So I think myself obliged to take care not
to suppress such as have any probability of Establishment upon Truth, and are
related by such credible Authors, to whom a Man of Sense and Prudence may give
some Faith.

After this great Victory, the Crusades returned to the Siege of Alcazar, which
defended it self still for a Month longer; but at last it was constrained to
surrender upon Descretion, upon the one and twentieth Day of October. There
were made above two thousand Slaves of the Sarasins, which remained in the
Garrison, and the Place was put into the Hands of the Knights of Palmela, to
whom it belonged, the great Master of which Order had signalised his Courage in
an extraordinary manner, both in the Battle and the Siege. They also gave
Liberty to the Sarasin Governor of the Place, and a hundred of his Officers,
and several of his Soldiers, who with him received holy Baptism, and renounced
the Superstition of Mahomet. The Pope, to whom the Earl of Holland and the
Portuguese sent the Relation of this great Success, caused public Thanks to be
given to God in all Places, exhorting all faithful Christians to imitate this
glorious Example, and to take Arms to fight against the Sarasins who Possessed
the Holy Land. But he would never consent that the Hollanders, and those of
Cologne, who had gained this important Victory, should thereby be dispensed
with from their Vow, as the Portuguese desired, that so these brave Men might
finish what they had so happily begun in Spain, by chasing the Moors from
thence. For this Reason therefore William Earl of Holland, General of the
Crusades, who had assured the Pope that he would inviolably observe his Orders,
after he had passed the Winter at Lisbon, set Sail in the beginning of April.
Having passed the Straits of Gibraltar, he was surprised by a Tempest, which
lasted for three days, which so dispersed his Fleet, that without being able to
unite again, some of them were forced into Barcelona, others into Marseilles,
Genoa, Pisa, and Messina, from whence they continued their Voyage to Ptolemais,
where they arrived one after another.

Frisons, who had wintred in Italy. The Hollanders, and those of Cologne, came
up presently after, and whilst they expected the rest it was resolved by King
John de Brienne, the Duke of Austria, the Bishops and great Masters of the
Orders, for the future to change the manner of the War, and instead of amusing
themselves about Palestine, as they had done hitherto, to fall directly upon
Egypt, and endeavor to take away the Cause, and cut up the Root of the War. It
was remonstrated, That from thence came all the great Armies which the Sultans
sent to the Holy Land, to oppose those of the Crusade, and that therefore, if
they could once make themselves Masters of the Source from whence those
terrible Inundations of Barbarians came, which did so often deluge Palestine,
there would be nothing then capable of resisting the Forces of the Christians.
That the Sarasins being in no manner of Apprehensions of Danger on that side,
would be without difficulty surprised. That there was nothing in all Egypt
considerably fortified, except Damiata; and that, after the Taking of that
City, which might easily be stormed by such a potent Army, which would daily be
reinforced by the Arrival of other Crusades which were expected, they might,
without difficulty, march and attack the Sultan in Babylon, which was in no
condition to resist them, having no Fortifications, and being only crowded with
People incapable to defend it. And, in short, That this was the Opinion of Pope
Innocent, in the Council of Lateran; and seemed as if he had a Divine
Inspiration; and that therefore it was to be hoped, that God would assist them
in the happy Execution of the great Design which himself had inspired.

This Resolution being taken, all the Fleet rendezvouzed at the Pilgrims
Castle, from whence the Frisons and Cologners, who were the first that were in
readiness, having chosen the Count de Sarpont to command them, set Sail, and
with the favor of a Stern-Wind, which blew a lusty Gale from the Northward,
they came in three Days, upon the 30th of May, before Damiata, and, by a lucky
beginning of the War, made their Descent without Resistance, and retrenched
themselves before the City, expecting the coming up of the rest of the
Christian Army.

Damiata was, at that time, one of the fairest and richest Cities of Egypt,
and, without dispute, the strongest, as being the Key of the Kingdom, situate
upon the Nile, about a Mile from one of its Mouths. This great River, whose
Spring was for so long time unknown, is now discovered to rise from five or six
Fountains at the Foot of the Mountains of the Moon, in thirteen or fourteen
Degrees of Southern Latitude, and so to cross the great Lake of Zembr; and
after having wandered from the South to the North, quite through the vast Tracts
of Ethiopia, and the higher Egypt, it divides it self below Grand Caire, or
Babylon, some twenty Leagues from the Sea, into two Arms; one of which drawing
to the Right Hand, toward the East, and the other to the Left, toward the
West, form that great Triangle, which is the lower Egypt, and which, by reason
of its Triangular Figure, the Greeks call Delta. These two Arms divide
themselves again into others, which, discharging themselves into the Sea, make
those Mouths of the Nile, whose number is very uncertain; most Authors make
them seven, some nine, and others will have it that there are eleven; but
William of Tire, who had most exactly searched the number of them upon the
place, assures us that there are no more than four: All which Differences may
be easily reconciled, by considering that when this River overflows the
Country, as it does every Year, about the middle of June, till toward the
midst of September, it then discharges it self by other Chanals, which remain
dry all the rest of the Year; and that then it is restrained to those four,
which are the natural Branches, by which its Waters flow regularly, and without
Interruption, to the Sea. The greatest of the Western Chanals is called the
Peleusiaque, from the name of the City Pelusium, which since is called Belbeis
upon the Nile, toward the Coast of Palestine. This City is usually confounded
with Damaita, by a Mistake which certainly cannot be defended; for William of
Tire, who speaks exactly of these two Cities which he had seen, and which were
besieged by Amauri King of Jerusalem, says positively, that the King, who had
by Force, taken Pelusium, anciently called Belbeis, which, it is well known,
stood upon the first Branch of the Nile, toward the East, passed the first Arm
of the River, Damiata upon the Oriental Coast of the second Branch of the Nile,
about a Mile from the Sea.

This City was environed with a double brick Wall, toward the Nile, and a
trible one on that side toward the Land, the second was higher than the first,
and the third than the second, with an infinite number of Towers to defend
them, and a great Ditch, by which there is a Passage into the Nile, which
compasses it round about, and makes it a great Island something longer than it
is broad. But that which it wants in Breadth is supplied by the fair Suburbs,
which in Beauty and Riches, yield not to the City. And it being thither that
all the Merchandises which come from Ethiopia and the Indies, by the Red Sea,
were brought, to be from thence transported into Europe and Asia, the Sultans
had caused to be built upon the other side the River a very strong Tower,
capable of containing three hundred Soldiers to defend it, from whence there
was drawn a huge Chain, to one of the Towers of the City, so that there was no
coming in, or going out of the Harbor without the Permission of the Sultan,
who drew from them what Tribute he pleased, for the Exportation of all the
Merchandises and Spiceries which were not to be had, but from Egypt.

So soon as the rest of the Army, which was for some time stayed by contrary
Winds, was come up, the Soldiers being marvellously animated by an Eclipse of
the Moon, which they took for a certain Presage of Victory, and the Ruin of
the Sultan, a Resolution was taken to attack the Tower upon the Nile, in regard
that without that it was impossible to batter the City on the River side, which
was the thing in design, that being the weakest part. For this purpose the Duke
of Austria, and the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, caused the great Ladders,
in form of Draw-Bridges, to be fastened to their Masts, such as had been made
use of to be let down with Pullies, at the Siege of Constantinople. The Germans
and Frisons, under the Conduct of Count Adolphus du Mont, made a kind of a Fort
upon a great Ship, which below the Round Top of the Main Mast, was like a
little Castle, from whence they might commodiously shoot against those who
defended the Tower; and the Templers raised upon one of the ablest of the Ships
another Machin in form of a Cavalier, to batter the Enemy at the same time from
another Quarter; but these Engines had not the happy Success which they had
promised from them; the main Mast which supported the Bridge of the Knights of
St. John, breaking in the middle, in the Fall drew along with it the Bridge;
that also of the Duke of Austria, was overturned and broaken under the Feet of
the Soldiers, who thronged upon it, and pushed one another forward with
Precipitation, every one striving to be foremost to sight with the Sarasins,
who expected them upon the top of the Tower. So that these valiant Men who
marched with so much Heat, with their Swords in their Hands, against the Enemy,
falling with their Bucklers and Swords one upon another, being entangled in the
Cordage, tumbled one upon another, and wounded themselves sorely with their own
Arms, before they fell from the Bridge into the River, where they were
miserably plunged in the deep Waters, and being armed, and such a number of
Men, Planks, and great pieces of broaken Timber that hindered their Swiming,
they could not possibly save themselves. The Christian Army, which saw this
lamentable Accident, without being able to remedy it, was infinitely troubled
at it; but the Infidels, who, from the Towers and Walls saw this agreeable
Spectacle, sent forth Shouts of Joy, mingled with horrible Noises, Insultings
and Blasphemies, which were so far from discouraging the Christians, that they
were thereby animated more than before, to revenge these horrible Affronts and
Impieties.

For this Reason therefore, after they had drawn off the other two Machins of
the Templers and the Germans, which were for no purpose but to favor the other
two which were ruined, it was resolved, that the Galleys and lighter Ships
should pass by the Chanal of the Nile, which was between the Tower and the
other Bank, that so they might make themselves Masters of the higher part of
the River, and break the Bridge of Boats which made the Communication between
the Town and the Tower of the Nile. This Design was as happily Executed as
could be wished; for in despite of the horrible storm of Darts, Arrows, and
Stones, which were poured upon them from the great Tower to defend the Passage,
which the Besieged did not believe they would be so mad as to attempt, Olivier,
who had been the Scholemaster of the Church of Cologne, a most famous Preacher,
and who, after he had preached the Crusade by the Pope's Order, in Germany,
Frieseland, and Flanders, resolved also to go along with them, and afterward
came to be Bishop of Paderborn, and Cardinal by the Title of St. Sabine. It is
to him that we are obliged for the Relation of this Siege, beginning after the
taking of the Tower of the Nile, in which, by his Invention he had so great a
Share, but withal so much Modesty, as not to make any the least mention of it.

This Person then, who was a man of a great Soul, and mightily beloved,
especially by the Soldiers which came from Cologne, with whom he took up the
Cross, caused this new Machin to be made with the Charity-money which he had
collected for the Crusade. He caused two great Ships to be tied together with
strong Cables and Hawsers, and that they might be the stronger, he caused
strong Piles of Timber, which joined the Ships together at the Heads and
Sterns, to be fastened with strong Clasps and Bolts of Iron; and all along
between the two Ships were laid strong Planks from the Hatches of one Ship to
the other, upon which the Men might pass conveniently; and these also were
strongly fastened to the Ship at each End, which kept them close from moving one
from another. Upon these two Ships, thus joined firmly together, four of the
strongest Masts that could be found were planted and joined together in a
Square by four of the largest Yards, which were fastened to the Masts almost at
the top; upon these Yards there lay Joysts fastened, and over them Planks nailed
down in the manner of a Platform; upon this was erected a wooden Castle, higher
than the Tower of the Nile; and this Castle was covered with raw Hides of Oxen
and Camels, to defend it from the Enemie's Fire; below this Castle, upon the
Platform, was fastened a great Ladder covered with Planks in form of a
Drawbridge, which hung by Pullies ready to be let down upon the Walls of the
Tower, and this was so long that it extended several Yards over the Heads of
the Ships; below this Machin there were placed certain long Tables, very thick
and strong, which were so fastened to the Prows, that by the help of Ropes they
might be heaved out to the Walls of the Tower, and served as Bridges for the
Miners, who might be at Work below in Sapping, whilst the other attacked them
above. This Work being finished, and approved by the Captains, who found it was
a most proper and rational Invention for the Execution of such a difficult
Design, they resolved to make use of it, and to make their utmost Effort to
carry the Tower. And the better to dispose and animate the Soldiers, and to
obtain the Protection of God for the Army, the Patriarch, Bishops, and all the
Clergy, followed by the King, Princes, and Officers, went barefoot in
Procession to the place where the Cross was kept, which according to custom was
carried to this War. After which, Friday, the Feast of the Apostle St.
Bartholomew, was appointed for the Day to begin the Assault; and choice was
made for that Service, of Officers and Soldiers of all the Nations, who were to
be Conducted by the brave Leopold, Duke of Austria, and this was done to avoid
Jealousies, and that they might all be Sharers in the Glory of so great an
Action.

The Day, which with so much impatience was expected, being come, the Attack
was made in this manner. A great Ship well armed, sailed up the Nile, which was
mightily swelled, and went as it were to show the Way to the great Machin which
followed it filled on all Sides, below, upon the Platform, and the Castle with
those Valiant Men, upon whom the Eyes of the whole Army were fastened, as the
dear Pawns of their Honor, and the Fortune of the rest. These proud of the
glorious Choice which had been made of them to sustain such an illustrious
Enterprise, looked upon the Danger, and the Tower with a generous Contempt, and
a certain fierce and menacing Joy, which showed the Resolution they had taken,
either to Perish or to Conquer; standing in the View of the City, Infidels, who
were run all to their Towers and their Ramparts, answered these Songs of Piety
with fearful Howlings, and horrible Blasphemies; at the same time discharging
from their Stone-Bows and Slings a dreadful Shower of Stones, to break or stop
this Machin, which, crossing this furious Tempest, sailed directly to the North
side of the Tower, which lies to Seaward, not being able, by reason of the
scantness of the Water, to get these heavy Ships into the Western Chanal,
between the Tower and the Bank that lies against the Town. All the which Army
was placed, partly upon the Decks of the Ships as they lay at Anchor, and
partly drawn up upon the rising Grounds, nearest the Enemy, stood there to
encourage the Assailants, and to be Spectators and Witnesses of the brave
Actions which were to be performed in a Combat of so extraordinary a nature.

So soon as the Anchors were dropped on all sides of the great Machin to keep it
immovable in the distance, which was necessary for the lower Bridges and the
great Ladder which hung upon the Platform, to reach to the Walls of the Tower,
those who were in the Wooden Castle, gave a most furious discharge of Darts,
and Arrows, from that high place downward upon the Enemies, who defended the
Tower; at the same time some fastened the Bridges to the Walls, whilst others
threw themselves upon them with a most Heroic Courage and without thinking of
the Dangers, which threatened them in such different manners, some marched to
the foot of the Tower to endeavor a Breach with the Force of Pick-Axes and
other Instruments, whilst those above ran with their Swords in their hands,
directly against the Sarasins, who defended the Walls, whilst at the same time
all the Engines of the City played upon the Assailants, and threw their
Wildfire by the long brazen Conduits, from the Tower against the Castle, the
Platform and the Bridges, which began every where to take sire; but there being
great Provision made of Sand and Vinegar, the Infallible Cure of this evil,
otherwise irremediable, it was soon extinguished in all places, except the end
of the Drawbridge Ladder, which had like to have occasioned the loss of all in
a Moment. For the Soldiers running violently to put out the fire, the Bridge
had like to have been quite overthown by the Crowd, that was upon it; insomuch
that by its leaning all upon one side, he who carried the Banner of the Duke of
Austria, was overthrown into the Nile, and the Sarasins who were about him, as
he fell from the end of the Bridge, snatched the Colors from him. Thereupon
the Barbarians gave a mighty Shout, as it were to celebrate their Victory,
which they now held most certain. The Patriarch, who lay prostrate before the
Cross and the Clergy, round about it, sent forth a greater to implore the
Succor of Heaven, and the Army, which was upon the Hills, and perceived this
Fall, fell upon the Ground, humbling themselves before God, and joining their
Tears and Prayers to those of the Patriarch and the Bishops, they made all
resound with their piteous Cries, which pierced the Heavens from which they
desired Mercy and Help.

Nor was it long before, so many fervent Prayers obtained it, the fire was
presently extinguished, the Bridge which hung all upon one side, was set right
and sixed, and the Assailants, without giving the Enemy the Leisure to make a
new Attempt upon the Machin, pressed up to the Walls, and pushing forward with
their Bucklers in one hand, and charging with the Scimiter in the other, they
loaded the Sarasins with such heavy Blows, with those, and the Battle Axes, and
Iron Maces, and pierced them with the Points of the half Pikes and Javelins, so
that they forced them to recoil; then a brave Liegeois, who was advanced
foremost, immediately leaped into the Tower, and was at the same time seconded
by a young Frieslander, who throwing himself into the middle of the Sarasins
with a flail, the swipple of which was tied to the handle by little Chains, and
which he handled in such an admirable manner; that whisking it round about with
mighty Force, Swiftness, and without ceasing, he so thrashed the Infidels
breaking Skulls and Arms, and in a few moments overthrowing all that came
within the reach of his formidable Instrument, against which, Sarasins still
made some resistance, by setting fire to the planchards, thereby to stop those
who pursued them and the Victory; but perceiving, that during the Combat, those
below had opened a breach in the Wall, and were now ready to enter at it, they
called for quarter, and yielded themselves to the Duke of Austria, who
generously gave them their lives. Besides those who were slain in this furious
Assault, which lasted from nine of the Clock in the morning till the next day
at noon, and those who in the Night endeavored to make their escape by the
Windows, whereof some where drowned and others slain by those who in the Ship
accompanied the Machin, there were about one hundred, who were taken in the
Tower and made Slaves. So soon as the Tower was taken the Christrians unlocked
the Chain, which shut up the great Chanal, and all the Fleet had Liberty to
enter and to attack the City upon the side of the Water.

The news of this loss touched Saphadin so nearly, that in a few days after,
while he was making Preparation to come to the relief of Damiata, he died of
Grief in his Palace at Caire. He was a Prince who yielded nothing to his
Brother, the great Saladin, either in good or ill Qualities. For if his
ambition had made him usurp the Kingdoms of the East, by the Murder of his
Nephews, as Saladin had seized upon that of Egypt by the Murder of the last
Caliph, he had also as much Courage, Valor, Address and good Fortune, to
maintain himself in them, as had that great Conqueror, who made himself Master
of them and possessed them till his death. He had also this advantage above
him, that during his life, he divided his Empire among six of his Sons, nine
others, which he had, satisfying themselves without Jealousy with the
Revenues, which he assigned them for their subssistance; they also rendered him
continually a perfect Obedience, and a respect approaching even to Adoration:
for this Prince, who was extreme politic, and thoroughly acquainted with the
Genius of the Orientals, born to Servitude, maintained so great a Majesty, that
unless it were when he went to the Wars, and that he appeared at the head of
his Army, and that in the greatest Pomp imaginable, he was never seen in
public but six times in the Year, and then with more terror than joy to his
Subjects, who durst not look upon him but in the Posture of prostration, upon
their Bellies with their Faces to the Earth. He left Egypt and Grand Caire, the
Capital City of his Empire, to Meledin, his eldest Son, with Sovereign
Authority over all his Brothers, who held their Dominions of him. Coradin the
second, and he, of his five other Sons, who most resembled him, both in Valor
and Ambition, Anger and Cruelty, had the Realms of Palestine and Damascus; and
for the other Provinces of the Higher Asia, they were divided among the other
four of his Sons, whom he made his Successors in his Dominions.

The new Sultan Meledin, who was nothing so great a Soldier as his Father, and
who was of an humor sweet enough and pacifick for a Sarasin, nevertheless did
not fail, with a great deal of Care, to make the Preparations, which Saphadin
had begun for the relief of the besieged; Coradin also his Brother, the Sultan
of Damascus, with whom during this War, he always acted by concert, and who
understood it far better than himself, prepared on his side a puissant Army and
demolished most of the Garrisons in Palestine, and, among the rest, the
Fortress of Thabor, to reinforce those Garrisons, which he still kept there. As
for the Christians, they did not make that use of their Victory, which they
ought to have done in vigorously pressing the Siege; but as if after this great
Success, they could not fail of Victory, they suffered a great deal of time to
slip away, without enterprizing any new thing, against the besieged, taking
unseasonably that repose, which they ought to have deferred till after their
Conquest. There were also diverse, who by a base desertion, contrary to their
Vow, reimbarked themselves to return into Europe, notwithstanding all the
Prohibitions, which the Patriarch could make, and all the threatenings of the
Judgments of God, by which he endeavored, tho to little purpose, to stay them.
But they were not without Effect, Hervey de Leon, a Gentleman of the lower
Bretany, the death of whose Brother made him return into France to seize upon
his Estate, having been a long time tossed with a furious Tempest near the
Coasts of Italy, perished by a miserable Shipwreck in View of the very Port of
Brindes, not above fourscore of these miserable men being saved upon the broken
Planks. A Party also of Frieselanders, who hitherto had so well behaved
themselves, having abandoned their Companions, were no sooner returned into
Frieseland but they were miserably swallowed up by the Sea, which having this
Year broken the Banks and passed all the Bounds, overflowed all the Country
with such a fearful deluge, that above a hundred thousand Persons were
swallowed up of the merciless Waves.

But nevertheless the loss, which the Christian Army suffered by this
desertion, was quickly repaired by the Arrival of diverse Troops of Crusades,
who being excited by the Letters, which Pope Honorius had writ continually to
all the Princes of Europe, arrived one after another during all the Autumm. The
Cardinal d' Alban^, the Popes Legate for the Holy War, arrived with the first,
accompanied with a fair Troop of the Nobility of Rome, whom the Pope, who was
himself of the first of those orders, had obliged to take upon them the Cross,
that so they might draw others by their Example. There came also from Germany,
the Low Countries, Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, and many from France, who inbarked
at Genoa, with Robert de Corceone, an English man, Cardinal of St. Stephen upon
Mount-Coelius, whom the Pope ordered to accompany them in this Voyage. The most
signal of those, who with the consent of Philip the August, went from France,
were the Counts Hervey de Nevers, Hugh de la March, Miles de Bar, upon the
Seine with his Sons, and the Lords, John d' Artois, Ponce de Grancey, Ithier de
Tacy, Savary de Mauleon; and among the Prelates, William Archbishop of
Bourdeaux, William de Beaumont, Bishop of Angers, Gautier Bishop of Autun,
Miles de Chastillon de Nantueil, Bishop Elect of Beauvais, with Andrew his
Brother, and Peter de Nemours, Bishop of Paris, the Son of Gautier great
Chamberlain of France, and Brother to the Bishop of Meaux and Noyon. This good
Prelate, after he had for ten years governed with great Wisdom the Church of
the Capital City of the Realm, where he took great care to maintain the Purity
of the Faith against the Errors of Amauri of Chartres, which he caused to be
condemned, resolved also to signalise his Zeal against the Infidels, by taking
upon him the Cross, with which he gloriously consummated that kind of Martyrdom
at Damiata, where he died after the taking of the City. Prince Oliver also, the
Son of Henry the third, King of England, came by the same passage in September,
with the Earls of Chester, Winchester, and Arundel, and William de Harcourt
accompanied with a Gallant Troop of English, who had devoted themselves to the
Holy War.

The Legate being arrived with so considerable a Succor, presented to the King
of Jerusalem, the Duke of Austria, and the other Princes, the Letters by which
the Pope, after having extremely commended the Cardinal, informed them, that he
had sent him principally to create and preserve a perfect Union in the Army,
and to animate them to do well by going before them, not with the Pomp and
Majesty of a Prince to command, but with that humility worthy of Jesus Christ,
whom he represented, and for whose Cause the Crusades in taking up his Cross
had obliged themselves to combat. But it must be avowed, that this good
Prelate, did very ill acquit himself of his Charge, and acted directly contrary
to the Intentions of the Pope, and the good Instructions which he had given
him. For at the first Conference, which he had with King John de Brienne, to
whom all the Chief of the Crusades yielded Obedience, he told him plainly and
without a Complement, that he was resolved to command the Army, alleging for
his reason, that the Church having commanded the Crusade, and that the
Crusades, who were come to the relief of the Holy Land, were not Subjects of
the King of Jerusalem, but depended upon the Church, by the Authority whereof
they had taken upon them the Cross.

The King was extremely surprised with such a foolish Proposition, which he had
so little expected; but as he was very discreet, he did not declare it, lest he
should be obliged openly to break with a man, whose Ambition, Caesar.

This nevertheless did not fail to occasion some Trouble in the Army, by
dividing the principal Officers; for those who found themselves any ways
dissatisfied with the King, inclined always to the Legate, and he finding
himself able to do nothing more, usually came to the Council only to give his
Opinion in contradiction to the King. But at length the Arrival of the Sultan
Meledin, who came down the Nile to Damiata, with a potent Army, before the
Christians had passed the River to besiege the City by Land, obliged all the
Commanders to reunite, and recover the time which they had wasted and lost by
an extreme Negligence, and seriously to dispose themselves to Combat the Enemy.
After some light Skirmishes, wherein the Sarasins were constantly beaten, upon
the thirtieth of November there arose such a furious Tempest, that the Sea
repelling the Waters of the Nile, and breaking over all the Banks, the whole
Army had like to have perished by the Inundation; many of the Ships were driven
ashore and beaten in pieces, and four great Vessels, upon which there were
Castles built in order to attack the City, were driven by the Wind and the
Waves, against the Towers and the Walls, where they were unfortunately Consumed
by the Wildfire which the Besieged with ease threw into them, in the sight of
the Christians, who during that dreadful Storm were not able to Relieve them.
Several Knights of the Temple, who were in another great Ship, which the
Tempest had also forced to the Shore near the City, seeing, after they had
fought most valiantly for a long time, that it was impossible to resist the
infinite number of the Sarasins, who having on all sides surrounded them, and
making themselves Masters of the Vessel, threw themselves in Shoals upon her,
they imitated Samson, and resolved to bury themselves together with their
Enemies; for boreing Holes in the Ship, they let in the Water so fast, that
during the Combat she sunk in a Moment to the Bottom, nothing but the top of
the main Mast appearing above the Water. And certainly all had been lost, if
God in Mercy had not been entreated by the incessant Prayers and Tears of the
Bishops, who continued Night and Day in Prayers to implore his Pity and
Compassion, and that upon the third day he was pleased to cause the Tempest to
cease, so that the River returned to its Chanal, and the Waters again came to
their old Course, to run within their Banks.

As soon as the Tempest was over, the Army, which had saved themselves by
getting upon the higher Grounds, returned to their Camp, and some time after,
ten Soldiers, Friselanders and Germans, performed an Action so Heroic, as
astonished both the Sarasins and Christians, who were equally the Spectators
and Admirers of it. For the Enemy having repaired their Bridge of Boats, which
hindered the Ships from passing up the River to the Place where the Army was
resolved to pass the Nile; these ten brave resolute Men, having put themselves
into two Shallops, undertook to gain it and break the Bridge. They set upon it
then in open day, and mounting it, chased those who defended it, with dreadful
Blows of the Sword, from their Posts, and having made themselves Masters of it,
whilst some of them fought at the Entrance of the Bridge to defend it against
all the Forces of the City, Horatius Cocles had done at Rome, opposing the
whole Army of Porsenna upon a Bridge of the Tiber; others of them broak this
Bridge of Boats, and in despite of the fearful Tempest of Stones, Darts, and
Wildfire, which were showred upon them from the Ramparts and Towers of the
City, they brought off diverse of the Boats which composed the Bridge, as it
were in Triumph, to their Companions, who with the loud noise of Drums,
Trumpets, and Acclamations, celebrated the Praises of their Victory, and an
Action which well deserves to be consecrated to their eternal Glory and the
Knowledge of Posterity by immortal History. So that this Obstacle being removed
all the Ships sailed up above the City,

And in truth it did not only seem a most temerarious Action to attempt a
Passage so well defended, but wholly impossible to succeed. But God was pleased
in an instant to open it, against all Appearance, by one of the most
extraordinary Events imaginable, and which could not reasonably be attributed
to any thing besides that Providence, which he has for those whom he has
taken into his Protection. For the same Night, which was the fourth, or fifth
of February, and that all things were disposed to adventure the Passage the
Morrow of the following Day, the Sultan Meledin with his Emirs, and the
principal Commanders of the Army, leaving in his Camp the most resolute of his
Troops to receive the Enemy, not doubting but they would be able to do it, he
posted with full speed toward Caire, as if he had been pursued by a victorious
Army after a mighty Overthrow; nor could there ever be assigned any Reason for
this precipitate Flight, but that sort of Terror which God sometimes fills the
Hearts of those withal, whom he will punish, and of which we find frequent
Examples in the Holy Scriptures. A Christian Renegade, who had for a long time
served the Sultan, and who was big with the Desire of being the first
Discoverer of a thing so astonishing, came running to the Bank of the Nile, and
called aloud in French, that they should pass over immediately, for that the
Sultan had forsaken his Men and was fled; desiring them presently to send a
Skiff, as they did, to take him in, that so they might be the better assured of
what he told them. In this time the Army of the Sarasins seeing themselves
abandoned by the Sultan, believing themselves betrayed, they disbanded, and
presently fled after him in the greatest Fear and Disorder. So that the
Christians ravished to see such a visible Effect of the divine Protection,
passed the River without Resistance; but not altogether without Difficulty, in
regard that the Banks of the Nile were so Muddy and Slimy on that side, that
the Horses, whom they led by the Bridles, being up to the Saddle Skirts in the
Quicksands and Quagmires, did not gain the Bank without extreme Trouble; which
made it clearly appear that if there had been but a few Defendants, it had been
almost impossible to have forced it. As soon as all the Army was passed over,
they entered into the Camp of the Sarasins, which they plundered, and then they
took up their Quarters about the City, which was environed with good Lines, and
a great Ditch, which was drawn from one Part to the other, to the River Nile,
upon which they built a Bridge of Boats, that so they might have a
Communication with those who were encamped on the other side the River to guard
the Ships upon which the Attack was to be made upon the side next the Water.

There was necessity however of making use of all manner of Precautions; for as
the City was extreme strong, so there were in it forty thousand Men who were
resolved to make a brave Defense; it was also Winter, and many Diseases,
especially the Scurvy, raged among the Soldiers, and many died of them. The
Siege was like to prove long, so that the Enemies had leisure to come to the
Relief of the Besieged, with potent Armies. The first that appeared was
Coradin, who after he had gathered all the Troops that he possibly could in
Syria, Jerusalem, and before he passed further he set on all hands to work to
demolish that Holy City, which then was held to be Impregnable; he ^ased the
Walls and all the Towers to the very Foundations, the Tower of David only
excepted, which could not defend it self singly, and in short reduced that
strong and famous City to the condition of a miserably Village; either that
thereby he might strengthen his Army by the Troops, which otherwise he must be
obliged to leave for the defense of so strong a Garrison; or possibly that he
feared that the Christian Army, after they had taken Damiata, would enter
victorious into Palestine, and take that City, which he knew to be the end of
their Enterprise, and the occasion of all the Crusades, which had been made in
Europe. This being done he marched directly to Damiata; and as his Army was far
more numerous than that of the Christians, which wasted every day, and also
that he had seized upon certain very advantageous Posts, by the negligence of
those who ought to have defended them, the besiegers found themselves in a
manner as straightly besieged by his Army as Damiata was by theirs; and that they
were more easily and dangerously to be attacked themselves, than they could
attack the City, their retrenchments being nothing so terrible or strong as the
Treble Wall with which the City was surrounded.

And in truth Coradin, who was a brave, and a great Captain, attempted the
lines three several times with all the Vigor imaginable, and particularly upon
Palm Sunday, having made himself Master of the Bridge, which joined the two
Camps, he had forced them on that side, if the brave Duke of Austria, who with
the Germans and Templers came rushing in upon him, had not chocked his Success,
and at last repulsed him after a most obstinate Combat, maintained from morning
till it was high noon. This was the last of those fair actions which that
gallant Duke performed in this Crusade, for having on one side accomplished his
vow, having staid in the Levant above six Months longer than the time of
Service which he had only vowed for a year; and on the other side his own
Affairs recalling him into his Dominions he took Sea in the Spring; and this
example was quickly followed by a great number of Crusades, who wearied with
the length, and the inconveniences of the Siege returned into Europe. So that
the Army being extremely weakened by this retreat, and the diseases, ran the
Fortune of being at last forced in their retrenchments, if the great Succors
of new Crusades of all Nations, whom the Pope pressed continually to part from
all the Ports of Italy, had not come most seasonable in the very nick of time
with great plenty of all manner of refreshments in abundance, of which the
besiegers stood in great want.

And certainly the arrival of these recruits was no more than necessary; for
shortly after, Meledin having recovered his courage out of the Swound into
which it had fallen, raised an Army more numerous than the first, and marched
to join his Brother Coradin, that so with their joint forces they might make
one great attempt for all upon the Camp of the Christians, which they believed
was then in no condition of resisting them; so soon therefore as the necessary
time to make all the Preparations for so great an Action was over, these two
great Armies of Sarasins, having ranged themselves in Battalia, early in the
morning upon the last day of July, presented themselves in good order before
the Lines, and made four or five several attacks, thereby to divide the forces
of the Christians, which notwithstanding their recruits, were not by far so
numerous as theirs. It was fought with incredible heat and Fury on the one
side, and the other; the Sarasins animated by the presence of their Sultans and
the certain hope they had conceived, that they should that day deliver the
besieged City: the Christians by the fatal necessity to which they were
reduced, either to repulse the Enemy, or to be all cut in pieces, their camp
being shut up, between two mighty Armies, an Enemies City, and a great River,
over which it was impossible for them to escape. In this time, those who
attacked the quarter of the Knights Templers, made such a vigorous impression,
and returned so often to the Assault, that they forced the Lines on that side,
entered the Camp, charged furiously upon the Infantry, whom the Knights had
posted for the defense of that place, and pressed so stoutly upon them, that at
length they put them to slight, and pursued their point so briskly, being
followed by their reserves, who came crouding after them into the lines, that
the entire ruin of the Army seemed inevitable, when the French and English
arriving in good time with their Swords in their hands,

For being all Fresh men, and desirous above all things to signalize their
Courage by some gallant action, they charged the Enemy according to their
manner, with so much fury that they forced them to recoil, and beat them back
again to the Lines, where the Sarasins finding themselves sustained by those
without, who continually mounted over the Works, they also took their turn and
as they had been themselves beaten back, so now they made the French retreat.
But in a minute after, the shame and madness, which they had to be thus bassed,
redoubling their Courage and their Strength, they came up to the Charge again,
and three several times fell upon the Enemy with such irresistible Valor, that
being unable to sustain their Fury, they tumbled over the Lines and into the
ditch; when at the same time those of the City making a notably Sally, by
setting fire to the Machins, which put the Christians into great fear and
disorder, gave them the opportunity of regaining their advantage. Thereupon the
great Master of the Temple, and the other of the Knights of the Teutonick
Order, who hasted to their relief, observing that the Sarasins, who believed
themselves assured of the Victory, advanced with precipitation and disorder,
shouting for Joy as they ran to the Charge, they marched to charge them in the
Flanks on both sides, whilst the French who now took new Courage by the sight
of these Succors attacked them in the Front; so that being beset on three
sides by so many Valiant men, whom the danger of losing all had rendered
furious, they were almost all cut in pieces, and those who followed them were
chased over the Lines and the Ditch, which was almost filled up with the heaps
of the slain. After which the Army falling upon those of the Town who had made
the Sally, they were presently repulsed with a most dreadful Slaughter, though
notwithstanding they had first destroyed a great number of Machins by setting
them on fire, which could not in that great Confusion be suddenly quenched.
Thus ended this great Battle which lasted from morning until night. On the
other side, the Venetians, the Pisans and Genoese, who were wholly managed by
the Legate, were not much more fortunate in their Enterprise, and though they
had assured him the Success was infallible, yet they happened to be mistaken;
for all the new Machins, which they had built upon four great Ships, were in
several Assaults, which they gave to little purpose, either broken by the
Engines of the Town, or burnt by the Greek Wildfire, from which they were never
able to secure them.

But the greatest of all the evils, which the Besiegers suffered, was the
division which happened between the Infantry and Cavalry, which had like in one
day to have ruined the whole Army. For the Cavalry in those times was in a
manner wholly composed of Gentlemen, who loved their ease and pleasure so much
that they left the Foot to all the hard duty, and exempted themselves from it.
The Foot, who believed themselves undervalued, loudly murmured against them,
reproaching them with want of Courage, and accusing them of leaving them to
shift for themselves in the most dangerous combats. On the contrary, the
Cavalry maintained the quite contrary, saying, the Foot did nothing at all, as
appeared plainly in the last Battle within the Lines, where the Infantry proved
themselves good Footman in running for it, and that all had been infallibly
lost, if the Cavalry had not spurred up to their assistance, and almost alone
repulsed the Enemies. So that by the most foolish and strange adventure that
ever was seen in an Army, both Horse and Foot, that they might manifest who had
the greatest Courage and most Valor, compelled the King to lead them against
the Enemy and oblige them to a Battle.

It was then that St. Francis of Assise, who by the earnest desire which he had
to gain the Crown of Martyrdom, by preaching the Faith to the Infidels, was
come to the Camp at Damiata; and contrary to his custom, in meddling with
matters, which were not religious or agreeable to his Profession, opposed
himself stoutly against this foolish Resolution. And the Spirit of God being an
Emanation of the divine Wisdom upon us, which agrees perfectly with good sense
and reason, made him predict with a great deal of reason to these foolish
Braves, that if they would be so rash, to undertake such an ill grounded
Enrerprise, it would prove fatal to them. Francis threatened them withal, who
was a man of no presence, and whom they did not believe to be a Prophet.
Leaving therefore a few men to guard the Camp, against the Besieged, they
marched against the Enemy in Battalia, upon the nine and twentieth day of
August. The Sarasins upon the sight of them drew off, and retreated into a
large Champaign between the Nile and the Sea, where there being no water, and
the season excessive hot, they were reduced to the utmost extremities of
weariness and thirst and broak all their Ranks and order, to search for water
to refresh themselves. The Sarasins then, who waited for this disorder, to make
advantage of it, immediately faced about, and came pouring upon the Cyprus
Cavalry, which was upon the left Wing, and charging them in the Flank, broak
them, and dissipated them in a moment; whereupon the Italian Infantry, who were
covered by them, presently fled, and after them the Horse, the Legate and
Patriarch, who carried the Cross, being not able to stop them: and in short all
had been infallibly lost that day, if the King, who was in the main Battle,
perceiving the horrible disorder, and letting the Fugitives pass by him, that
they might not hinder his march, had not instantly advanced, being followed by
the Knights of the three orders, the English, French and Flemings, who stopped
the Pursuit of the Sarasins, and made good an honorable retreat to their Camp,
where the Army entered well mortified with the ill Fortune which they had met
withal in this foolish adventure. For they lost above six thousand men, besides
the Prisoners, among which were the Bishop of of Beauvais, and his Brother
Andrew de Chastillon Nantueil, Gautier de Nemours Brother of Peter, the Bishop
of Paris, John d' Arcis, and Henry de l' Orme, the Marshal of the order of St.
John of Jerusalem, and above thirty Knights of the Temple.

Thus the Prediction of the holy man St. Francis d' Assise was accomplished;
but he pursuing his principal design, wandered from the Christian Camp, and
permitted himself to be taken by the Sarasins, who, after they had given him a
thousand blows, presented him to Meledin, to get the reward which he had
promised to those who should bring him a Christian dead or alive. The good man
notwithstanding this, preached the Gospel to him with an admirable Zeal,
offering himself to the Flames for the proof of the truth thereof. But he
labored in vain as to the design which he had propounded to himself, being
neither able to gain the Crown of Martyrdom, by reason that the Sultan, charmed
with his discourse, his Patience, and his Virtue, was so far from putting him
to death, that he gave him a thousand carresses, and all the obliging Usage
imaginable; nor could he obtain the Conversion of this Prince, the fear in
which he was of his Subjects being more prevalent with him than the truth which
was propounded to him. So that the Saint finding there was no good to be done,
took his way back again, and the Prayers which the Sultan, whose presents he
refused, desired of him for his Salvation proved ineffectual by the just
Judgment of God, who rigorously punishes those, who either out of fear or
malice, refuse his Grace and the tenders of Salvation: For the Authors who have
written for the Honor of St. Francis, that in Virtue of his Prayers, this
Sultan was converted, and baptized before his Death, are under a mistake of the
Sultan of Iconium, who never saw St. Francis, who this very year of the Siege,
of Damiata received Baptism at his death, whereas this Sultan of Egypt neither
died that year nor was ever baptized. And it is a great weakness, to give it no
worse Title, to make such fabulous relations of holy men; for the Saints, who
in Heaven enjoy infinite happiness, do neither desire nor stand in necessity,
that those who write their lives, or make their Elogies should give them
praises upon Earth that are not true, whether it be in magnifiing their
Actions, or in attributing to them such miracles as may well be doubted, and
rationally disproved, and which is the most abominable and pernicious flattery,
making them so perfect in all things, as to be free from all manner of sin.
That which is certainly true in this matter is, That Sultan Meledin not only
treated St. Francis, but after this the Christians, and particularly the
Prisoners with great humanity, sending some of the principal of them to the
Christian Camp to treat of a Peace.

Nile having not been very favorable this year, he feared, that the scarcity
which he foresaw, would not permit him to raise or maintain an Army if he
should be obliged to continue the War; that after the taking of Damiata, he
should not therefore be in a condition of resisting the Crusades, who would
infallibly march against him in Grand Caire. For these reasons therefore, after
the Retreat of diverse of the Crusades, who had reimbarked themselves for
Europe in the Month of September, having again made an unsuccessful attempt
against the Christians to force them in their retrenchments, by the consent of
his Brother Coradin he sent to propose a Peace, or at least a Truce for several
years, upon Conditions, which were very fair and advantageous to the
Christians, which were as follow, That he would restore to them the true Cross;
which was taken by Saladin at the Battle of Tyberias; That he would restore to
the King all that they held in the Realm of Jerusalem, and That he would give
so much money as should be sufficient to rebuild the Walls of that City, and
put it into the same Condition wherein it was before; That he would release all
the Prisoners which had been taken in Egypt and Syria, not only during this,
but all the preceding Wars; That the strong holds of Thoron, of Sephet, and
Beaufort should be surrendered to the Christians in the same condition which
they were now in; and in short, that he would keep nothing but the two Cities
of Crac, and Montreal on the other side of Jordan, in regard they were
necessary for the Security of the Pilgrims, which should travel to Mecca, and
that these two Cities should also be in some sort under the Authority of the
King of Jerusalem, by paying to him a moderate acknowledgement of tribute
during the time of the peace or Truce.

Now this being a decisive affair, there was an Assembly called of all the
Commanders, and Prelates, and the question was debated, Whether leaving the
Enterprise of Damiata, the Propositions of the two Sultans ought not to be
accepted. The opinions were diverse, the King of Jerusalem, and all the Lords
and great Officers among the French, English, Germans, Flemings, and Hollanders
were of the opinion, that they ought to be received; and without doubt this
Judgment was founded upon reasons equally plausible and substantial. For, said
they, that which ought to govern us in this deliberation, is the end which we
have proposed to our selves in undertaking this War: And what is that end? Is
it not to reconquer the Realm of Jerusalem, and to recover the Sepulcher of
Jesus Christ out of the hands of the Infidels, for the deliverance whereof so
many Crusades, have from time to time been undertaken? Nor had we besieged
Damiata, but upon the belief that the taking of that City would prove the most
proper and conducive means to arrive at that end; and although we have now
besieged the place for seventeen Months, yet we have not taken it, and it is
uncertain when we shall, since not only our one Soldiers daily quit the tedious
Service, but the Enemies receive daily reinforcements, and redouble their
attacks, which we did not without difficulty, resist, even when we were
stronger, and the Events of War being uncertain, it is but reasonable to accept
those offers now, which we would willingly have embraced before the Siege. That
it is but to quit a certainty for an uncertainty to refuse them, and that what
we aim at ultimately is now offered unto us. That when we have taken Damiata,
we should be willing to exchange it for the Realm of Jerusalem, since that is
the only reason for which we endeavor to take it, and there is all the reason
in the World to accept that now which will deliver the Army from all future
difficulties and dangers in continuing the Siege, and not only spare the blood
of so many brave men as were daily lost before the Town, but also the exposing
of the whole Army to the disgrace of not taking it at the last, that if as
might be objected, it was to be feared, that the Sarasins never intended to
perform the Condition, Jerusalem before the Army separated, and before the
Enemies could be in a Condition to obstruct them, as to render it impregnable
for the future.

On the other side the Legate, who rarely was in the same Opinion with the
King, and who wanted neither Wit nor reason to support his own, stiffly
maintained, That these Propositions ought by no means to be accepted; That this
was nothing but the pure Artifice of the Sultans, to prevent the taking of the
City, which they found it was impossble for them to relieve; That all they
offered being now only a naked Country, and defenseless Villages, it was easy
to take it from them without the help of a Treaty; That the Infidels had no
other intention, by all these seeming advantages, which they offered to the
Christians, but to separate their Army, by a delusive Peace, that so they might
afterward with ease recover, what they had yielded to them only to amuse them.
And for what concerned the true Cross, they were certainly informed that the
Sarasins had suffered it to be lost or destroyed; since Saladin, if after the
most diligent search he could have found it, would most willingly have restored
it, for the Ransom of so many Valiant men, and so many considerable Emirs, as
were made Prisoners upon the taking of Ptolemais. And in short, that the Siege
was now so far advanced, that the Defendants being reduced to the last
Extremities, it was impossible but they must take Damiata, and that after that,
it was easy to know what they had to do, and that then they might if they
pleased, treat with more Honor and more advantage.

Now as the Legate had a strong Party, and a great authority especially among
the Ecclesiastics, and that his reasons also were not without a Foundation of
great Probability, the Patriarch, the Archbishops, the Bishops, and all the
Ecclesiastics, together with the three great Masters of the Military Orders,
all the Italians, and many other Crusades were in his Opinion; so that the
others also standing firmly to their Sense, the whole Army was divided, and in
perpetual contests for several days. But the Sultan, who made use of that
Opportunity to endeavor to put some succor into the place, during this
discourse of Peace, the King's Party, which was the least, reunited again with
the Legate. Hereupon the Conferences for Peace were broken, and it was resolved
to pursue the Siege with all imaginable Vigor. But it lasted not long, for one
of the Towers, which lay upon a Corner of the Town, being by the force of the
Machins so ruined, that it was easy to enter by the Breach, and there
appearing no great number of Defendants to secure the Breach, the Legate made
choice of a very dark night wherein the Wind blew very loud, to cause it to be
attacked. The Soldiers approached the Tower and the Gate adjoining, which they
set on sire, and passed to the second Wall, whilst others clapped up Ladders,
and scaled the first Wall in diverse places without resistance; then the King
being immediately advertised of this strange Success led his Troops thither in
good order, and with the same facility gained the second Wall; and the next
morning being the fifth of November by break of day they took the third Wall
with so little resistance, that there was but one man lightly wounded in his
Foot Immediately the Christian Standards were planted upon the Towers, which
the Sultans perceiving, they retired with precipitation, setting fire to their
Camp and Bridge, that so they might not be pursued.

Thus Damiata, which had cost so much Blood and labor for eighteen Months, was
in one night taken by the Christian Army without Noise, without Tumult, there
being none left in this fair and great City in Condition to defend it. For the
extreme Famine which they had endured, and the diseases which followed upon it,
had made such a horrible ravage, that of eighty thousand Soldiers and Citizens
which were in it at the Beginning of the Siege, there were scarcely lest three
thousand alive, and of those not above one hundred, who were able to bear Arms.
All the Streets and houses were filled with dead and dying Persons, which the
living, who with extreme weakness expected the same Fate, were not able to
bury; so that the Army was forced for a long time to encamp without the City
before they could get it cleansed. There were found in the City infinite Riches
in Vessels of Gold, Silver, Pearls, precious Stones, Silks and all manner of
Indian Drugs and Spices: Sarasins during the Siege having buried most of their
Money, and notwithstanding that the Legate had denounced the Anathema against
those who should conceal any of the Booty, which he ordered to be brought
together to make a just distribution among the whole Army, yet particular
persons concealed the greatest part of the Booty; so that there could never be
got together above four hundred thousand Crowns in Money, which was distributed
among the Soldiers. There were about four hundred among the Prisoners, who were
the most considerable, who were reserved to be exchanged for those who had been
taken by the Enemies during the Siege.

Mosque, which was supported by one hundred and fifty Marble Pillars, and
environed by five curious Galleries, with a noble Cupelo in the middle, upon
which was a lofty Spire, was consecrated to God, in honor of the blessed
Virgin, and upon the Feast of the Purification, the Cardinal Legate,
accompanied by the Patriarch, the Bishops and Clergy of Ptolemais, followed by
the King, the Princes, the Lords, and all the Chief Commanders, went in Solemn
Procession, there to celebrate the Sacred Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
after which they built a new Bridge, which joined the City and the Fort, which
they had during the Siege, built upon the other bank of the Nile; and then
Damiata by the consent of the Legate, and the whole Army, was annexed to the
Realm of Jerusalem, and to add to the good Fortune, some few days after a
Party of a thousand Soldiers being commanded to go abroad for Forage and
Provisions, failing up the second branch of the River Nilus, which is called
the Tanitique, the Egyptians terrified by their coming, cowardly abandoned the
strongest of their Castles, which was built upon the Ruins of the Famous City
of Tanis, in Ancient Time the Capital City of Egypt, and the Residence of the
Pharaohs, the place where Moses, to move the heart of that obdurate Prince,
wrought all those memorable Prodigies, which are recorded in the Holy Story in
the Book of Exodus. It is also reported, that in a place near Damiata, the
Christians found a Book written in Arabic, the Author whereof, who assures us
that he was neither Jew, Christian, nor Mohammedan, predicted the Victories of
the great Saladin, the taking of Ptolemais by the Kings of England and France,
that of Damiata nine and twenty Years after; and that one day there should come
a King from the East, whose name should be David, and another from the West,
whom he does not name, who joining together should overthrow the Empire of the
Mahometans, and recover the City of Jerusalem. But as one cannot judge of the
Truth of this Prophecy by the former part of the things which it does predict,
since they were already come to pass when the Book was found; so it must be
Posterity, who only can be able to make a certain judgment of the truth of the
second part, when it shall happen to be accomplished, which we have not yet
seen.

The End of the Third Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land.
PART IV.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS of the First Book.
The Condition, the manners, and the Religion of the People of Georgia, who
resolve to join with the Princes of the Crusade, but are hindered by an
irruption of the Tartars into their Country. The Emperor Frederick sends a
considerable relief to Damiata. The return of King John de Brienne to the Army
of the Crusades. The Legate Pelagius opposes his advice, and makes them
resolve upon a Battle against Meledin, who once more offers Peace upon most
advantageous Terms. The Legate occasions the refusal of them. The humor and
description of this Legate. An account of the miserable adventure of the
Christian Army, which by the innundation of the Nile, is reduced to the
Discretion of Meledin. The wise Policy of this Sultan, who saves the Army by a
Treaty, which he was willing to make with the Crusades. This misfortune is
followed by the Rupture of Frederick the Emperor with the Pope. The Character
of that Emperor. The Complaints of Pope Honorius against him. His Answers and
their Reconciliation. A famous Conference for the Holy War. King John de
Brienne comes to desire assistance throughout Europe. The death of Philip the
August. His Elogy, his Will and his Funerals. New Endeavors of the Pope and
the Emperor for the Holy War. The Marriage of Frederick with the Princess
Jolante, the daughter of King John de Brienne, Heiress of the Realm of
Jerusalem. John de Brienne is dispoiled of his Crown by his new Son-in-Law. He
puts himself under the Protection of the Pope Honorius. The good Offices of the
Pope to pacify the Princes. The death of Lewis the eight King of France. He is
succeeded by his Son Lewis the ninth. The death of Pope Honorius. He is
succeeded by Gregory the ninth. The Portraict of this new Pope. The Army of the
Crusades much diminished by diseases. The Emperor takes shipping. He stays at
Otranto, where the Lantgrave of Thuringia dies. A great rupture between the
Pope and the Emperor. The Pope excommunicates him. Their Manifests. The Revenge
which Frederick takes. He passes at last into Syria. His differences with the
Patriarch and the Templers. His Treaty with the Sultan, his Coronation at
Jerusalem, his return and accord with the Pope. The Conference of Spolata, for
the Continuation of the Crusade. The History of Theobald the fifth Earl of
Champagne, and King of Navarr. His Voyage to the Holy Land with the other
Princes of the Crusade. His description, and his Elogy. A Crusade published for
the Succor of Constantinople. An Abridgement of the History of the Latin
Emperors there. The Causes of the little Success of the King of Navarr's
Enterprise. A new Rupture between the Pope and the Emperor. The Occasions
thereof. The deplorable effects of that breach, which ruins the Affairs of the
Holy Land. The Jealousy among the Princes occasions their loss. Their defeat
at the Battle of Gaza. The unsuccessful Voyage of Richard Earl of Cornwall. The
death of the Constable Amauri de Montfort. His Elogy, his Burial, and that of
his Ancestors, and of Simon de Montfort, in the Monastery of Hautebruiere. A
Council called at Rome. The Pope's Fleet defeated by the Emperor's, and the
taking of the Legates and Prelates going to the Council. The death of Pope
Gregory. The election of Celestin the fourth, and of Innocent the fourth. He
breaks with the Emperor, and retires into France.

Crusades of the West had obtained against the Sultans of Egypt and Damascus,
being spread all over Asia, raised the Courage and hopes of the Christians in
the East, and more particularly of the Georgians, who then were, and are at
this day, the bravest among all those Nations. These People to whom that name
was given, either from their particular Veneration of St. George, upon whom
they call in their Combats; or by Corruption of the word Gurges, their Country
being called Gurgiston, inhabit those Regions, which extend themselves from the
West to the East, between the Euxine and the Caspian Sea, the Countries which
anciently were called, Colchis, Iberia, a part of Albania, and also of the
great Armenia as far as Derbent. They were at this time under the Obeisance of
one King, who governed the whole Nation united into one Monarchy, and not
divided as they are now, among many small Princes, who are not able to free
themselves from paying tribute either to the Turk or Persian. They have been
Christians ever since they were converted by a young Maid, a Christian Slave,
in the Reign of Constantine the Great, and followed the belief and Ceremonies
of the Greeks, although in some things they differ from them much, and
especially in this. That they have nothing of that Aversion for the Church of
Rome, which the Greeks have. They all shave the middle of their heads in form
of a Crown, but with this difference among them, That the Ecclesiastics have
it round, like that of the Roman Churchmen, the other square, with great
Mustaches, Amazons, will go to the Wars and sight most valiantly; and they are
so taken notice off for this Valor above all other of the Eastern Christians,
that the Sarasins either out of Fear or respect, permit them to enter with
their Colors flying like Soldiers into Jerusalem, and without paying any thing
when they come to visit the Holy Sepulcher. But they have this great Blemish
that they are most intolerable Drinkers, and make little account of such People
as will not debauch with them, having entertained a brutish persuasion, that it
is impossible for any persons to be truly valiant, who are not excessive
Lovers of drinking. So that they never go to the Combat till they have well
drunk; for which purpose they always carry to the field, a Bottle of Wine tied
to their Girdles, and before they begin the Battle they presently and with
Cheerfulness toss it off to the last drop, and then furiously charge the
Enemies, being elevated with the Wine and half drunk.

This was the Temper of these Georgians, who were now most highly incensed
against Coradin, because without consulting them, he had caused the Walls of
the Holy City to be demolished during the Siege of Damiata; for which, as a
common Injury done to all Christians in General, they loudly threatened to be
avenged on him. For this purpose so soon as they heard the news of the taking
of Damiata, their King writ to the Princes of the Crusade to give them joy of
their Victory, and to exhort them to follow their good Fortune, assuring them,
that for his own particular,, as he should esteem it a dishonor to him not to
follow the glorious Example, which they had given him, so he was resolved in
favor of them to make a powerful diversion in Syria, and to attack Coradin
even in his Capital City of Damascus. But all these fair hopes of chasing the
Insidels out of the Holy Land, quickly vanished by two unhappy Accidents, which
ruined all the Affairs of the Christians in the East. The first was, that as
the King of the Georgians, was preparing for this Holy War, he received advice
that the Tartars, who began to make diverse Conquests in Asia, were ready to
fall into his Dominions; and this hindered this Valiant Prince from executing
what he had so generously resolved against Coradin. The second was the
deplorable misfortune, which befell the Christian Army, which having lost a
great deal of time, had at last took the field to endeavor to finish in
conquering the rest of Egypt, what they had so happily begun, by taking the
strongest of all the Cities of that Realm, and it is this which I am now to
treat of, and in few words to give an Account of the Causes of this sad event.

After that the Army had passed the Winter at Damiata, and the Country about
it, to recover themselves from so many Fatigues, they were so far from being in
a Condition to pursue their Conquests, in the Beginning of the Spring, that
they found themselves more weak than at the end of the Siege; for many of the
Crusades of all Nations, believing that they had fully accomplished their Vow,
and being weary of a tedious War, returned into their respective Countries: and
that which weakened them still more, was, that the King of Jerusalem, who
commanded the Army, quitted them and returned into Palestine. This King, who
was in no sort satisfied with the Legate, who had so often shocked him, and
with whom he found it impossible to keep himself in any good Terms, was not at
all sorry to have a fair pretext to retire himself; and the death of Livon the
King of Armenia, which then happened, furnished him with a plausible reason, to
go and pursue the Right of the Queen, his Wife, who, in Opposition to the
Prince of Antioch, pretended that that Realm appertained to her. Besides he
said, that having heard that the Sarasins of Alepo, were fallen into the
Territories of the Templers, he was obliged to go instantly to repel these
dangerous Neighbors, who made Advantage of his Absence. So that
notwithstanding what ever the Legate could remonstrate to him to stop his
Journey, he left the Command of the Army to him, and embarked with his Troops,
he carried them with him to the City of Acre, promising nevertheless to return
and join the Army so soon as he could. But the long stay, which he made to no
purpose at Ptolemais, Sarasins, or in Armenia, made it evident that the
reasons, which he alleged to justify his retreat, were nothing but colorable
pretenses to withdraw himself. So that the Crusades having not sufficient
Troops to guard the Conquests, and to march into the field, were constrained to
pass the Summer without doing any thing; and in the Interim they writ to the
Pope to entreat him to hasten the Supplies of the New Crusades, which were
expected; and above all to procure the Emperor Frederick to put himself at the
head of them, that so under so great a General, whose Commands no person would
presume to dispute, there might be no more such divisions as might retard the
progress of the Christian Arms.

This Prince who had more than once promised that he would presently accomplish
his Vow, yet continually put of the Voyage for reasons, which appeared very
plausible, pretended that the present posture of the Affairs of the Empire,
would not admit of his Absence; and that he had not yet received the Crown
Imperial at Rome, without which at that time they were scarcely thought to be
complete Emperors. The Pope therefore to take from him these Excuses, which he
had hitherto made use of, sent for him to Rome, where he was solemnly crowned
upon St. Cecily's day in St. Peter's Church, together with the Empress
Constance his Wife; there he again received the Cross, and renewed his Vow to
take the Voyage to the Holy Land, giving his Promise and his Oath to the Pope
thereupon; upon which Confidence the Pope writ to Damiata, to encourage the
Legate and Crusades, assuring them that in the Month of March in the following
year, the Emperor would send before him, the Duke of Bavaria, the Bishop of
Metz his Great Chancellor with considerable Succors, and that he himself
would follow in the Month of August with all his forces. Lewis, Duke of
Bavaria, according to his promise embarked in the Spring with above four
hundred Lords and Gentlemen, Germans and Italians, who conducted noble Troops,
which arrived happily at Damiata; he also rigged out three and forty Galleys
out of the Ports of Sicily, under the Command of the Bishop of Catania,
Chancellor of that Realm. The Venetians, the Genoese, and the Pisans also
brought thither great reinforcements, as did the Archbishops of Milan, of
Genoa and Candia, and the Bishop of Brescia, who were accompanied by many
Italian Lords; insomuch that the Legate who had a great longing to sight,
whilst he commanded the Army, which he had once before drawn out to no purpose
to meet the Enemy, and now believed that with this reinforcement, of so many
brave Troops, he might more easily execute his Enterprise.

He communicated his Design to the principal Commanders of the Army, the
Archbishop of Milan, and all the other Bishops, who were constantly in the
Council; and they who were very willing to be at his Devotion, were in his
Opinion, and all concluded as he did, that such a flourishing Army ought not to
lie idle, but that without waiting any longer, they ought to march against the
Sultan, who had not had much time to make his Preparations, and who would
doubtless perfect his Levies if they should any longer defer attacking of him.
But the Duke of Bavaria and so many Lords as accompanied him, and generally all
the Commanders, who were not pleased to see a Churchman at the Head of an Army
as a General in the day of Battle, were unanimous in the opinion, that since
the Emperor could not possibly come so soon as was desired, they ought to
expect the King John de Brienne, whom the whole Army desired as their General,
and who would most certainly be there in a very small time.

And in truth the Pope having understood that this Prince was withdrawn in
discontent, under pretense of the difference with the Prince of Antioch for the
Kingdom of Armenia, had writ to him in very pressing Terms to oblige him to
return to Damiata; and all the Lords of the Army, who were resolved to have a
Captain of his Quality and Valor, pressed him so strongly to return and take
the Command of the Army, that in four or five days he arrived at Damiata; and
that which augmented the Joy of this happy return, which was so welcome, and
had been so long hoped and wished by the Army was, that Count Matthew,
Governor of Pavia for the Emperor, came almost at the same time to anchor in
the Port of Damiata with eight Galleys, which Frederick, Sicily, had sent as a
reinforcement, upon which were seven hundred of the most brave among the
Nobility and Gentry of Sicily, who in their passage having met with twelve
great Ships of the Sarasins had sunk four, chaced the rest, and taken two of
them, whom they brought in as the Trophies of their Victory to Damiata.

In this time Meledin, who had had leisure to make advantage of this sad
division, which still continued between the King of Jerusalem and the Legate
Pelagius, being marched out of Grand Caire, accompanied with his two Brothers,
Coradin, Sultan of Damascus, and Seraph, Sultan of Alepo, and the greatest part
of his Allies, which together made the greatest Army, which they had ever had,
came and posted himself a little above the place, where the Pelusiack and
Tanitick, the two Eastern Chanals of the Nilus, divide themselves from each
other; there he retrenched himself very strongly, and built a Fortress which he
called the new Damiata, with two Bridges, one upon the Pelusiack Chanal, for
the Convenience of Communication with Grand Caire, which lies upon the Bank of
the Nile on the right hand; and the other upon the Tanitick, to make his
Excursions as far as Damiata, that by this means he might draw the Christian
Army into a Country where he believed he should most assuredly ruin them
without running the hazard of coming to a Battle. And the Success proved better
for him than he had foreseen or could have imagined. For immediately after the
arrival of the King of Jerusalem, a great Council was held to determine, what
was to be undertaken with so brave an Army as was then together. There this
Prince with great Judgment gave his Opinion, That besides that it was extreme
dangerous to engage the Army in such a Country, particularly at that season of
the year, when the Nilus began to swell in order to its constant Immdation, it
was also to no purpose to make any further Conquests there, which would weaken
the Army, and not conduce in the least to the great end, which they had
proposed to themselves. For having Damiata and Tanis, which were the two
strongest places of Egypt, and the two Keys of the Kingdom toward Palestine,
they would certainly hinder the Sultan, who durst never leave these two strong
places behind him, from going to the Assistance of his Brother Coradin; and
that before he could possbly regain them, they might easily reconquer all the
Holy Land, and rebuild Jerusalem, which was the ultimate end of the Crusade:
And that after this, if the Christians of the West, had a desire to recover
Egypt from the Insidels, they might make another Crusade, to the Success
whereof, a King of Jerusalem well established in his Dominions, might
contribute very much.

But on the other part the Legate, who after the taking of Damiata, to which
without doubt, he had contributed in a great measure, and after the Retreat of
John de Brienne, which showed that he was in fear of him, was now become more
hot, fierce and untractable, strongly opposed this advice. And seeing himself
supported in his Opinion, not only by the Bishops, but by the greatest part of
the Crusades, who were lately come, who desired nothing so much as to see the
Enemy, he said a hundred things with more heat than Prudence, to prove, That
this was to betray the Common Cause, to let such a fair opportunity escape them
of cutting in pieces a patched Army, and consequently the taking of Grand
Caire, which had no manner of Fortifications, capable of resisting them; That
besides that this would be the most Illustrious action in the World, for the
Glory of the Christian Name, this was to strike directly at the Foundation of
the Sarasin Empire, and the way to reverse it from the top to the bottom; that
after this glorious Conquest there would remain nothing either in Palestine or
Syria, that could oppose the victorious Arms of the Christians. And in short
this Legate, who was of an humor extremely Martial, said so much, and that
with Menaces of Excommunication against those who should oppose it, that the
most ancient Captains among the Crusades, who when they had before opposed this
Prelate, had not done it, but that the King was at their head; and the King
himself fearing, that he should render himself suspected and might make the
Soldiers believe, that he acted only for his particular Interest, suffered
himself at length to be hurried down this impetuous Torrent, and concluded as
the rest to come to a Battle.

It was then in the Month of July, that the Christian Army, composed of above
seventy thousand men, without computing those who were aboard the Fleet, Sultan
toward Caire, which is about thirty Leagues from Damiata. They marched between
the two Eastern Branches of the Nile, the Fleet being upon their right hand,
which sailed up the Tanitique Arm, to furnish them with Provisions, and if
there were occasion to combat the Vessels of the Sarasins. Immediately all the
Enemies which were in the Field fled and retired to the main Body of the
Sarasin Army on the other side the River; and the Christians taking this flight
for a happy presage of their Victory, marched pleasantly, almost as far as the
halfway toward Caire, to the Angle which these two Arms of the Nile make,
where they must of necessity stop, by reason that the Enemy was encamped on the
other side the River, and which was extremely difficult and dangerous to pass
in view of an Army more numerous than theirs. Now though the Sultan saw his
Design begin to thrive so well, he having drawn the Christians to the place
which he desired, yet nevertheless seeing them in so good a condition, and that
they were much stronger than he had believed, he was afraid that they would at
last, in despite of all his Art and Force, find some way to pass the River;
the Christians having more than once before this done the same in the sight of
stronger Armies than his: For this reason therefore, having no mind to be
constrained to expose his Empire to the hazard of a Battle, which he was afraid
he might lose, he chose rather once more to offer Peace upon the same
conditions which he had before proposed; adding moreover this time that he
would leave them in the peaceable possession of Damiata, with its Territories
for above six Leagues round about it, provided that they passed no farther.

And in truth this was all that which the Crusades could reasonably have
desired or wished for; nor was it possible to make a Peace either more glorious
or more advantageous to all Christendom; since thereby they would most
assuredly recover the whole Realm of Jerusalem, for which only the War was
undertaken, without the Expense of one drop of Christian Blood: But it has
been an observation of more than one Ages Experience, that when a Person, who
is not acquainted with the Mystery and Profession of War, takes a Fancy in his
imagination to the honor of that Employ, and believes that he ought to do some
wonderful action to render himself illustrious and considerable by his Arms;
there is nothing which he will not do to satisfy that foolish passion, which
usually carries him further than his Fear, the common and natural disposition
of those people, who become courageous and resolute when they think their
Enemies timorous and cowardly. The Legate, who had once before rejected the
Propositions of Peace, was now so far from harkening to them, that looking upon
this offer of the Sultan's, as an indubitable sign, that he was in his own
opinion desperate, and gave all for lost, unless he could weather this dreadful
Tempest which hung over his head, he pressed the Commanders now more vigorously
than ever, to come to the decision of a general Battle.

This Legate was a Spaniard by birth, and by profession a Benedictine Monk, a
man of Spirit and great Abilities, but of a Nature extremely fierce, and so
mightily Opinionatretive, that Pope Innocent the Third, who had made him
Cardinal, had at one time thoughts of depriving him of that Dignity, for
opposing himself singly and pertinaciously against a Bulla, which the whole
Sacred College had signed in favor of the Cistercian Monks. But that which at
this time rendered him more conceited and obstinate in his own Opinion, was
that he had the weakness too common in all times to abundance of people, which
made him give strange credit to certain Predictions, which still discovered his
Vanity and Folly, and with which he continually permitted himself to be abused.
For having heard it said in his Country, that there was an old Prophecy which
gave assurance, that at that time there should a man go out of Spain, who
should ruin and overthrow the Sect and Empire of Mahomet in the East. He had an
imagination that he might be that glorious man, who was designed by the Oracle
for that mighty Action, and consequently that he ought to attempt all things to
finish that admirable Adventure. And this ridiculous Fancy was the reason,
that, by obstinately refusing the Peace which the Sultan offered upon
conditions so advantageous to the Christians, whilst he coveted all, he lost
all. So much does it import Princes not to trust the manage of their Affairs,

The Sultan, who then perceived that he had to do with people whose presumption
had so far blinded them, that they never once perceived the danger into which
by an extreme imprudence they had thrown themselves, now had no other thoughts,
but how to oppose their passage with all his Forces, in expectation of
executing the design which he had formed of destroying the Christian Army,
without ever drawing his Sword. And in truth he guarded the other Bank of the
Nile so well, as it was easy for him to do with those innumerable Troops,
which he had disposed in all places where there was any possbility of landing,
that they could never come to lay a Bridge, so that they were constrained to
stay between the two Chanals of that great River near a Month, wasting the time
in little Combats and Skirmishes, with their Arrows cross the River; and in
this time the Army was lessened by ten thousand men, who weary of this slow and
foolish way of fighting, or doubting what would be the Event, and fearing that
which happened, retired in good time to Damiata. For the Nile, which at this
time continually increases, being now risen to that height which the Sultan
expected, he caused the Sluices to be opened, and filled all the great Canals,
which cross all the lower Egypt, from the Western Arm of the Nile, which
anciently was called Canopus, and afterward Rossetta, about two miles from
Alexandria, to the Pelusian Branch; and having filled these Canals, he brought
his Ships in, which passing over to the Tanitique below Damiata, surprised the
Christian Fleet, which expected nothing less, for they did not believe they
could come thither but by the Tanitique Chanal, and by Damiata, which shut up
that passage; and in this surprise the Christians not being upon any Guard, the
Sarasins, who were for the purpose provided of store of Greek wildfire, set
the Ships on fire at their pleasure, and the Christians being unfurnished of
Materials to extinguish it, the greatest part of the Ships were burnt, and they
hindered the rest without any difficulty, from carrying Provisions to the Army.

The Commanders finding now too late, that it was impossible for them either
long to subsist there, or to pass further, thought of retreating toward
Damiata, marching at a good distance from the River, and the Enemies Fleet,
which they kept upon their left hand; but they had marched but a little way,
when the Sultan causing the other Sluices to be opened, all the little Ditches,
which cross the Fields were presently filled, and the water continually
increasing, all the Country was so drowned in a few hours, that the whole Army
found themselves under an inevitable danger of perishing; insomuch that they
were forced to do that which nothing but extreme necessity could excuse, by
constraining them to accept what Meledin by a most surprising adventure,
offered them at the same time to draw them out of that terrible danger, to
which they were reduced. For whether it were that this Sultan, who naturally
had abundance of humanity, could not see so many Princes and Lords of the
highest Quality perish in this miserable manner; or that God, who disposes
absolutely of all hearts, did upon this occasion mollify that of this
Egyptian, to save this poor Army; or at last that this Prince, who was Wise and
Politic, chose rather presently to draw Damiata out of the hands of the
Christians, than to put it to the hazard not to take it at all, though this
Army should be lost; it is certain that he offered them a Truce for eight
years, which was instantly accepted, upon condition that Damiata should be
presently surrendered to him, and that he should reciprocally restore the true
Cross, which had been taken by his Uncle Saladin; and that all the Prisoners,
which had been taken on both sides, as well in Egypt as in Syria, should be set
at liberty. Those who were in Garrison at Damiata made some difficulty of
surrendering the place; but as on the one part they were not provided to
maintain a long Siege, and that on the other the Sultan that he might be secure
of it, would have the King himself, the Legate, and the Duke of Bavaria for
Hostages, there was a necessity of yielding it; so that the Treaty was with
great sidelity performed on both sides, and Meledin himself did such things as
could not be reasonably expected from a Sarasin, Christian Prince to do them.
For after he had caused the Sluices to be shut up, and the water to be let out
to leave the Christians a free passage, he also furnished them with plenty of
Provisions for five days, and upon the rendition of Damiata the tenth of
September, he sent his Son to attend the King and Princes, and to furnish them
magnificently with whatever was necessary for their return either by Sea or
Land into Phoenicia.

This was the unhappy Effect which was produced by that Division, which always
continued during the whole War, between the King of Jerusalem and the Legate
Pelagius, who assuredly had done much better, if according to his Profession,
and the Intention of him from whom he was sent, he had not gone beyond his
Commission, but had applied himself wholly to maintain a perfect Union among
the Crusades, and to exhort them to do bravely; leaving the management of the
War to the King, whom God has ordained to carry the Sword, and to make use of
it upon occasion as he shall judge most expedient. But that which was still
most deplorable, was that this loss of Damiata, was the thing which begot that
sad difference between the Emperor and the Holy See, which beginning under
Pope Honorius, upon the miscarriage of this Crusade, had those dreadful
consequences under the two following Popes, which produced an infinite number
of mischiefs to the Church, and in Italy, and were at last the principal cause
of the ruin of the Affairs of the Christians in the East. But in regard, that
it is in this part of History where the Writers observe the worst measures, and
for the most part on the one side and the other fall into the Invective and
Declamation, which a Historian ought above all things to avoid, as the most
dangerous to his honor, and the credit which he desires to have in the World,
I have, therefore, endeavored to secure my self from that prepossession, which
by reason of my profession may render me suspected of partiality; and have
resolved faithfully and impartially to relate matters of fact, as I find them
in the most Authentic Acts and Records, and in those Authors least liable to
Suspicion or Exception, without undertaking to pass my Censure and Judgment,
either of the Intentions of People, which only appertains to God; or of the
right, which they either had, or had not to do as they then did; leaving this
wholly to the pleasure and discretion of the Reader, whom it is necessary that
I should first make acquainted with this same Emperor Frederick the Second, of
whom there are such different paintings and Portraicts drawn by different
Historians.

He was then of the Age of near eight and twenty years, of a just Stature and
majestic Shape, a good Proportion, and a Complexion strong and vigorous; his
Face was very agreeable, his Hair fair, inclining something to yellow, and in
the turn of his Mouth, his Forehead, his Eyes, and his whole Face, there was a
certain briskness, fine and sprightly, which produced in those who saw him, at
the same time both Love and Veneration. As for his Mind, one may truly say that
he had there a strange Medley of the admirable good Qualities of his
Grandfather, and the ill ones of his Father; for like him he was of temper,
very vindicative in the pursuit of his Enemies, severe and vigorous in taking
his revenge even to cruelty; not too religious or exact in observing his
Promises, nor overburdened with true Piety or Devotion: he was cunning,
dexterous, and a notable Dissembler, commonly preferring his Interest before
his Conscience; and above all, an excessive lover of the pleasures and delights
of Sense, in which he would drown himself sometimes, even to Scandal and
Infamy. But on the other part, it must not be concealed or denied, but that he
was Master of many most admirable Qualities and Perfections worthy of a Great
Prince, even by the confession of his very Enemies. For he had a Heart truly
Great and Noble, he was most Liberal and Magnificent, and above all things
never failed in plentifully rewarding the Services which were done for him; he
was Prudent and Mighty knowing in Affairs of State, and of strong natural Parts
and Reason; really brave, and a most excellent Soldier, perfectly a Master in
the Trade of War; He had a Mind very quick, apprehensive, and generally
knowing, and which being stored with a large stock of acquired Learning,
rendered him very able in most of the Liberal Arts, but more particularly in
Mechanics, which he knew even to perfection; and that which was still more
rare, Latin, Greek, Italian, French, German, or Sarasin; he was a great admirer
and lover of Learning, and learned men, for whose sake he caused an exact Latin
Translation of the Works of Aristotle to be made from the best Copies, Greek
and Arabian, of which he made a Present to the University of Bologne. Such in
truth was this Prince, of whom Authors write so differently; the various
passions, with which they are possessed, too frequently transporting them with
immoderate and unbecoming heat in favor of the several Parties and Interests
which they follow, making some of them conceal his Vices, and speak of nothing
but his Perfections, whilst others overlooking all his good Qualities, will
permit the Reader to see only with their Optics his Vices and his Faults.

Now the Emperor having understood in Pavia, where he then was, the sad news of
the loss of Damiata, which was brought him from the East by the Great Master of
the Teutonick Order, he sent immediately to the Pope, to let him know how great
an Affliction this misfortune of the Christian Army was unto him, and to assure
him that he would omit nothing, which in the present condition of his Affairs
was possible for him to do, to put himself as soon as could be into a condition
of going in Person with a powerful Army into Syria. But the Pope, who was
stricken with this News, as if it had been a Thunderbolt, and whose Grief
admitted of no Consolation, vented his Passion by writing to him in very hard
Language, bitterly complaining of him, and accusing him of being the occasion
of this Disaster, in so often abusing his good Nature, and putting off his
Voyage from time to time, notwithstanding that he stood obliged to the
performance of it, both by his Oath and Vow; laying to his charge the guilt of
this great blow which Christendom had received by the deplorable loss in Egypt.
And after having exhorted him to repair this fault by immediately conducting
into Syria the Assistance which he had so often promised, protesting that if he
did not do it without any longer amusing the World by his Excuses and Delays,
he would declare him, and cause him to be solemnly denounced, to his confusion,
an Excommunicate Person throughout the Christian World, as a Sacrilegious
Violater of the Vow which he had made unto Almighty God.

Frederick, who believed that the Galleys of Italy, and the Army of Germany,
which he had sent to Damiata; but above all the Importance of the War, which he
was obliged to attend in Sicily, were sufficient Excuses for him, was extremely
provoked by these Letters and these Menaces. And being of a violent Nature when
he was shocked, and the good Fortune, which hitherto in all his Enterprises had
attended him, rendering him more fierce and haughty, he openly broke with the
Pope, entered upon the Lands of the Church, which he said belonged to the
Empire; he chased several Bishops out of the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, who
were suspected to favor the Pope, and of his own Authority named others,
renewing the Ancient Pretensions of the Kings of Sicily, who affirmed that this
Right appertained to them; and to justify his proceedings he made a long
Deduction in his Manifest, how many and great Subjects he had of Complaint for
the Injustices, which he said were done him by Pope Innocent, his Guardian
during his Minority, in seizing upon, and usurping his Regalities and Rights;
and even by Honorius also, whom he accused to have, contrary to all Justice,
exacted many things of him, which he was constrained to yield so much against
his will, that so he might receive from him the Imperial Crown, which he could
not in Justice have dispensed with himself in denying to place it upon the Head
of an Emperor so lawfully Elected, and who had two several times before been
Crowned.

The Pope, who was very prudent, and of a temper very soft and sweet, was
resolved not to carry matters to Extremity; and therefore he answered to these
Complaints, that he was a Father; and that his Son though he were disobedient
and undutiful, yet was not therefore either a Stranger or an Enemy, so long as
there was any hope that he might return to his Duty. He therefore satisfied
himself to answer to the Complaints and Reproaches of Frederick with abundance
of mildness, in a long Letter, which to speak properly, was a Manifest, or
Apology for the Conduct of his Predecessors and his own, Frederick was moved by
these Remonstrances of the Pope; or whether he feared the dangerous
consequences of this Rupture, particularly in Lombardy, where they began to
form a great League against him, it is certain that this procedure sweetened
both Parties, and that the Emperor satisfied the Pope, taking all his Dominions
into his Protection, and that the Pope during all his Pontificate, never
proceeded further than these Menaces and Anathema's, as may be seen plainly by
the Letters of Honorius, and that after this, they both acted by Agreement for
the Succor of the Holy Land, in this following manner.

They had first a meeting at Veroli, between the Cities of Anagnia and Sora,
where after a Consultation of five Days with the Cardinals, they ordained that
there should be another Conference, to which were to be invited King John de
Brienne, the Legate Pelagius, the Patriarch, and the Great Masters of the
Temple and the Hospital, who were better able than any others to give them such
an understanding of these Affairs, as might enable them to come to the last
Resolution upon them. After which the Emperor sent four Galleys to bring them
over, and upon their arrival this famous Conference was appointed to be held in
Champagne in Italy the year following. There it was that to engage Frederick
more strongly than ever to undertake this Holy War, Constantia his Wife, the
Daughter of the King of Aragon, should marry the Princess Jolante, the Daughter
of King John de Brienne, the Heiress of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, in the
Conquest whereof it was believed he would take more Interest than before, when
it should be his own Estate for which he was to sight. It was also ordained,
that in two Years he should part with all the Forces of the Empire at
Midsummer, to which those that were present, and Parties obliged themselves by
a Solemn Oath, that whoever should fail in the performance of his Promise,
should be Excommunicate. After which the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of
Jerusalem parted, every one to endeavor for his part, according to his power,
to dispose all things for this Holy War, which was to be begun two Years after.

For this purpose, the King of Jerusalem, who was able to do nothing more in
Europe, but to solicit the Princes to contribute their part to this War, went
to desire the Assistance of England, Spain, Germany, and above all in France,
where he arrived a little before the Death of Philip the August, his Benefactor
and Protector. This great Prince, who had labored under a Quartan Ague for
above a Year, and who nevertheless did not cease to visit his Provinces, and
always to carry himself as a Great King, with all the strength imaginable of a
Soul, which did not seem to be concerned at the weakness of the Body, died this
Year at the Castle of Mante, the fourteenth day of July, in the eight and
fiftieth Year of his Age, and the three and thirtieth of his Reign, which by
the Glory of his Actions, by his Heroic Qualities, by his Power, and by the
Force of his Arms, he had rendered the most flourishing of all that France had
ever seen since that of Charlemagne. And as he had worn the Cross in the third
Crusade, which was famous for the remarkable winning of the City of Ptolemais;
so he gave in his Will a Noble Testimony of the Zeal which he still preserved
for the Glory of Jesus Christ, and for the Deliverance of his Holy Sepulcher.
For among other Magnificent Effects of his pious Liberality, which are therein
to be observed, for the comfort and relief of the Poor, for the Deliverance and
Ransom of the Wife of Amauri, Count de Montfort, who was a Prisoner amongst the
Albigenses, and for other Works of Christian Piety, he bequeathed three hundred
thousand Livres for the Relief of the Holy Land; one hundred thousand to King
John de Brienne, and so much to each of the two great Masters of the Temple,
and the Hospital; nor was his going of the Theater of the World less glorious
than his Actions on it; Paris against the Albigenses, they all assisted at his
Funerals, as did also the King of Jerusalem, who was also present at the
Coronation of Lewis the eighth, the Son and Successor of King Philip. As for
the Pope, he being persuaded that it was to be in his Papacy, that Palestine
was to be reconquered, which was the thing of the World which he most desired,
he did all that lay in his power to render the Crusade following most numerous
and powerful. He sent new Preachers throughout Europe to excite the People to
undertake it; he writ to the Bishops to oblige them to preach it themselves,
and to collect all the Money, which the Ecclesiastics were obliged to
contribute out of their Revenues toward the carrying on of the Holy War. And
in short he did all that it was possible for him to do, to oblige the Christian
Kings and Princes to make Peace among themselves, and to join their Forces to
those of the Emperor, and to march in Person with him to partake of the Glory
of delivering the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ.

Frederick also in this time, acted in such a manner as might make it be
believed that he applied himself cordially to make preparations for such an
Enterprise worthy of himself: For he caused to be built and equipped, in the
several Ports of the Kindgdoms of Naples and Sicily, one hundred Galleys very
well Armed, and fifty Ships of Burden, able to carry two thousand men at Arms,
and their Horses, and ten thousand Foot; besides an infinite of other Vessels,
which he had already in other Ports, without accounting those also, which he
designed to have from the other Ports of Italy, which all together were
sufficient to transport as great an Army of Crusades, as would in probability
undertake that Voyage. And in regard that the War, which he then made with the
Sarasins, who at that time also possessed some part of Sicily, was upon the
point of being very fortunately ended, would not permit him to go in person to
hold the Diet in Germany to move the Princes to go to this Holy War; he sent
thither the great Master of the Teutonick Order, to solicit in his behalf the
Duke of Austria, the Lantgrave of Thuringia, and the other Princes of the
Empire, as also the King of Hungary to prepare for the undertaking of this
Enterprise, promising that he would furnish all the Crusades with money,
shipping and Provisions, and what ever should be necessary for their
transportation.

Frederick would certainly march at the head of a most gallant Army into the
East. But whether it were that this Prince feared that his absence might prove
extreme prejudicial to him in the present Condition of his Affairs, and that it
would encourage the League, which he knew was formed against his Interests in
Lombardy; or whether it were that he was resolved before his departure to put
himself in Possession of the Realm of Jerusalem, by accomplishing his Marriage
with Jolante; or possibly that he thought it wholly unjust and ungenerous to
break the Truce, which had been made with the Sultans, Meledin and Coradin, by
which the whole Christian Army was saved, which must otherwise have infallibly
perished; it is certain that upon a request, which was presented to Honorius
upon the Part of the Emperor, the Pope after having thereupon taken the Advice
of the Sacred College, consented that the Voyage should be put off for two
years, accounting from the Month of August in the Year 1225, till the same
Month in the Year 1227, and he also consented to those advantageous Conditions,
which Frederick himself proposed, and to which he obliged himself in the City
of St. Germain, in the presence of his Barons, inviolably to observe, upon pain
of Excommunication, which the Cardinals of Albano, and St. Martin, the Pope's
Legates to conclude this treaty, were instantly to pronounce against him in
case of his Failure in the Performance of what he had promised.

Jolante, for whom the Emperor had sent the Archbishop of Capua with fourteen
Galleys, happily arriving at Brindes, she was conducted by him to Rome, where
the Ceremonies of their Marriage having been performed by the Pope, she was in
St. Peter's Church crowned Empress and Queen of Jerusalem, with a mavelous
applause of the People of Rome, who never made their joy more conspicuous, John
de Brienne received from this Marriage, which was of his own procuring, and
which he looked upon as his principal support, did not continue long. For
Frederick, who was resolved to have the present enjoyment of what he desired,
and could not persuade his hope to live upon the spare diet of future
incertainty, told his Father-in-Law, that he was absolutely resolved from that
moment, to have the Sovereignty, the Rights, the Titles and the Demesnes of the
Realm of Jerusalem, which appertained to him, as the Dowry of the Empress his
Wife, and that he would not permit any other to enjoy them. This Poor Prince to
whom the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, had promised upon the Treaty of
this Marriage, that he should during his life enjoy the Realm of Jerusalem, was
strangely surprised at this discourse, which he had so little expected. But as
he was not in a condition to oppose the Will of an Emperor, who was resolved to
make himself be obeyed, and moreover that the disobliging manner, with which he
was treated, made him sensible that the Emperor was highly incensed against
him, there was a necessity that he should strip himself of all, and renounce
all his Rights and pretensions to that Realm to yield it to Frederick; and ever
since that time the Kings of Naples and Sicily, have added in their bearing the
Cross of Jerusalem to their other Arms.

It had like also to have happened, that the Emperor, not contented to have
dispoiled him of his Kingdom, failed but little of taking his life also, as
well as that of his Nephew Gautier, Count de Champagne, the Son of him who had
done such gallant actions in the Kingdom of Naples, in the time of Pope
Innocent. For some People having put it into the Emperors head, that this
Count, who was the Son of the Daughter of Tancred, King of Sicily, pretended a
Right to that Kingdom, and that his Uncle secretly encouraged and assisted him
in caballing and making a strong Party to seize upon it, this suspicion had
like to have cost them both their lives; for there is nothing, which makes
Princes so easily dip their hands in Blood as Jealousy of State, a disease,
which, when once it gets the Possession of the minds of Great men, drives them
to the most outrageous Extremities, so that it has been often seen, that
neither the Fathers have spared their Children, nor Children their Parents,
when the Jealousy has been concerning Crowns and Scepters. The Uncle and the
Nephew therefore to secure themselves, not trusting to the good Intervals of an
humor, which rarely is able wholly to overcome even the most groundless
suspicious, thought best to retire out of the reach of danger, the Count into
his Earldom of Brienne in Champagne, and King John to Rome, where he put
himself under the Protection of the Pope, who had a wonderful esteem for this
Prince, and who to no purpose did what he could by his Remonstrances, and by
his entreaties, to oblige Frederick to restore the Crown of Jerusalem to him
for his Life; but not being able to prevail, that he might in some manner
comfort him for his disgrace, he made him Governor of the greatest part of the
Ecclesiastic Dominions.

But although this discreet Pope, had no great reason to be satisfied, with a
proceeding of the Emperor so little obliging; nevertheless as he desired
nothing so much, as to quiet all those discords and Wars, which might be
prejudicial to that, which he so much desired, should be made against the
Enemies of Jesus Christ and his Church, he did not forbear doing what was most
advantageous for the Emperors Interest, insomuch that he persuaded the greatest
part of the Cities of Lombardy, who were confederated against him, to lay down
their Arms; and obliged himself to obtain their Peace and pardon, with the
Conservation of their Privileges, and Immunities, upon condition that they
should at their own charge, maintain a certain number of Soldiers to serve
under the Emperor for two years, in the Holy War. It was for the same reason
that he hindered Henry the third, King of England, from Enterprizing any thing
against France, whilst Lewis the eighth made War against the Albigenses. That
King prosecuted the War against them with so much heat and Zeal, that he did
not spare continually to expose his Royal Person to all hazards and dangers;
and after having taken Avignion, and the greatest part of the considerable
places in Languedoc, he was seized with that dangerous Malady, which was got
into his Army, Montpensier, the eight of November in the fourtieth Year of his
Age, and the third of his Reign, leaving for his Successor his eldest Son,
Lewis the ninth, of the Age of twelve years, under the Regence of the Queen his
Mother, Blanch of Castile. This was he who by the August Surname of Lewis the
Saint, which was given him by God, by the Authority which he has given to his
Church, has made himself be more gloriously distinguished by that title since
his death, than all other Kings have done during their lives, by all the most
Illustrious Sirnames and most magnificent appellations, which men have bestowed
upon them.

At last the term drawing near, wherein the Emperor had obliged himself to
begin this Voyage, and that all things appeared better disposed than ever they
had been before to the undertaking, the Pope believed that the deciding Blow,
which he had so long desired, was now certainly to be given: And therefore
redoubling his Efforts, as one shall see a Flambeau blaze out twice or thrice
with mighty Force before it is extinguished, so he pressed the Crusades with so
much Ardour, that an infinite number of them came from all Europe into Italy;
it is reported that out of England alone there came above sixty thousand men,
to whom the appearance of a mavelous Crucifix from Heaven all glorious and
shining, in which were plainly to be seen the five Wounds, had given so much
Courage, that they desired nothing so much as to combat and to die for Jesus
Christ. But as this devout Pope believed that he should enjoy upon Earth the
Fruit of so much care and pains as he had taken to assemble so many Crusades,
he was taken more happily for himself to receive them in Heaven; from whence he
might see, though without trouble, in a small time after, that which would have
sufficiently afflicted him in this life, that the Success of this Crusade
proved quite otherways than he had vainly flattered himself withal in the time
of his Pontificate. But that a man may therefore never be disappointed, there
is nothing better than for any Person constantly to do what he ought to do, and
what he can do, without promising himself any certainty of future contingencies
and Events, for which God alone is able to answer.

Rome the sixth of March in the Year 1227; and two days after the Sacred
College by common consent, gave him for his Successor, the famous Hugoline
Cardinal of Ostia, who took the name of Gregory the ninth. He was Nephew to
Innocent the third, who had employed him in the most important Affairs of the
Church; a man of a mighty Spirit, well made, and of a Port extremely Majestic,
very knowing, a great Canonist, and of an irreproachable Life, to whom St.
Francis, whose order he took into his Protection, had predicted that he should
be Pope. He was in short of great Courage, and incapable of yielding even in
the greatest dangers, but withal too quick in Execution of what he proposed
without fearing the Consequences how mischeivous soever they might happen to
be. The first thing that he did after his Exaltation, was to pursue the
Enterprise of his Predecessor, and to press the Emperor Frederick to put
himself as soon as it was possible into a Condition to perform what he had so
solemnly promised. This Prince, who after so many delays, durst no longer
desire the time to be prolonged, appointed the Rendevouz to be at Brindes,
where the Shipping lay all ready for the Transportation of that Infinite number
of Crusades, who descended from all parts of Italy. But as they came into
Pavia, during the great heats of the Summer, which in that Country are
excessive, an Epidemical Distemper began to disperse it self among them, which
took off a great number, and made others withdraw themselves, though few of
them ever returned into their own Country, but perished miserably by the Way.

That which further contributed to the diminution of the Army, was, that a
certain Imposture, set up by some of the Principal Persons in Rome, who had no
kindness for the Pope, as it appeared presently after, counterfeited an
Authority and Power from Gregory, who had appointed him his Vicar, for that
purpose, to take of the Cross from such as desired to be dispensed with, as to
the Performance of the Voyage, and to commute their Vow into some considerable
Alms, of which this Cheat made his own advantage. It is true that he was taken
by the order of the Pope, Pavia came to Brindes, with the Emperor, and Lewis,
Lantgrave of Thuringia and Hesse, who had conducted a gallant Troop of Germans,
who were embarked about the middle of August, and sailed toward Syria, not
doubting but they should be followed by the Emperor, who seemed continually
disposed and ready to part thither also.

And accordingly so soon as he saw the Lantgrave a little recovered of some
Fits of a Fever, which he had gotten in a little Island near Brindes, whether
he had gone to divert himself, he put to Sea the eight of September with this
Prince and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and those few Troops which remained. But
he sailed not far, for the third day of the Navigation, he commanded them of a
sudden to tack about, and stand for the Port of Otranto, alleging that he
found himself much indisposed, and that in the Condition wherein he was, he
could not possibly brook the Sea. But this little Voyage was very unfortunate
to the poor Lantgrave, for the Fever redoubling upon him, he died in a few days
after, receiving the Sacrament from the hands of the Patriarch with great Piety
and Devotion. He was a Prince of an extraordinary merit, and had so well
profited by the Admirable Example of his Wise St. Elizabeth, the Daughter of
Andrew, King of Hungary, to whom he did not yield in Sanctity; and it is said
that it pleased God to make his Piety more resplendent after his death by
diverse Miracles, which were done at his Tomb. I cannot affirm positively what
effect the death of this Prince had upon the Soul of Frederick; or whether he
believed, that it furnished him with a specious Pretext to break of his Voyage;
but it is certain that after this he thought no more of departing; but
continually pretended that his Malady was the Obstacle to it; insomuch that
near forty thousand Crusades, who were gone before him, hearing this news they
also suddenly returned to Brindes, and from thence into their respective
Countries.

Now the Pope, who was then at Anagnia, being informed in what manner the
Emperor, after having begun the Voyage, had broken it off, he was seized with
an excessive Grief, seeing all the hopes, which he had of the happy Success of
this Crusade, vanished in a moment. He had no Consideration of what was
alleged concerning the Indisposition of the Emperor; he believed that it was
all a Fiction, and nothing but a false pretext, which this Prince made, who
notwithstanding all his Oaths, had no Inclination to accomplish his Vow,
thereby to elude the Punishments both of God and man. And therefore without
deferring any longer, and without having recourse to Menaces, or so much as
giving him any notice of it, or giving him longer time as had been done before,
he went in his Pontifical Robes, accompanied with the Cardinals and the
Prelates, the nine and twentieth day of September, being St. Michael's day, to
the great Church, where he solemnly declared him excommunicate, according to
the Sentence to which he himself had voluntarily submitted before the two
Legates of the late deceased Pope. At the same time he writ to the Princes, and
Bishops throughout all Christendom his circular Letters, wherein he showed the
reasons which had obliged him to have recourse to this severe Method, which was
the Crimes, the Perjuries and the Artifices of the Emperor; and especially,
That having nothing in readiness for the transportation of the Crusades at the
time prefixed, that he had with a formed design of mischief stopped them, that
so the greatest part of the Army might perish by the Intemperance of the Air,
during the excessive heats of the year as accordingly it had unfortunately
happened. And in short, he said, that this Prince nevertheless having not the
Power to stop them all, but that in despite of his detestable Arts, there
still remained a great number, who having set sail for Syria, he had basely
abandoned them, under the pretense of a feigned Sickness, by the most
abominable Artifice, that so he might return into his Realm and there plunge
himself in his scandalous Debauches.

On the contrary, Frederick furiously incensed against the Pope, and resolving,
being as he was, Potent and Vindicative, to carry matters to the utmost
Extremities of Revenge, failed not also on his part to send to all the Kings of
Europe, After having protested, that the pressing Affairs of his Estate, and
the War, which he was constrained to make against his Rebels, had obliged him
to desire those prolongations of time from the Pope, which could not with any
manner of Justice be denied him; That he took God to Witness, that it was no
feigned but a real Indisposition of Body, which hindered him from pursuing that
Holy Voyage, which he had begun with a most real Intention of performing it;
and that in despite of the Injustice, which was done him, he was resolved so
soon as he was in a Condition for it, to undertake it anew. And then enlarging
himself in sharp Invectives, against the abuses and the Crimes, whereof he
accused the Court of Rome, he did what he could to interest all Crowned heads
in that which he said was their several and particular concern; and to persuade
them to unite with him, to oppose those Usurpations, which were designed
against them and their temporal Rights which they held only and immediately
from God alone.

These Letters, which on both sides were with great diligence dispatched to all
places, produced the Effects, which are usual in such quarrels as happen
between Great men, which is to divide into parties the People and the Writers
of those times; some declaring themselves for the Pope, others for the Emperor,
and both the one and the other, accusing their adverse Party of Calumnies and
Impostures. But the Emperor, who was resolved to make use of other Arms besides
Invectives, that he might make his Vengeance the more remarkable, instead of
seeking for the Favor of absolution as the Pope by his Letters invited him to
do, found means to chase the Pope from Rome. For having got to him the
Frangepanis, Roman Barons, who endeavored nothing so much as powerfully to
establish their own Fortunes; He made them Princes and Feudatories of the
Empire, after a manner very advantageous unto them. For he bought all their
Lands for ready Money, which he presently surrendered to them again to be held
of him in Fee, by making them take an Oath to do him true and Faithful Service,
and to obey all his Orders without exception; so that upon their return to
Rome, the Pope having upon Holy Thursday anew excommunicated the Emperor, they
raised against him such a horrible Sedition among the People, who in those
times did not love the Domination of the Popes, that he was constrained to quit
Rome, and for his Security to retire to Perusa. In the mean time the Emperor,
who omitted nothing to satiate his Revenge, terribly prosecuted the
Ecclesiastics, whom he believed to adhere to the Pope, ravaging their Lands,
and the Patrimony of the Church by the Sarasins, whom he had transported out of
Sicily into Pavia, pillaging and Sacking the Houses of the Templers, and the
Hospitallers, whom he held for Enemies; and by his Lieutenants making a most
cruel War in the Duchies of Spoleta and Beneventum, and in the Marquisate of
Ancona, from whence King John de Brienne, whom Gregory set to oppose him as his
particular Enemy, repulsed his Troops, being speedily assisted by a powerful
Succor from the Lombards, who upon this occasion manifested a very great Zeal
for the Service of the Church.

But all these Hostilities did not at last hinder Frederick from taking the
resolution to undertake the Voyage into Palestine; to which he found himself
obliged by many reasons. For that it might appear that the Sickness which he
had made use of for the Excuse of his delay, was not feigned, he had engaged
his Word to all the Princes of Europe, that so soon as his health would permit
him he would pass into Syria, and that being now very well established, there
was a necessity that he should make good his Promise, lest otherwise he might
incurr the disfavour, and ill opinion of so many great Princes, as he should
thereby delude. Moreover the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to whom he had given two
Galleys at Otranto, and all the other Commanders of the Crusades, who were
already passed into Syria had writ the most pressing Letters to the Pope, which
he sent all over Europe to oblige all Faithful People to go to the relief of
their Christian Brethren in Palestine. Besides, Frederick was afraid lest John
de Brienne should put himself at the head of those, who would go and recover
the Kingdom of which he had despoiled him. And in short the Empress Jolante,
who died after her Lying-in, had left him a Son called Conrade, who assuring
the Crown of Jerusalem to his House, well deserved that he should be at the
Pains to recover it out of the hands of the Sarasins; Palestine.

For this purpose having assembled all the Great men of his Realm at Barletta,
and those of Germany, who had followed him into Italy he ascended a Throne,
which he had caused to be erected in the middle of a great field filled with an
infinite number of People, who flocked from all parts to this new and
magnificent Spectacle, and in this lofty manner he was resolved to declare his
intention, that so it might make the greater noise in the World, and persuade
the whole Earth, that he looked upon this Enterprise of the Conquest of
Palestine, as an Affair which lay nearest to his heart, and which he esteemed
of the greatest Importance of all others. There he caused his last Will and
Testament to be publicly read, in which he declared at large what was his
desire in case it pleased God to dispose of his life in this dangerous Voyage,
and obliged all the Sicilian and Neopolitan Nobility, to promise with an Oath,
that they would see it performed, unless they received another Written with his
own hand. And this without doubt was capable of blinding abundance of People,
and destroying the report, which ran current, that whatever he had done
hitherto was only perfect Pageantry to amuse the World; and that
notwithstanding his repeated Vows, promises and oaths, he never had any real
intention of putting himself at the head of the Crusades for the Conquest of
the Holy Land.

And after all this, it must be avowed, that the end did not at all correspond
with these specious Beginnings. For leaving the greatest part of his Forces
with Renard Duke of Spoleta, whom he declared Vicegerent of the Empire, in
Italy, and his Lieutenant General in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, he gave
him Order to continue the War, with the Pope; and in the Month of August, he
himself embarked upon twenty Galleys with such a retinue and an Army, as for
the smallness of their number, were neither becoming the Majesty of such a
potent Prince, nor proportionable to the Enterprise in which he was engaged:
Insomuch that the Pope, who had the greatest Interest in this Affair, wherein
the general good of the Church and the Honor of the Christian Name was so
nearly concerned, sent a Prohibition to him, absolutely forbidding him to
concern himself with the Holy War; it being as he said altogether
insupportable, that a Prince, who was cut off from the Body of the Church by
the Anathema, should appear at the head of the Army of God against the
Infidels; and besides that he had nothing near the number either of shipping or
of Soldiers, which by his Oath he was obliged to carry to the Holy Land, and
that with that small Fleet he went rather like a Pyrate than an Emperor. But
Frederick the more enraged against Gregory for this Embassage, whom he no
longer now regarded but as his mortal Enemy, embarked himself and set sail in
the view of the Pope's envoyes, to whom he would not condescend to give any
other answer than what they received from the Sterns of his Galleys; And after
having as he passed by, determined to his own advantage, a difference in the
Isle of Cyprus, which he had with the Lord of Baruch, the Governor of the
Young King Henry, he arrived prosperously at the Port of Acre, the Eve of the
Nativity of our Lady.

The Patriarch accompanied with his Clergy and People came to meet him, and
received him with all the Honors which were due to an Emperor, but withal
protested to him with great Freedom, that it was not permitted him to
communicate or treat with his Imperial Majesty, till such time as he should
have received Absolution from the Pope, to whom he most humbly entreated him to
apply himself above all things, and to obtain this Favor from him, without
which God would never bless his designs; and this he repeated to him several
times after upon occasion. And this was the first cause of the rupture between
this Prince and the Patriarch, who afterward writ Letters against him into
Europe full of sharpness and Injuries; And I must needs affirm that it has not
been possible for me to persuade my self to write my History after such Copies,
as many others have done, upon the disposition of one Witness, who appears so
Choleric and transported with Anger; and which is an Injury, which the meanest
Person in the World before any equitable Judge would have reason to complain
of, and think himself unfairly dealt withal, if being accused in such a manner,
he should be condemned. Of such Importance it is to those who write, Frederick
he did not show much resentment in this Rencontre, but after he had received
the Complements of the Princes and Lords of the Crusade, he satisfied himself
with protesting to them, as he had ever done, that his Indisposition was the
only Cause, which had obstructed his Voyage till that time; and that also the
Sentence, which the Pope had pronounced against him, without giving him the
hearing, and without informing himself in a judicial Way of the truth of his
case, was therefore in its own Nature null and void. After which he took an
Account of the Affairs of the Country, which were then in this Condition.

After the Departure of the great number of Crusades, who had quitted Palestine
the preceding year, upon the new retardment of the Emperor's Voyage, there were
not then in Palestine remaining of the new comers, more than about eight
hundred men at Arms, and ten thousand Foot, besides the Knights, which the
Great Masters of the three Orders had upon the place. All these Crusades had
chosen for their General, Henry, Duke of Limbourg, who after a long
deliberation with the Officers of the Army, the Patriarch and the Bishops of
Caesarea and Nazareth, and those of Oxford and Winchester in England, seeing
themselves too weak to attack Coradin, they had employed themselves in the
rebuilding and Fortification of Caesarea, and some other little Maritim places,
resolving to do the same to Jaffa, in expectation of the Succors, which were
to come from Europe. In this time Coradin died, leaving for his Successor his
Son Melesel, of the Age of twelve years, under the Tutelage and Regency of the
Emir Esedinebec: Hereupon the Sultans his Neighbors failed not to enterprise
immediately against him; and this doubtless was of great advantage to the
Crusades, who were not only delivered from the most formidable of their
Enemies, but saw them also engaged in Civil Wars. This was the State of the
Christian Affairs at the arrival of the Emperor, who was not able to prevent
it, but that many of this small number of Crusades, believing that they had
satisfied their Vow by a Years Service, returned by the Convenience of passage,
which they had that Autumn.

On the other part, the Sultan of Egypt, who always maintained a good
Intelligence with his Brother Coradin, was come to the Assistance of his Nephew
with a potent Army, and was encamped at Napolose, anciently Sichem or Sichar,
where he expected the coming up of all the Forces of Damascus, who were to join
with his. Upon this, whether the Emperor believed that he could not with those
few Troops he had, undertake this War but to his dishonor; or whether it was
that the matter was so preconcerted betwixt him and the Sultan before his
coming thither, as the common report went, although there is no manner of
Foundation for it in History; or which is most probable, that he had a great
desire to return with all Expedition into Italy; it is certain that he sent
Count Thomas his Confident, and Balian, Lord of Tire, to Meledin, to whom,
after they had in the Emperors name made magnificent presents, they acquainted
him, That it was not at all the desire of their Master, that there should be
any thing betwixt them two, which might prevent their living in perfect Amity;
That Frederick, who was the most potent Prince in Christendom, was not come
into the East to make new Conquests there, for that he was possessed of such
large Dominions in the West, as were capable to satisfy the vastest Ambition;
That the great reason of his coming, was to visit the Holy places, and to
redemand the Realm of Jerusalem, which the Christians had conquered, and for so
long a time possessed, and which appertained to his Son, in right of the
Empress Jolante, his Mother, who was the Queen and the lawful Inheretrix of
that Kingdom; That if he were satisfied in a demand so just and reasonable, he
was ready to return into Europe without drawing his Sword; and therefore
desired the Sultan, that by an unjust refusal he would not be the occasion of
sheding so much humane Blood which might be spared, there having been so much
already miserably spilt in so many cruel Battles, as had been already fought
upon this quarrel.

Meledin, who had a Soul naturally inclined to mildness and to peace, as had
most evidently appeared in the War of Damiata, gave the Ambassadors a
favorable Audience, and promised that he would send Ambassadors of his own,
who should carry to the Emperor his Answer in an Affair of that Importance, and
having made them very rich Presents he sent them back to Frederick; whilst
these matters were in Agitation, two Cordeliers, who came immediately from
Rome, presented the Patriarch, and the three great Masters of the Military
Orders, Letters from the Pope; by which he strictly prohibited them from giving
any Obedience to the Emperor, and appointed the Patriarch to declare him
Excommunicate: now as this could not be done without making a mighty noise, the
Sultan was quickly by his Intelligencers made acquainted with it; and therefore
seeing that besides that the Emperor had but a very slender Army, he was in
danger of having the fortune to be ill obeyed; but yet nevertheless being very
willing to deliver himself from the continual Fear which he had of some new
Crusade, which was only to be done by some good and long Truce; and not
doubting but now he had an opportunity to do it as he pleased; he put on a
Countenance something fierce and haughty, as if he were very indifferent in the
matter; however he sent his Ambassadors, who from him were to acquaint the
Emperor, That he was far from refusing his Amity, but for that which concerned
the Article of Jerusalem, that which was desired of him, was of such a Nature,
that neither his Conscience, his Honor, nor his Religion would permit him to
agree to it; in regard that the Sarasins themselves had as great a Veneration
for the Temple of the Lord, whither they resorted from all Parts, to worship
God, as the Christians had for the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, to which they
came in Pilgrimage to adore Christ Jesus. But that nevertheless, if his
Imperial Majesty would please to send new Ambassadors to their Master, he would
make such reasonable Propositions, as that he should have cause to find himself
very well satisfied. And thereupon they presented the Emperor from him with a
huge Elephant, several admirable Camels, and diverse other rare Animals of Egypt
and Arabia: And Frederick, after having magnificently treated them, and
honored them with Noble Presents, sent them back with his Ambassadors to treat
with the Sultan.

That Prince, who was resolved to come to his Ends, in the manner which he had
formed in his own Imagination, did not presently give them Audience, but only
made them be informed that they must follow him to the City of Gaza, whither he
marched with his Army, leaving that of the Sultan of Damascus, his Nephew, at
Napolose. This procedure made the Emperor Frederick believe, that Meledin had a
Design to affront him, and therefore having caused all the Captains to
Assemble, he acquainted them, that according to the resolution which they had
taken, he thought it convenient to march with the Army to Jaffa, and to
fortify it, thereby to secure the passage to Jerusalem, they all submitted to
his Orders, except the two great Masters of the Templers and Hospitallers, who
said in plain terms, that the Pope, to whom they owed obedience, had forbidden
them to obey an Excommunicate Prince, and that therefore if the Orders were
issued out in his Name, they would not obey them. The Emperor extremely
surprised by an answer so little expected, seemed to slight it, and therefore
presently put himself upon his March; but at last, when he saw these two great
Bodies separated from the rest of the Army, and that there was reason to fear,
that many others might be induced to follow their Example, so that he should be
in a manner wholly diserted by all, except the Germans, who always continued
their Fidelity to him; he made a great attempt upon himself, and reserving his
Vengeance for another time, he consented that his Lieutenants should give out
his Orders, not in his Name, but in the behalf of God and Christendom; and
thereupon the whole Army being reunited, they continued their March to Jaffa,
where they fell to work upon the Fortifications, which nevertheless were
presently interrupted by the News which was received from Italy.

For whilst he did all these things directly contrary to the Pope's
prohibitions, which he despised and contemned, Gregory, who had been attacked
in that time by his Lieutenants, who spoiled the Lands of the Church, had with
the assistance of his Allies raised two good Armies, which under the Conduct of
King John de Brienne, and the Counts de Celano and Aquila, his Lieutenants,
Ancona, into which they had fallen, but also pursued them into the Realm of
Naples, where, after they had taken the strong place of St. German, they made
themselves Masters of all the others even to Capua. And in the mean time the
confederate Cities of Lombardy, solicited by the Cardinal of St. Martin, who
was sent Legate to Milan for that purpose, declaring themselves for the Pope,
made War against the other Cities, who were of the Emperor's Party: And after
this not only the Villages of these Provinces, but the Families of the same
City, being divided into these two furious Factions, which by an odd name, the
Original of which is very uncertain, were called the Guelphes and the Gibelins;
the first of which held for the Pope, and the other for the Emperor: these two
Factions did in all places an infinite of mischief, silling the Cities and the
Villages with Desolations, Ruins, Massacres and Fires; this implacable hatred,
which they had entertained one against another, arming them to their mutual
destruction, and to the commission of all the most barbarous Inhumanities, and
most detestable Crimes. Such are generally the miserable Consequences of the
differences of Princes, in which those, who take their part, having neither
their Intentions, Sentiments, nor Manners, frequently run into those transports
and excesses of Fury, which bring neither Reputation nor Advantage to the Cause
which they support, and, which those Princes are so far from esteeming
acceptable Services, that they are the first in condemning such false Zeal, and
horrible brutality.

Frederick, and affrightned him so much, that to expedite his return, he was
resolved to comply with the Sultan almost at any rate, and therefore sending
Count Thomas with one of his Secretaries to him, they concluded a Truce for ten
Years upon these conditions. That the Sultan should yield the City of Jerusalem
to Frederick, together with the Cities of Bethlehem, Nazareth, Thoron, and
Sajeta, or Sidon, and the Villages, which are directly upon the Road between
Jerusalem and Jaffa; That it should be lawful for the Christians to fortify
these places, and to rebuild the Walls of Jerusalem, of which the Emperor might
dispose as he pleased, excepting only the Temple, with its appendages, which
was to be reserved to the Sarasins, with liberty there to perform all the
Exercises of their Law; That the City of Tripolis, the Principality of Antioch,
and the other places, which did not appertain to the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
should not be comprised in this Treaty, and that the Emperor should not permit
the Christians to assist them. This Treaty was mutually signed between them in
the Month of February, and though the Patriarch, who did not approve of it, nor
would have any Commerce with the Emperor, did not only refuse to perform the
Ceremonies of his Coronation, but had also interdicted all the Churches of
Jerusalem if he should attempt to go thither; yet he did nevertheless, make his
Public Entry there, as it were in Triumph, upon the seventeenth day of March,
followed by his whole Army, all the Prohibitions of the Patriarch being not
able to hinder him from visiting the Holy Sepulcher

The next day, which was the third Sunday in Lent, he went clothed in his
Imperial Habit, with abundance of Pomp and Majesty to the Church of the Holy
Sepulcher, where after having said his private Devotions, there being not found
any one, who by reason of the interdict durst attempt to celebrate the Divine
Mysteries, he caused a Crown of Gold to be placed upon the great Altar, and
without troubling himself about the Ceremonies, which the Church is wont to
observe in the Coronation of Kings, he went himself up to the Altar, and taking
the Crown, he placed it upon his Head, and with his own hands crowned himself
King of Jerusalem, with the mighty Acclamations of the Germans, and the Knights
of the Teutonick Order, who highly approved of this Action, as well as the
Treaty, which the Emperor had made. At the same time he writ to the Pope, and
to all Christian Kings and Princes, Letters, by which he invited them in most
Pompous and Magnisicent Terms, to render solemn thanks unto Almighty God, who
had in this manner, by a miraculous Effect of his Power happily finished this
Enterprise without Effusion of Christian Blood, and almost without Forces,
which so many great Princes had not been able to execute with the most potent
Armies, and after so many cruel Battles, which had been fought to oblige the
Infidels to restore to the Christians the Holy City, Crusades had been made;
and in Conclusion he made a Relation of all the Advantages, which he pretended
were to be drawn from this Treaty.

But on the other part, the Patriarch writ to the Pope, and to all Christian
People, long Letters, in which he complains bitterly of Frederick, whom he
treats in such a manner, as at the least one must say, is very injurious; there
he endeavors to lay open the Shame, the Dishonor, and Illusion of the Treaty,
by which he maintains, that Frederick has betrayed Christianity; First,
because it is most shameful to have the Sarasins share the Holy City with the
Christians; Secondly, because the Sultan of Damascus, having never given his
consent to the Agreement, the Treaty signified just nothing; and in short, that
all those places, which were in show, yielded to the Emperor, were in reallity
as much the Sarasins, as they were before, since he returned into Europe
without fortifying any one of them. And in truth Frederick, who took no care
now but to reimbark himself and to return into Italy as soon as was possible,
to recover the places which the Pope's Army had taken in his Dominions there,
left all things in Palestine, in the same condition wherein he had found them,
not giving himself the trouble to build either the Walls of Jerusalem, or any
other of those Cities, which were yielded to him by the Treaty, insomuch that
the Sarasins, who were much the stronger in the Country, especially after his
departure, were as much Masters as they had been before the Treaty, which
Established the Affairs of the Christians in nothing but appearance. But the
Emperor, who believed he had reason to charge the Pope as the Cause of all
those Mischiefs, which might follow upon his hasty departure, was not at all
concerned at it; but after having treated the Patriarch and the Templers very
contemptuously at Acre, he commanded all his Soldiers to follow him, alleging
there was no necessity for their stay in Palestine during the Treaty; and
therefore upon the first day of May he departed with two Galleys only, and in a
few days arrived in the Kingdom of Naples, where in a little time he recovered
all the places, which had been taken from him during his absence; Herman de
Saltza, great Master of the Teutonick Order, and diverse other Princes and
Prelates of Germany, he made his peace with the Pope, who received him at
Anagnia, with all manner of Honors, and Marks of Affection, giving him
Absolution, and restoring him to all his Rights. Thus the differences of
Princes, the most highly exasperated one against the other, may by a Treaty of
a few days come to be determined; but many Ages ofttimes will not suffice to
repair the Evils which they have produced in the World.

Meledin, who was come to a Rupture with his Nephew, whom he had driven out of
Damascus, fearing that during the War, which he made with him, there should be
some new Crusade formed in the West, sent his Ambassadors to Frederick to renew
the Amity, which they had contracted, and presented him, among other precious
Rarities of the East, a most Magnificent Tent, which was valued at above one
hundred thousand Crowns, in which, surpassing all that ever was written of the
Magnificence of the Ancient Kings of Persia, the Heavens were so perfectly
represented, that this admirable Pavilion looked like the true and natural
Sky; in it were to be seen the shining Globes of the Sun and Moon, which by
secret Movements, turning like those glorious Luminaries, by the Skill of Art,
kept exactly the same measures in their Regular Motions, which Nature has
prescribed to those two beautiful Planets; insomuch that by this well governed
Motion all the Hours of the Day and Night were as well to be known by the
Artificial Course of these two Globes within the Tent, as by a Dial or Exact
Quadrant from the natural Motions of the Sun and Moon. It is said also, that
these Ambassadors addressed themselves to the Pope, to desire peace with him;
but that he dismissed them without an Audience, in regard that he would not
have any Commerce with Infidels, and that he still continued in the Design of
pursuing the Crusade.

Italy were quieted, at least for a time, by the fervent Preachings of the
Religious of the Orders of St. Dominick and St. Francis, whom the Pope sent
into all the Cities, to compose the Minds of men to peace, he called a great
Assembly of Prelates to Spoleta, Constantinople, Antioch, and Jerusalem, whom
Gregory had caused to come thither to deliberate with them upon the Affairs of
the East. There it was resolved, That so soon as the Truce was expired, the War
should be renewed in Palestine; and that in the interim, Theoderick, Archbishop
of Ravenna, should be sent into Palestine in quality of Legate, with Letters
from the Pope to all the Prelates, and from the Emperor to all his Officers, by
which they should be enjoined to obey him: Christians to take upon them the
Cross, and to give notice to such as had already taken it, to hold themselves
ready for the Voyage within four Years, which was exactly the time when the
Truce expired, this did not fail to produce the same Effects, which had been
seen in the other Crusades; for the Devotion of that Holy Voyage being the
thing in Vogue in those times, there were always a multitude of People of all
Ranks and Conditions, who either then took the Cross, or having taken it
before, resolved with the first opportunity to accomplish their Vow.

He, who upon this occasion showed the most Zeal and Fervor, and whom all the
rest were obliged to look upon as their Chieftain, was the King of Navarr. This
Prince was the famous Theobald, the Fifth of the Name, Count de Champagne and
Brie, who renouncing the League, which the Princes had made against the Regency
of Queen Blanch, and discovering the Ambushes, which they had laid for the
Surprisal of the young King, her Son, thereby rendered a most signal Service to
France, and to St. Lewis, who reciprocally also defended him against all the
Forces of the Princes of the League, who had turned their Arms and all their
Rage against him for having advertised the King of this Treason, which was
hatched against him. He was the Posthumous Son of that brave Theobald the
Fourth, who died in his preparations for the Crusade, of which he was the
Chief, and of Blanch de Navarr, Sister of Sancho the strong, the last of the
Male Descendants of Garcias Ximenes, who had reigned five Years in Navarr; and
therefore according to the Custom of the Laws of Spain, where in default of
Males, the Crown descends to the Daughters, this Count Theobald was in right of
his deceased Mother, proclaimed King of Navarr at Pampelona, in the Month of
May, 1224. He was then about the Age of three and thirty Years, a goodly
Prince, of an Excellent Mind, and most Noble Inclinations, extremely addicted
to the Catholic Religion, which he took great care to preserve free from
Heresies in his Dominions; above all, he was liberal and magnificent, Virtues
which he enjoyed as it were by Succession from the Counts de Campaign his
Ancestors, who possessed these Royal Virtues in such a degree of perfection, as
distinguished them from all the other Princes of their time; he was besides, of
an humor sweet and pleasant, a Mind extreme quick and polite, and which he had
diligently cultivated and improved by all manner of gentile Learning, and
particularly Poetry, in which he had made himself an able Master, as appears by
certain Copies of Verses, which he made after he had left the Court of France,
to which a well known passion tied him, and in which he expresses himself in
thoughts infinitely tender, though at the same time full of that profound
respect, which he had lying so near his heart.

Arragon, the King of which Realm pretended some manner of ill grounded Title
to that of Navarr; he was resolved to accomplish the Vow, which his Father
Count Theobald had made when he took the Cross with the Earls of Flanders and
of Blois. He therefore took it himself, and by his Example, engaged in the same
Enterprise Hugh, Duke of Burgundy, Peter de Dreux, surnamed Illclerk, Duke of
Bretagne, John his Brother, Count de Brain and Mascon, Henry, Count de Bar,
Guy, Count de Nevers, the Constable Amauri, Count de Montfort, the Counts de
Joigni and Sancerre, and many other Barons of France, Navarr and Bretagne, as
the Counts Guiomar de Leon, Henry de Go^tlo, Andrew de Vitrey, Raoul de
Fougeres, Geoffry de Avesnes, and Fouques Paynel, who all acknowledged him for
their Head and General, together with an infinite number of Crusades of France
and Germany, who waited only for a General of that high Reputation to conduct
them. Crusude, if there had not happened Accidents, which could not be
foreseen, which contributed extremely to the rendering it unfortunate and
unsuccessful. First, by an unhappy Encounter, it fell out that the Pope was
obliged to publish in the same time another Crusade for the Relief of the
Empire of Constantinople, which was reduced to the last Extremity. For the
French, as it is observed of them, who know much better to make great Conquests
in a little time, than afterward to preserve them very long, were not so
fortunate in keeping this Empire, as they had been in gaining it; the Emperor
Baldwin the First lost it, being taken prisoner in a Battle against the King of
the Bulgarians, who barbarously put him to death. His Brother Henry, who
succeedeed him, did truly for above ten Years, hold it with great Success and
Glory: but his Successors found nothing of the same good Fortune; For Peter de
Courtenay, Count d' Auxerre, the Husband of Yolanda of Flanders, Sister to the
last Emperor, having succeeded him, was taken by treachery as he passed through
Macedon to Constantinople, and afterward murdered by Theodore Comnenius,
Prince of Epirus; and in a short time after the Empress, who had taken her
passage by Sea, died of Grief at Constantinople, after her delivery of the last
Child she had by Peter her Husband. Robert de Courtenay his second Son, upon
the refusal of his Eldest Brother Philip, Count de Namur, succeeded Peter in
the Empire, and had the Misfortune in his time to see it miserably dismembered.
For after he had lost a great Battle in Asia against John Ducas, furnamed
Vatacus, the Successor and Son-in-Law of Theodore Lascaris, the Conqueror took
from him all that the French were Masters of on the other side the Bosphorus,
and the Hellespont. And on the other side the Prince of Epirus won from him all
Thessaly, and a great part of Thracia; insomuch that after his Death, the
French Barons, seeing that his Brother Baldwin, who was not above eight or nine
years of Age, was not in a condition to sustain the burden of an Empire, which
was in so great disorder, and attacked on all hands, they sent to desire of the
Pope to have King John de Brienne, who was then the General of his Army for
their Emperor, assuring him that after his Death the Succession of the Empire
should return to Baldwin, who was to marry the Princess Mary, his Daughter,
whom he had by his second Wife Berengera, the Daughter of Alphonsus, King of
Castile.

It is true that this Emperor, who was one of the greatest Captains of his
time, did in some measure re-establish the Affairs of this miserable Empire,
and with a poor handful of men he defeated a great Army, which besieged
Constantinople, both by Sea and Land. But at last two potent Armies, Vatacus,
Emperor of the Greeks, and Azen, King of Bulgaria, who had confederated against
him, attacked him on both sides with very great Forces, whereas he had
precisely no more men than were necessary to defend himself in Constantinople,
in which he was forced to shut himself up; he was obliged to send Prince
Baldwin, his Sonin-Law, to implore in Europe the Succors, which he had so
often desired, and so long in vain expected; and in the midst of these
Transactions he died, leaving to all Gentlemen in the History of his Life,
Philip the August, that that great Prince, who knew how to esteem men for their
Virtue, judged him worthy, not only of his Esteem, but his particular Favor,
and after he had acquired a high Reputation for those Gallant Actions, which
together with his Brother he performed in Italy, he raised him to the Throne of
Jerusalem, from whence it seemed that Fortune had not made him descend, but to
mount him with more Glory by his Virtue to the Empire of the East; from whence
it is easy to observe, that true Merit is the best supporter of such Noble
Persons, who endeavor to obtain the favor of Kings,

In this time Baldwin, his Son-in-Law, and Successor to the Empire, found the
Pope so well inclined to assist him, that, as if he had now had no other
concern, but for the Establishment of the Empire of Constantinople, he writ to
the Kings of France, England, and Hungary, and to all the Bishops of those
Realms, to exhort them to contribute the utmost of their power, to the Aid of
the Emperor, Baldwin the Second, even so far as to permit those, who had
undertaken the Crusade for the Holy Land, to change their Vow to that of
succouring Constantinople. He caused also a new Crusade to be preached every
where for that purpose, and that the greatest part of the money, which was
designed for the Holy Land should be employed that way. Hereupon the Emperor
Baldwin went into France, and from thence into England with the Bulla of this
Crusade, and the Pope's Letters, which exhorted the Crusades to follow him; so
that he sound a great many, who either to please the Pope, or that they thought
this Enterprise less difficult and dangerous than that of the Holy Land,
presently joined with him, and among others, Peter de Dreux, Duke of Bretagne,
who promised to assist him with twelve thousand men. This gave so great a
displeasure to the King of Navarr, the Duke of Burgundy, the Counts of Bar,
Vendosme and Montfort, who had before devoted themselves for the Holy Land, and
who thought very hard that one Crusade should be ruined, or at least extremely
weakened by another, that they complained thereof to the Pope himself, and in a
manner reproached him with Levity, and this Change, which they said was most
prejudicial to the principal Enterprise, the deliverance of the Holy Sepulcher
of Jesus Christ. But Gregory made them answer, that being at least as zealously
interested as they in the Affairs of the Holy Land, he also understood himself
better than they could inform him, and was in the Opinion that it was
impossible ever to chase the Infidels out of Palestine, unless the Conquest of
Constantinople was first well assured, and that now it was in danger to fall
under the Power of the Schismatical Greeks: and therefore he conjured them to
join with Baldwin, remonstrating to them, that this was to labor most
efficaciously for the End, by applying themselves to the means, which was so
absolutely necessary for the attainment of it.

Breton himself, Peter de Dreux, who had promised the Pope to serve for
Constantinople, wheeled off again, and chose rather to join himself to the King
of Navarr; so that by this Accident, there being a great Division among the
Minds of men, some following Baldwin, others the King of Navarr, it fell out,
that in the place of one great Crusade, which might have proved successful,
either in Greece or Palestine, there were two very indifferent ones, which had
in neither place the good Fortune, which was to be hoped and desired. This was
the first Division, which hurt the Army of the Crusades, but that which
happened presently after, between the Pope and the Emperor, was much more fatal
to them, and had like to have ruined all.

The Island of Sardinia, as well as several other Estates had been now for a
long time held as Fiefs from the Holy See, and Gregory had sent thither one
Roland, one of his Chaplains, to receive the Homages, and Reserved Rents, and
to take possession of some Lands about Cagliari. Frederick, who notwithstanding
all the Entreaties and Remonstrances of the Pope, who had sufficient cause to
be afraid of his Power, was now come from Germany into Lombardy with an Army of
one hundred thousand men; and having gained a great Victory over the Milaneses,
and reduced the greatest part of the Confederate Cities under his Obedience, he
believed himself to be in a condition to make himself Master of what ever he
pretended appertained to him, as being dismembered from the Body of the Empire.
And thereupon those of the Principality of the Tour, which now is called
Sassari, having given it to him after the Death of their Lord Vbald, he sent
thither his natural Son Henry, who was usually called Entius, who presently
seized upon the whole Isle, which his Father erected for him into the title of
a Feudatory Kingdom to be held of the Empire.

Frederick was so far from giving him Satisfaction, that he seized upon other
Lands of a Bishop of Sardinia, which the Magistrates had adjudged as Demesnes
to the new King; and withal he made it be answered to the Pope for good and
all, that Sardinia had been usurped from the Emperors, and before those
Usurpations, had always belonged to the Empire, and that for his own
particular, it was well enough known, that as he was Emperor he had sworn that
he would do all that lay in his Power to reunite to the Body of the Empire
whatsoever had been dismembered from it, and that he was fully resolved most
exactly to acquit himself of his Duty in this particular. Hereupon the Pope
seeing that he remained immovable in that Resolution, solemnly excommunicated
him upon Palm Sunday, and Holy Thursday for invading the Patrimony of the
Church, and such other Causes as are comprised in the Decretal, which he
pronounced himself, and which he sent to all Christian Kings, Princes, and
Prelates, with orders for them to publish it by the Sound of Bells, prohibiting
all the Emperor's Subjects to obey him, and all the Ecclesiastics from
celebrating the Divine Offices in the Cities or Castles, wherever he should be.
It is said also, that having declared that he was fallen from the Imperial
Title and Dignity, he offered the Crown to St. Lewis for his Brother Robert,
Count d' Artois, but that for very good reasons that pious King rejected the
Offer; and this is most certain, that by a most discreet Policy he would never
concern himself in this difference, nor be persuaded to change the Conduct and
Maxims of his Government, by taking Arms against the Emperor, although he was
extremely solicited to do so by the Pope, as in the following year the King
gave the Emperor an account by his Letters.

The War between the Pope and the Emperor began by the Writings, the Letters
and the Manifests, which both the one and the other dipersed abroad, in which
were contained the Accusations and the Answers, which they made, which may be
seen at their full length in Matthew Paris, after which the Emperor Frederick
having a potent Army, whilst the Pope sent to all places to demand the
Assistance of the Princes and Republics, caused his Son Entius to enter into
the Marquisate of Ancona, whilst he himself taking the Right Hand marched over
Tuscany, where the greatest part of the Cities, and even Viterbum receiving him
and declaring against the Pope, he advanced directly toward Rome, not doubting
but that he had such a Party there, as would upon his Appearance open the Gates
of that City to him. But Gregory, who in the extreme danger wherein he found
himself, destitute of all humane Succors, had recourse to God, by a great
Procession from the Church of the Lateran to that of St. Peter, in which he did
so movingly harangue the Romans, holding between his Arms the Venerable heads
of the Apostles, protesting with Sighs and Tears, that he was not in any sort
able to protect them without the Assistance of the People of Rome, who were
their Protectors, that they cried out with an incredible Ardour, that they
would all perish in the defense of them. Hereupon the Pope, who was resolved to
make his advantage of this extraordinary Zeal of the People, whilst the first
heat of it lasted, caused a new Crusade to be instantly published, with great
Indulgences to all those, who would take up the Cross against Frederick; and
his endeavors proved so effectual, that the same Romans, who before had been
raised against him, and had driven him out of Rome in favor of the Emperor,
now took up the Cross against him. So easily is the Spirit of the People turned
from one Extremity to another, especially when they are acted by some high
Object of Devotion, and that Religion, or what they call so, which is able to
do all things, when once it becomes Mistress of their Souls seems to call them
to the performance of what they think their Duty.

It happened therefore that Frederick coming to Rome, which he believed he
should enter without resistance, was strangely surprised to meet with a whole
Army of Crusades, who were marched out in Battalia to hinder his entrance, and
had posted themselves under the Walls in shelter of the Engines: However he did
not fail to attack them in the Order wherein they were, rather with Fury than
hope to overcome them: and all those, which he took both in this Combat and
during the whole War, he treated in the most cruel manner, Crusade, he caused
their heads to be cut in a Cross. After this there were no kind of disorders,
miseries and calamities, public and private, which this cruel War did not
produce between the two furious Factions of the Guelphes, and the Gibelins, who
like Infernal Furies let loose with Fire in one hand, and the Sword in the
other, laid wast all the Provinces, and all the Cities of Italy, whilst to
satisfy their Revenge, they buried one another under the Ruins of their
miserable Country.

It was this Rupture, which did the greatest mischief to the Army of the
Princes of the Crusade, who were already advanced as far as Lions. For the
Pope, who saw himself so vigorously attacked, was so far from giving them any
assistance, that he himself desired it of all the World, and sent to them to
Lions, to desire them to proceed no further, but to defer their Voyage to the
Holy Land, till a more proper and convenient Season. Besides all the Italians
were wholly divided between the two parties of the Guelphes and Gibelins, who
made a mostcruel War against each other without thinking of the Crusade;
insomuch that all those, who had a design to imbark themselves in the Ports of
Italy, could find there neither convenience nor safety for their transportation
into Syria. For the Genoese, who were of the Pope's Party, stood in need of all
their shipping to oppose the Emperor's Navy, which was commanded by his Son,
the King of Sardinia. The Venetians were taken up in the Service of the Emperor
of Constantinople against the Greeks; and the Pisans, who declared themselves
highly for the Emperor Frederick, were taken up in his Service against the
Genoese; so that there was only Province and Languedoc where the Crusades could
hope for shipping to transport them. But there being not a sufficient number of
shipping to supply so great an Army of the Crusades, they were forced to divide
themselves; One Part with the King of Navarr, and the greatest part of the
Princes, embarked themselves at Marseilles and Aigues Mortes; and the other
being forced to take their Way by Land, and as the first Crusades did, to cross
over all Germany, Hungaria, Bulgaria, Tracia, and all the lesser Asia, they
lost a World of men in that long March, by Famine, Diseases, and the Ambushes,
which the Barbarians laid for them in the Straits of Mount Taurus, insomuch
that not above the third part of them ever came into Syria, where the King of
Navarr, to whom the Sea had been very civil, was arrived before and in
Expectation of them.

Sarasins at that time in the East were extremely favorable to this Enterprise
of the Christians; For Meledin, the Sultan of Egypt, being dead the year
before, Edel, his Successor, and Nazer, the Sultan of Damascus, who was
reentred into his Dominions, out of which he had been driven by his Uncle
Meledin, made a most cruel War one against the other, so that undoubtedly great
advantages might easily have been made of this division of these Infidels, if
the Christians had not lost those opportunities by those divisions of their
own, which ruined all their Affairs. And in truth the Emperor's Lieutenants,
having by his orders renewed the Truce with the Successor of Meledin,
notwithstanding all that the Templers could do to persuade them against it,
they would never join their Forces with those of the Crusades, and besides,
although the princes had all owned the King of Navarr for their Head, yet he
found that he had nothing but the Title and Honor of the name without any
manner of Authority; for every one of them would be independent of another, and
act according to his own pleasure, without receiving Orders from any Person:
Hereupon as the Army marched toward Ascalon, which they resolved to rebuild,
the Duke of Bretany, separating with his Troops from the rest of the Army
without their consent, made an irruption into the Terretories of the Sultan of
Damascus, from whence, after having taken and sacked some places of small
Strength, he returned with a rich Booty, and was received with great
Acclamations of the Soldiers, as if he had gained some memorable Victory over
his Enemies.

There is no Passion so dangerous to men of Courage as Jealousy of their
Honor, which by diminishing the Strength of their reason and Judgment, in
proportion as it augments their natural Boldness, generally does precipitate
them blindly into inevitable misfortunes. The Duke of Burgundy, the Count de
Bar, and the Constable Amauri de Montfort, Breton, who in truth had done no
such considerable Exploit to deserve them, that they believed it would be a
dishonor to them, if they also should not do some brave thing to be talked on;
Dividing therefore from the main Body of the Army, contrary to the opinion of
all the other Commanders, they took the Field, and after having made a great
Booty in a Country where they found no manner of resistance; puffed up with their
good Fortune, they resolved to attempt the surprising of Gaza, a strong City
and admirably provided; now though they knew nothing of it, it happened also,
that the Sultan of Egypt had not only reinforced the Garrison, but that his
Army, which advanced daily to oppose that of the Crusades, was at no great
distance from the City. Conducted therefore by their ill Destiny, after they
had marched one whole night with Intention early in the Morning, to execute
their design before the Enemy should have notice of their march, just upon the
break of day, they found themselves engaged in a Valley so deeply Sandy and
loose, that both the men and Horses, who were soundly harrassed by the nights
march, had much difficulty to dragg their Legs out of this deep Sand.

The Governor of Gaza, who had by his Spies been advertised hereof, laid
himself in Ambush behind some little Hills, and all of a sudden appeared upon
the top of them with some of his Squadrons, but without advancing, as first
resolving to observe the Countenance of the Christians. And accordingly seeing
that they made a Halt, and showed some surprise to find those People in order
of Battle, whom they had thought to have found asleep in their Beds, he
commanded some Squadrons to descend, and charge them at full Speed; and the
light Arabian Horses, running as freely upon these Sands, as if they had been
upon firm ground, they made a furious discharge of their Arrows, and then
retreated to their main Body, in a little time returning again in greater
numbers, shooting always without coming nearer than the distance of their
Arrows, and without danger of being pursued by the Christians, who did not
without difficulty advance over the heavy Sands; so that wheeling and running
round about the Army all day, they harassed them till Night, a Night that was
to be spent in Arms, without repose, and repast, and without the Possibility of
advancing or retreating, and in nothing but miserable trouble and waking
despair, in which they were overwhelmed.

And indeed their Fortune was much more deplorable, the next morning, when the
whole Army of the Sultan being joined to the Garrison of Gaza, encompassed them
on all sides, and without fear attacking the poor Soldiers already half dead,
and almost unable to carry their Arms, they came to charge them with the Sword
and Lance. The Christians indeed performed in despite of their Fortune all
that could be expected from men of Courage, and infinitely above their
Strength; but there was a necessity that they must yield to multitude with
which they were oppressed, most of them being either slain or taken that
miserable day: Henry, Count de Bar, one of the most Valiant Princes of his
time, Simon, Count de Clermont, the Lords, John de Bars, Robert Malet,
Richard de Beaumont, and many others of the Bravest and most remarkable men,
remained dead upon the place; The Constable Amauri, and seventy other great
French Lords, after having fought most courageously, and by their long
resistance given an opportunity to the Duke of Burgundy to make his escape,
were taken Prisoners and carried in Chains to Grand Caire. Thus ended this
unhappy Jealousy, Ambition, and Vain Glory, which were governed by rashness
and Imprudence in this fatal Encounter of our Ancient Worthies, whose
misfortune may teach all the Gallant men of our times, that they can never be
truly Brave unless their Courage be regulated by Prudence in the Commanders,
and Obediences in the Inferior Officers and Soldiers.

This unfortunate news did so astonish all the rest of the Army, which was at
Ascalon, in no very good understanding among themselves, that they presently
returned to Ptolemais, where the divisions, which continued still among them,
as well as between the Sultans of Egypt and Damascus, completed the loss of
all, by two most Shameful Treaties with the Infidels. For the Templers, who had
one part of the Army on their side, made a Truce with Nazer, Sultan of
Damascus, Beaufort and Saphet, with all the Territory of Jerusalem, and that
they should assist him with all their Forces against Melech-Salah, Sultan of
Egypt, who had dethroned his Brother Edel to possess himself thereof: and the
Hospitallers, supported by the King of Navarr, the Dukes of Burgundy, and
Bretany, and the other part of the Army, made a truce quite opposite to this
with the Sultan of Egypt against the Sultan of Damascus. After which the King
of Navarr, the Duke of Bretany, and the greatest part of the Cusades, embarking
in the Port of Acre, returned into their own Country, almost at the same time
that Richard, Earl of Cornwall, Brother to King Henry the third of England,
arrived in Palestine with good Troops of English Crusades.

This Prince, who following the Example of his Uncle Richard Coeur de Lion, had
taken the Cross with a great Party of the Nobility and Gentry of England,
embarked at Dover about Whitsontide, and landing in France, passed to Paris,
where he was magnificently received by St. Lewis, who lodged him in his Palace,
and caused him to be royally treated, and conducted to Lions, from whence
passing by Roan, to Arles, where he was to be received by Count Raymond de
Provence, he came to Marseilles, and about the middle of September, he embarked
upon the Fleet, which he had sent through the Straits, and upon the eleventh of
October, in fifteen days after the departure of the King of Navarr, he came to
Anchor in the Road of Ptolemais. The Sarasins had a strange fear upon them, for
this Prince, whose very name was formidable to them, renewing the memory of the
famous Richard, King of England, who by his mavelous Feats of Arms was so
terrible to these Infidels, that the Women were wont to quiet their Children
when they cried with threatening them with King Richard; and the Horsemen to
make a Skewish boggling Horse go forward, would commonly say to him in clapping
their Spurrs to him, What? do think it is King Richard? And certainly his
Nephew wanted neither Spirit nor Courage, neither Money nor Conduct, to support
a name so great, and so terribly to the Sarasins. He did all that could be
expected from a very great Prince, to put things into a Condition, so that it
might be hoped the War against the Infidels might be happily prosecuted; for
within three days after his arrival he caused it to be proclaimed by the sound
of Trumpet through the whole City, That if any one of those, who remained in
the Holy Land, stood in need of Money, he would furnish them during all the
time of their Service. But he quickly learnt, that in the deplorable condition
to which matters were reduced, by the division, which still continued among the
principal Officers, and above all the Templers and Hospitallers, there was no
appearance of succeeding by the way of Arms.

And therefore seeing that it was impossible to bring them to any agreement,
and that the Sultan of Damascus did not at all observe the truce, whereas he of
Egypt offered to continue it, with new advantages to the Christians, he
resolved at last by the advice of the Duke of Burgundy, the great Master of the
Hospital, and the greatest part of the Crusades, to accept of it upon these
conditions, That all the Prisoners an each side, and especially those, who were
taken at the Battle of Gaza, should be set at liberty; and that the Christians
should enjoy certain Lands, which the Sultan possessed in Palestine. Mean time
the Earl, whilst he staid for the ratification of the Treaty, caused a
Fortress to be built near Ascalon, which was finished before his departure.
After which the Sultan, who acted like his Father, Meledin, with great
Sincerity having signed and ratified the Treaty, which he caused to be approved
by all his Emirs, he sent back all the Prisoners together with the Constable of
Montfort, who during his Imprisoment had been treated more rigorously than all
the others, in regard that out of his Generosity he could never be persuaded to
discover the quality of the Barons, who were in Captivity with him. After which
Richard, having caused the bones of the French, who were slain in the Battle of
Gaza, to be gathered up, and honorably interred in the Church yard at Ascalon,
reimbarked upon his Fleet and steered toward Italy.

The Ship, which carried the Constable Amauri, put in at Otranto, where this
Illustrious Count died by a kind of Martyrdom by the hardships which he endured
in his Captivity; happy in this that he had spent the best part of his Life,
either in Combating against the Albigensian Heretics, Sarasin Infidels for the
Interests of Jesus Christ, of whom he had the Honor to be a Knight after a
most particular manner, and such a one as does not afford us another Example
besides himself. For Count Simon, his Father, General of the Holy League, and
the Crusade against the Albigenses, having made a great meeting of Barons and
Bishops at Castelnau-d'-Arry, upon St. John Baptist's day, in the year twelve
hundred and thirteen, there to celebrate with great Pomp and magnificence, the
promotion of his eldest Son, Amauri, to the order of Knighthood, his absolute
pleasure was, contrary the common to Custom, that the Ceremony should be
performed by the Bishops. And for this purpose addressing himself to two of the
greatest Prelates of their time, Manasses, Bishop of Orleance, and William,
Bishop of Auxerre, who was afterward removed to Paris, and who were two
Brothers of the Illustrious House of Seignelay, whose name they bore, he
obliged them notwithstanding all their modest resistance to satisfy him,
telling them, that since he was resolved that his Son should be a Knight of
Jesus Christ, it was reasonable that he should receive that order by the Hands
of the Bishops, who represent Christ Jesus, our Master and our King. Thereupon
the Bishop of Orleance in his Episcopal Habits, having celebrated Mass in a
most magnificent Pavilion, which was erected in the Field of Castelnau-d'-Arry,
which was filled with Knights, Soldiers and People, the Count, and Countess his
Lady, presented Amauri before the Altar, supplicating the Bishops to give him
the order of Knighthood, to serve Jesus Christ against the Enemies of his Holy
Name; then the Bishop who officiated, and William, Bishop of Auxerre, kneeling
down, girded the Sword about him, and by their Prayers begged the Blessings of
Heaven upon this new Knight, who about three Months after signalized himself in
the memorable Battle of Muret, where his Father with less than two thousand men
defeated a hundred thousand Albigensians and Aragoneses, under their King,
Peter, who was slain upon the field with twenty thousand of his men. And
afterward he performed so many gallant things, following the Example and the
orders of that great Captain, that some time after his death, King Lewis the
eighth acknowledging him for a Son, who had rendered himself most worthy of such
a Father, bestowed upon him the Sword of a Constable of France.

And as this brave Count was extremely considered by the Pope, both for his own
Merit, and for that of the famous Simon de Montfort, he caused magnificent
Funerals to be made for him at Rome, where he was interred in the Church of the
Vatican; his heart, according to his desire at his death, being carried into
France, and buried under the Monument, where his Statue lies in the Church of
the Nunnery of Hautebruiere, which is at this day more famous than ever, not
only for the rare Virtues of so many illustrious Virgins as are consecrated to
God, but also, by reason of the certainty, that besides the heart of the
Constable Amauri, and the Bodies of his Grandfather and his Uncle, Gui de
Montfort, there lies interred that of Simon his Father, that invincible
Champion of Jesus Christ, who with so much Courage and good Fortune combated
for his Glory against the Albigensian Heretics. For as they were at work in
the Year one thousand six hundred fifty six, to repair his Tomb, which is to be
seen in the middle of that Church, there were found the Bones of a man and a
Woman lying in their natural order, wrapped up neatly in Carnation Taffata,
which being compared with the inscription, gives no place for doubting, but
that these are the Bones of this famous Count, and Alice his Wise, which are
deposited in that Tomb. And this is so far from contradicting, what Peter du
Val de Sernay writes, that Count Amauri caused the Body of his Father to be
carried from the Field of Tolouse to Carcassone, that it is most conformable to
him, because he says that he caused it to be first carried thither, and that
word makes it clear to me, that he had a design to transport them to some other
place, after which, according to the custom of France in that time, that they
had separated the Flesh from the Bones with boiling Water, which the Historian
expresses by these words, Primum apud Carcassonam curatum Gallico more,
exportavit. They first did that to his Body at Carcassone, which the French
were accustomed to do, and which sometime after was done to the Body of St
Lowis, separating the Flesh from the Bones. The Flesh and the Intrals of Count
Simon were interred at Carcassone, and the Bones were transported into France
by his Son into the Earldom, Montfort-l'-Amauri. I have contrary to my custom,
made this little remark by the by, to do Justice to this Famous Nunnery, and to
show, that many times People dispute much at ramdom out of passages in Ancient
Authors concerning the Monuments they pretend to possess, either by reading
them only in Quotations, or not examining them with that exactness as they
ought, in order to their making an equitable Judgment of them. Thus it was that
the Constable Amauri de Montfort ended his days at Otranto in his return from
the Holy Land, at the same time that Richard, Earl of Cornwall, landing in
Sicily, after he had conserred with the Emperor Frederick, passed to Rome to
endeavor an accommodation of matters with the Pope, whom he found still firm
and inflexible in his refolution to have entire Satisfaction; but yet
nevertheless extremely troubled with the sad news, which he had received of the
taking of his Legates, and all the Prelates, which he had convoked to Rome.

The Pope considering the pitious condition, to which the Affairs of the
Christians in the East were reduced, and that Frederick drawing his advantage
from this ill Success, charged it all upon the Pope, to render him odious to
all the Princes; and that he became still more powerful and more hot in his
Persecutions of the Holy See, and that while the West was troubled with this
War, it was impossible for any Crusade to prosper in the East; all these
considerations had made him resolve in the preceding Year, according to the
advice of the King, St. Lewis, who passionately desired the Peace of the
Church, to call a general Council at Rome, to meet in Easter of this Year, to
which he invited all the Princes and Prelates of Christendom. Frederick himself
at first made some appearance of consenting to it, and in order thereto to
admit of a Truce with the Pope; but he presently changed his opinion, and upon
the demand that the Lombards should be also comprised in this truce, to the end
that this War might not obstruct the Freedom of passage to the Council, he took
occasion to write to all Princes, whom he endeavored to interest in his Cause,
in which Letters he complained, That this Council was not called by the Bishop
of Rome, his mortal and declared Enemy, for any other end, but to give his
Rebellious Subjects, who were at the last gasp, the leisure to take breath, and
to renew the War with more Vigor than before, at the same time when he would
condemn and depose him in a Council, wherein his Capital Enemy was to preside,
and wherein it was well known, that many People, who were Enemies to the
Empire, and others of whom he was well assured, that they were his Creatures
and dependants, were to be his Judges. That for these reasons he desired them
to advertise all the Prelates in their Dominions, that they should forbear this
Voyage, for which he could not promise them any safety, in regard, that though
for the love of the Princes, his Friends and Allies, he was ready to favor
their Subjects in all things, he was nevertheless absolutely resolved not to
permit any that should be so audacious as to go to a Council, which was called
against him by his mortal Enemy.

Mean while he caused all the Passages to be diligently guarded, taking,
imprisoning, treating ill and cruelly Massacring some of those, who adventured
to go by Land; and to guard the Sea, he set out a great Fleet, and armed out
twenty new Galleys at Naples and in Sicily, which toward the end of March
joined those of Pisa, who were of the Emperor's Party, under Entius, the King
of Sardinia. The Pope also on his side having a great Soul, as upon all
occasions, he made apparent, and a Vigor much surpassing his Age, which now
approached to a hundred years, and whose Courage was invincible in maintaining
the Rights of the Church and the Supreme dignity of the Pontificate, writ the
most curious Letters in the World to all Prelates, to exhort them by all
Considerations, both Divine and humane, to despise the Menaces of Frederick,
and generously to expose themselves to all hazards, for the Service of the
Church in the most important of all occasions, which was to hinder her from
being oppressed and robbed entirely of all her Liberty, promising them withal,
that he would take care to Arm so potently at Sea for their safe passage, that
they should have no occasion to fear their Enemies. Gregory, whom he had sent
Legate to Genoa, to spare for no charges to reinforce his Fleet with a great
number of Ships, which he was to join with those of Genoa; and the Genoeses,
who made no doubt, but they should be able to beat all that they should
encounter upon the Sea, promised with so much certainty and Considence to the
Prelates of France, Spain, England and Italy, who were come to that Port, with
the two Legates of France and England, that they would conduct them to Rome
without any manner of danger, that they resolved to venture that passage rather
than trust to the offers of the Emperor.

For that Politic Prince seeing them arrived at Genoa, notwithstanding all his
menaces, changed his method; and whether it were, that he had a design to
surprise them, or that he would thereby endeavor to persuade the World, that
he was ready on his side to make all manner of reasonable advances, toward
Peace, which could be expected from him, he offered them all the Security,
which they could desire, and in such manner as should best like them for their
free passage through Lombardy and Romanca, that so he might have the
opportunity of informing them of the Justice of his care; it being as he said,
altogether unreasonable, that, after having already been condomned by his
Enemy, Gregory, without being heard, he should also be condemned by those, whom
the Pope had called together to serve his own Passion against an Emperor, who
desired nothing but thoroughly to instruct them, after which he would willingly
submit to their Judgment. But the Prelates durst not trust to the Faith of a
Prince, who was accused not to have too great an Honor for his word; and being
encouraged by the Pope, and the Genoese Admiral, who considently affirmed
always that they should not need to fear any thing, they all in conclusion went
aboard the Fleet, except the Archbishops of Bourges and of Tours, and the
Bishops of Chartres, and some others, who not finding the Convoy, that was
promised them beyond Vienna, and judging it was not safe for them to pass any
further, returned into their respective Diocesses.

And certainly it appeared quickly after, that they had acted with reason and
foresight; for the Enemies Fleet, which expected that of Genoa in their
passage, meeting with them about Pisa; there was a necessity of coming to an
engagement, which was very fatal to the Genoese, and to all the Prelates, whom
they conducted. For three of their Galleys were sunk, two and twenty taken,
with the greatest part of the other Ships, together with the three Legates, a
hundred Ambassadors or Procurators of Cities and Bishops, four thousand
Genoese, and almost all the Prelates, who were going to the Council; among
which for France, where the Archbishops of Roan, Ausch, Bourdeaux, and
Besanson, the Bishops of Nismes, Agde, and Carcassone, the Abbots of the
Cluniaques, Cistercians, and Clairvalleys, whom Frederick, who was then at
Faenza, which after a long Siege he had taken, caused to be carried bound to
the Castle of the Egg at Naples, where the greatest part of them perished
miserably, by their long Sufferings, only the Prelates of France escaped better
by the interposition of St. Lewis, who sent to demand them of the Emperor. At
first Frederick made some difficulty to deliver them, they being, as he said,
his Enemies; but the King writ to him a Letter so reasonable, but withal so
positive, giving him to understand, on the one hand, that they had no manner of
intention to do him prejudice; and on the other, that though he had a
resolution to maintain a good understanding with the Empire, yet he was not
deposed to purchase it at the rate of so disobliging and dishonorable a
refusal of his demands; insomuch that this Prince, as fierce as he was, being
afraid to provoke a King, whom he both extremely honored and feared, in
consequence upon his more cool and deliberate thoughts, judged it convenient to
satisfy him, and therefore sent home his Bishops and Abbots into France.

In short this Accident, so fatal to the whole Church, and which ruined all the
good designs of the Pope for the Holy Land, did so afflict him, that his
extreme old Age, although wonderful vigorous, being unable long to resist the
Violence of his Grief, he died of Age, and his resentment of this Blow, about
three Months after, having for above fourteen years with mavelous Courage
steered the Ship of St. Peter, in that terrible Tempest, which had been raised
by the Quarrels, Frederick. Geossry de Chastillon, a Milanese, was thirty days
after chosen by the name of Celestine the fourth, and did immediately all that
he could by writing to the Emperor, Letters full of tenderness to sweeten his
Spirit, and incline him to restore Peace to the Church; But the death of this
Pope, which followed within ten days after his Exhaltation, hindered him from
finishing, what he had so happily begun. After his death the Holy See was
Vacant for above two years, by reason that the Cardinals always refused to
assemble, unless Frederick would deliver their Bretliren, who had protested the
Nullity of such Elections, as should be made without them, and whom the Emperor
persisted obstinately to detain all that time. But at length Baldwin the Second
the Emperor of Constantinople, who in the extremity to which his Affairs were
reduced, was come in Person to desire the Assistance of the West, wrought so
effectually upon his Spirit, already shaken by the Clamours of all Christendom,
that he restored them to their Liberty. And then by common consent Cardinal
Sinibald de Fiesque, was chosen at Anagnia, upon the twenty fourth day of June,
Innocent the fourth, which he rendered so famous by his Virtue, and by his
Knowledge in the Canon Law, of which he was called the Father.

It was the General belief of the World that this Election, would fully
reestablish the Peace of the Church, in regard that this Pope, while he was
Cardinal, had been a mighty Friend to Frederick, and that at first the Emperor,
sent to him a magnificent Embassage, to congratulate him upon his Exaltation,
to offer him whatever was in his power, by submitting himself entirely to him
in all things, the Rights and Dignities of his Empire and his Realms always
excepted. After this also he sent his Chancellor, Peter de Vignes, and Thadeus
de Sessa, who promised solemnly in his behalf, and with an Oath, that he would
stand to his Judgment, as to the satisfaction, which he was to make; insomuch
that there seemed to remain no doubt, but Peace would be concluded. But this
belief was quickly lost; for the Pope having sent his Legates to the Emperor,
to let him know that he was ready to receive him to peace and to the Communion
of the Church, provided, that he purged himself of those Crimes, for which
Gregory had condemned him; and that Innocent on his side was disposed to give
him satisfaction, if in a General Council, which should judge of it, it should
be found that he had offended. This so exasperated the Emperor, that he carried
matters to the utmost Extremities, so that the Pope finding that he was not in
safety in Italy, was obliged to take refuge in France, which has ever been the
Sanctuary and retreat of persecuted Popes.

Peter's Chair, was to reestablish Jerusalem, and to secure it to the
Christians, by procuring all the Princes of Europe to contribute to the
rebuilding of the Walls of that City, so as to render it impregnable, it was at
the same time, that he received a terrible Surcharge of grief, by the sad news,
which he received of the entire desolation of that Holy City, and the horrible
Profanation of the Sacred places by the Corasmins, whom the Tartars, who
ravaged the whole East, had chased out of their Country. And this is the
Subject, which I am next to recount, this miserable accident being the
principal Cause of the seventh and last Crusade, which was wholly managed in a
manner by the French, under the King St. Lewis.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land. PART IV.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book.
The Original of the Tartars, and their Empire. They drive the Corasmins, the
Descendants of the Ancient Parthians, out of Persia. The Irruption of these
Barbarians into Palestine. The entire Desolation of Jerusalem. The Effect which
this produced in the West. The Relation of the first Council of Lions, where
Frederick is excommunicated and deposed. The Decree of the Council for the
Crusade. The Decision of the Pope touching the Deposition of Dom Sanches, King
of Portugal. A mavelous Example of Fidelity in the Governor of Conimbra. The
Emperor's Manifest, and his Exploits. A Crusade published against him, which
hinders the Effect of the General Crusade for the deliverance of the Holy Land.
St. Lewis undertakes it singly with the French. He takes the Cross, and causes
many of the Nobility and Gentry of France, to follow his Example in the
Assembly of Paris. The Conference of Clugri for this Crusade. The Embassage of
Frederick to St. Lewis, and the wise Conduct of the King in reference to the
Emperor. The Politic Reasons to justify this Enterprise of St. Lewis, with an
account of what was done at the beginning of it. His Voyage to Aigues-Mortes,
where he takes shipping. His arrival in the Isle of Cyprus. He commits a great
Error by staying there six Months. The Death of diverse Lords there. That of
Archambald de Bourbon. The Marriage of his Granddaughter, Beatrix of Burgundy,
with Robert the fourth, the Son of St. Lewis, from whom the Princes of the
Angust House of Bourbon are descended. The Embassage of the Tartars to St.
Lewis, during his stay in Cyprus. His arrival in Egypt. The Battle of Damiata,
and the taking of that City from the Sarasins, who abandon it, and the reason
of their doing so. The Entry of the King into Damiata. The Error which he
commits by stopping there. The Army grows dissolute and debauched by lying idly
there. The arrival of the Count de Poitiers. The Resolution which is taken of
going directly to Caire. The Situation of the Places where the two Armies are
encamped. The unsuccessful attempt of the Crusades to turn the Nile. They pass
the River. The first Battle of Massore, where the Count d' Artois is slain. The
second Battle, and the admirable Actions of the King. The Plague and Famine in
the Camp. An unfortunate Retreat wherein the whole Army is defeated, and the
King, with all the Princes and Lords are taken Prisoners. An Heroic Action of
Gaucher de Chastillon in this Retreat. The admirable Constancy of the King in
his Imprisonment. His Treaty with the Sultan. The Original of the Mamalukes.
The Revolution in the Empire of Egypt by the Murder of the Sultan. The
Confirmation of the Treaty, with the Admirals. The King absolutely refuses to
take the Oath, which these Barbarians would exact from him. The Refutation of
the Fable touching the pawning of the Holy Eucharist to the Sarasins by the
King Lewis. His Deliverance, and admirable Fidelity to his Promise, and the
perfidiousness of the Egyptians.

Asiatick Sarmatia, the two Scythia's, the one on this side, the other beyond
the Mount Imaus, with the third, which was unknown to Ptolomy, from Tanais to
the Strait of Anian, was formerly called, as it is at this Day, Tartaria, from
the Name of the River Tartar, or Tattar, which discharges it self at the
farthest part of this vast Continent toward the East into the Northern Sea. It
was inhabited by an infinite number of People extremely Barbarous, who were
called Tartars and Mongols, and who for a long time lived without Cities,
without Laws, without Civil Policy, being divided into diverse Troops, who had
every one their Conductor, to lead them from time to time into diverse places
proper for the feeding of their Flocks and Herds, till such time as one named
Cyngis obliged all the rest, either by cunning or by force to acknowledge him
for their Master and their Sovereign. Then he took the Surname of Can, which
signifies Master, Prince, and Emperor; and after having instructed and
disciplined his new Subjects, he lead them, about the beginning of this
Century, into Indostan against King David, to whom they were Tributaries, and
having vanquished him in a great Battle, he put him with his whole Family to
death, excepting one of his Daughters, whom he married, and made himself Master
of all that Country where his discendants, which are called Mogols, a name of
the Tartars Reign even to this present day.

After which this Can being slain with a stroke of Lightning, his Son
Hocloda-Can, who had as much Courage and Conduct as Ambition, endeavored the
Conquest of all Asia, and having divided his Troops, whose number was infinite,
into four terrible Armies, the Conduct of three of which he gave to three of
his Sons, Cabesabada; the first of them moving Northward, seized in Europe upon
the Regions lying between the Tanais, the Taurick Chersonesus, and the Euxin
Sea, which at this time are called the lesser Tartars. The second, after having
desolated the great Armenia, and the Country of the Georgians, penetrated
Westward as far as Transylvania, Hungary, and Poland, even to the Confines of
Germany, putting all before them to Fire and Sword. The third entering into the
le^ser Asia, there defeated Gajazadin, the Sultan of Iconium, and compelled the
Turks to pay Tribute to the Tartars. The fourth having subdued all Persia,
obliged the Corasmins, the Descendants of the Ancient Parthians to go in search
of their Fortunes beyond the Tigris and Euphrates; whereupon they addressed
themselves to the Sultan of Egypt, to desire of him some place of residence,
they being driven out of their own Country by the Tartars.

This Sultan, who did not like such dangerous Guests, and yet, who was very
glad to make use of them against his Enemies, caused it to be told them, that
he left to them all the Country of Palestine, upon which they might without
difficulty seize, in regard, that the greatest part of the places there were
open, and without defense. And this he did in revenge, because almost all the
Christians of the Holy Land, following the Advice and Example of the Knights of
the Temple, having broken the Truce, which they had made with him, had
confederated against him with the Sultan of Damascus, his Enemy, upon condition
that he should relinquish to them all Palestine, from Jordan to the Sea.
Certainly there is nothing more unlawful or dishonorable than to violate ones
Faith, when once it is given, whether it be even to Infidels and Barbarians;
for he who receives it does at the same time acquire a natural Right to the
observing of it so long as the Treaty continues, except he does first violate
and infringe it himself. And the true Religion, which Christians profess, can
never, without being rendered extreme odious, be pretended as a sufficient
Reason to authorize Persidiousness, which it prohibits, and which it abhors;
and therefore we have frequently seen, that the Breach of Faith, which men have
covered with the specious pretext of Religion, as if God would permit us to
deceive those, who differ from us in their Belief, has always been followed by
some great Misfortune; which justifies the Providence of God, by making it
apparent that he is so far from approving such Infractions of mutual Treaties
and Stipulations, that he does most visibly and terribly punish such as are
guilty of them, as was manifested in this Rencounter.

For the Corasmins being assured of the Protection and the Assistance of the
Sultan of Egypt, who resolved to make use of them to revenge himself of these
Infractors of the Peace, which had been mutually sworn between him and the
Christians, instantly threw themselves all over Palestine with a fearful
Number, which covered all the Country like some mighty Inundation, which being
formed of a thousand Torrents, precipitates it self from the Mountains, and
overflows all the Banks with a furious Tempest. They did in consequence commit
the most horrible mischiefs, plundring, sacking, burning, murdering, and
ruining all before them, without resistance in this Surprise; and after having
taken and cut in pieces six thousand Christians, who upon the noise of their
approach had sled into Jerusalem, they attacked, and without difficulty forced
the pitiful Retrenchments, which had been there thrown up in have, and entering
with the Sword, they slew all they met, cutting the Throats of such as had
taken Sanctuary there, even upon the Altar of the Church of the Holy Sepulcher,
which till then had been reverenced by the Sarasins themselves; and by a
thousand execrable abominations profaning all the Sacred Places about the City;
and in short, they did what ever Cruelty, Avarice, Luxury, Impiety, Rage and
Fury, and all the most brutish Passions could inspire the most brutish and
unnatural of all mankind withal. At last, all the Forces of the Christians in
the Country being joined with those of the three Great Masters of the Military
Orders, and the Succors of the Sultans, their Allies, they came to a Battle
near Gaza, where the Corasmins had joined the Troops of the Sultan of Egypt.
The Battle lasted two days, the seventeenth and eighteenth of October, wherein
the Christians fought with more Courage, but also with greater misfortune than
ever they had done in all their former Battles.

The whole Army, was divided into three Bodies. Gantier the third, Count de
Brienne, and Jaffa, Nephew to King John, and the Son of that Count Gautier, who
died in the Conquests of the Realm of Naples, commanded the Left Hand Body,
with the Knights of the Hospital. The Sultan of Chamella or Emessa, who
conducted the Confederate Sarasins, had the Right, And the Patriarch,
accompanied with the other Knights and Barons was in the main Battle. He had
sometime before excommunicated the Count, upon his refusing to give him a Tower
in the Castle of Jaffa, to which he pretended, it being called the Patriarch's
Tower. This Prince, who was a very good Christian, and unwilling to have any
thing lie upon his Conscience, which might hinder him from courageously
exposing himself to death, demanded absolution of him two several times before
they came to charge. And as this Prelate without doubt criminally rigorous, and
too severe in an occasion of this nature, persisted obstinately in his refusal
to give it him. The Bishop of Rama, a man of great Courage, and who made use of
the Sword in this War against the Insidels, as well as of the Cross in his
Church, unable to endure that by this accident so much leisure was given to the
Enemies to range their Troops, cried out aloud, My Lord, Let not this Scruple
trouble you any longer, Let us charge. The Patriarch is in the Fault, and
therefore I absolve you in the name of the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost.
And thereupon the Count, who took it for a sufficient absolution went to the
Charge with his Lance couched, and being followed by his Valiant Bishop, he
threw himself into the thickest Battalions and Squadrons of the Enemies, in the
place where he observed the Prince of the Corasmins environed with all the most
brave of his Army.

The Sultan of Emessa also on his side did very Nobly, but he was not followed
by above two thousand of his Sarasins, the others flying upon the first Charge.
Nevertheless, the Christians, though abandoned by these Cowards, yet never
fought more bravely, being resolved rather to perish in the Field of Battle
than ever to quit it. So that after having always maintained their ground
without ever recoiling one step in two days from Morning until night: at last
oppressed by the Multitude of their Enemies, who were not only stout men, but
also infinitely surpassed them in number, and of whom notwithstandhing they
made a horrible Carnage, they were almost all either slain upon the place, or
taken Prisoners.

So great was this defeat, that there escaped with the Patriarch, Robert, and
some of the Bishops and Abbots, not above three and thirty Knights of the
Temple, six and twenty Hospitallers, and three of the Teutonick Knights, the
Constable, Count Philip de Montfort, Prince of Tire, Nephew to the Illustrious
Count Simon, and some hundreds of Soldiers, who retired to Ascalon, from whence
they came to Ptolemais, were all was in the utmost Consternation for this
dreadful loss. The great Masters of the Temple and the Teutonick Order, were
slain upon the place, and the Master of St. John of Jerusalem, was taken
Prisoner and carried in Irons into Egypt; as was also the brave Gautier de
Brienne, who after he was taken did an Action, which made him triumph even in
his Captivity over all the Forces of his Conqueror, and which doubtless
deserves to be recorded to his immortal glory. For the Prince of the Corasmins,
who thought to make advantage of his being taken, to gain the City and Castle
of Jaffa, caused the Valiant Count, to be bound under his Arms to a Cross,
which he had erected before the Gate of the Castle, telling the Soldiers of the
Garrison, who from the walls beheld this woeful Spectacle, that he would in the
most cruel manner put the Count to death, except they presently ransomed his
life by the surrender of the place. But this invincible Hero, making a
Sacrifice of his life to Jesus Christ, to save that little remainder of his
Inheritance in the Holy Land, cried to his Soldiers as loud as ever he could
from his Cross, that they should take no care for him, but leaving him to the
rage of these Dogs, to whom he should be obliged for the Crown of Martyrdom,
that they should courageously defend the place with which he had entrusted them
not only for himself, but to preserve it for Jesus Christ, for whose only sake
they had come into Palestine.

So that the Barbarian losing all hope of gaining the place by this cruel
Artifice, and not daring to attack it by main Force, he would not also lose the
opportutunity, which he had of making an agreeable Present to the Sultan of
Egypt, Sarasins of Grand Caire, who esteemed him their greatest and most
terrible Enemy, having demanded him of the Sultan, who durst not deny them,
they fell upon him with the Fury of cruel Wolves or enraged Dogs, and after
having made him suffer an Infinite number of horrible Torments, they tore him
in a thousand pieces, acquiring for him a thousand Palms, and a thousand Crowns
of Martyrdom, for one which he had wished, and which he believed he should have
obtained upon his Cross before Jaffa. Some years after St. Lewis, who had the
Memory of this great man in singular Veneration having recovered his Bones,
which the Admirals of Egypt caused to be restored to him, he rendered to him at
Acre, all the Funeral Honors which were due untohim, who had so gloriously
given his Life to the Honor of Jesus Christ. As for the Corasmins, who had
exercised so much cruelty upon the Christians, and had committed so many
horrible Sacrileges in the holy places, they afterward fell out among
themselves, and the Sultan of Egypt having drawn from them all the Service,
which he expected, he drove them out of his Dominions, so that they all
miserably perished by the hands of the Sarasins themselves, who united all
against them for their destruction, having a horror for them as the most wicked
and most execrable of all Mankind.

Mean time the news of the lamentable desolation of Jerusalem, and the defeat
of the Christian Army, and of the dangerwherein those few, which remained, were
to be presently besieged by the Sultan of Egypt, being brought to the Pope,
made him resolve to make his last Efforts, to procure Succors for them from a
General Council, which he had convoked. For this Pope, fearing to fall into the
hands of Frederick, had saved himself by Sea at Genoa, his Native Country, and
from thence he went by land by Montferrat and Savoy to Lions, where he put
himself under the Protection of the King of France; resolving to follow the
design of his Predecessor, Europe. It was held at Lions the year following, and
was opened upon the Eve of the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul the Apostles. It
was at this Council that the Cardinals received from Innocent the Red-Hat for a
distinction of their Dignity, and the Obligation which they had to loose even
their Lives for the cause of God and of his Church, especially in this
Persecution of the Emperor Frederick. The Patriarchs of Constantinople and
Antioch, as also those of Aquilea and Venice, assisted at this Council,
together with one hundred and forty Archbishops and Bishops of France, Italy,
Spain, England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Deputies of many other places, the
Abbots of Cluni, the Cistercians and Claraval, the General of the order of St.
Dominick, and the Vicar of that of St. Francis, as also a great number of other
Abbots and Priors of the same Kingdoms. There came scarcely any at all from
Germany, for fear of offending the Emperor, nor from Hungary, by reason of the
irruption, which the Tartars had made at that time into those Countries.
Baldwin, the Emperor of Constantinople, who came to desire assistance from the
Pope was there also together with Raymond, Count of Tholose, Raymond, Berenger,
Count de Provence, and the Ambassadors of the Emperor, the Kings of England,
France, and the other Christian Princes.

Affairs of the greatest moment certainly passed with wonderful Expedition, in
those times in Comparison of what they do in our days. For this great Council,
wherein matters of the Greatest Importance were treated of, the smallest of
which would now take up much a longer time, and would be discussed and debated
with extraordinary difficulty, was finished in three Sessions. In the first of
them the Pope being seated upon a Throne, which was raised in the great Church
at Lions, having at his Right hand the Emperor of Constantinople, and upon his
Left the other Princes, he made a most Pathetick Discourse, in which comparing
his pains and Grief to those of Jesus Christ upon the Cross, he said that the
Church had received five great Wounds, from which it was impossible but he must
be extremely sensible of her pain. The first, was the abuses and disorders,
which were so frequent among the Ecclesiastics. The Second, was by the
Insolence and the Tyranny of the Sarasins, Palestine from the Christians. The
third Wound was that which was given by the Schism of the Greeks, whose power,
though it had been brought down, yet now began to rise again and even to
threaten Constantinople, which was reduced to the last Extremities. The fourth
was by the furious irruption of the Tartars, into Hungary, even to the very
consines of Germany, where they filled all with Blood, Slaughter and Ruin. The
Fifth was by the terrible Persecution of Frederick, who exposed the Church to
all those Sufferings, for which Pope Gregory had cut him off from the Body of
the Church, in which he not only persisted, but daily augmented his former
guilt by new and greater Crimes. After which, the Patriarch of Constantinople,
and Valeran, Bishop of Berylus, who was sent by the Patriarch of Jerusalem to
implore the Succor of the Christians of the West, gave a Relation of the
deplorable condition, wherein the Affairs of the Latins were in Greece and
Palestine; And then Thadeus de Sessa, the Judge of the Imperial Palace, and the
Emperors Ambassador, rose up and spoke to the Council in the name of his Master.

At first, that he might gain the Favor of the Assembly, he repeated in
general, and few words, what the Pope had said concerning the Sarasins, Greeks,
Tartars, and the Emperor, and protested, that Frederick, whose Power by reason
of so many Victories, as he had gained against his Enemies, was greater than
ever it had been before, offered himself withal his heart to employ all that he
had, his Fortunes and his Arms, to reduce the Greeks to reason, and to repulse
the Tartars, and that he was ready to go himself in person, and at his own
charges, into Palestine, to drive out the Corasmins, and there to reestablish
the Affairs of the Christians, which were in such ill terms; and that in the
mean time he promised to restore to the Church whatsoever should be found that
he had taken from it, and to make all the satisfaction that could be expected,
if in any thing he had offended. To this the Pope, not doubting but all this
was said, as an Artifice to surprise and amuse the Council, only answered, that
they were not met there to talk of new promises, but to see that he performed
those, which he had already made upon his Oath, which he had so often eluded.
And then, added he, after having so often deceived us, what Caution will he
give to Warrant, that which he promises? The Kings of France and England,
boldly and without delay answered Thadeus, ought not they to be accepted? By no
means, replied the Pope, because if he should again fail in his promises, as
thereis reason enough to believe that he will, we shall be obliged to take our
remedy against these two Kings. So that the Church for one Enemy, which she
has now upon her hands, shall then have three, which are the three most
puissant Princes in all Europe.

Then Thadeus continuing his discourse to come to the point, which was in
question, and upon which he was defired to insist, he endeavored to answer
precisely to all the Crimes, which the Pope had objected against Frederick. And
being very dexterous and wonderful Eloquent, he spoke with so much Art, and
gave so soft and plausible a turn to his defense, that there were very many in
the Assembly, who appeared highly satisfied. But Innocent, who was a very able
man, and who was perfectly well acquainted with all the Circumstances of this
Affair, replied instantly to all that the Emperors Ambassador had said in
defense of his Master, and answered to every particular, with as much exactness
and Strength, as if he had been a long time before prepared, by seeing what
Thadeus would say upon this Subject. And this was what was done in this first
Session.

In the Second, which was held eight days after, upon Tuesday the fifth of
July, diverse Bishops, especially the Spaniards, who were come in greater
numbers to the Council than any other Nation, tendered an accusation consisting
in many Articles against the Emperor, urging the Pope to condemn him,
especially upon this whereon they insisted principally, That it was the
intention of that Prince, as appeared by his own Letters, to dispoil the
Ecclesiastics of all their Estates, and to reduce them to the same condition
that they were in, during the times of the primitive Persecution. The
Ambassador on the other side endeavored to satisfy the Council in every
particular of the Charge. July, where the seventeen Decrees, which were made
for the reformation of manners and discipline, were approved, as also those,
for finding out the ways to succor the Empire of Constantinople, and to oppose
the irruption of the Tartars, and for the Publication of a Crusade, against the
Sarasins, who possessed the Holy Land.

That which was decreed upon this Article was, That the Crusade should be
preached in all places; That those, who had already taken upon them the Cross,
and had not accomplished their Vow, should be constrained by the Prelates to
take it up, upon pain of Excommunication; That the Ancient Crusades, and those
who should take it up anew, should at a certain time and place to be appointed,
repair to the Pope to receive his Benediction; That there should be either a
Peace or a Truce for four years, among all the Christian Princes; That during
all that time, there should be no public Tournaments or Tiltings held; That the
Lords of the Crusade should retrench all manner of Superfluity, and Vain
Magnificence in their train, their Equipage, their habits, and their Tables;
That the Bishops should take great care to exhort their People, and especially
such upon whom they imposed any Penance for their Crimes, to contribute some
part of their Goods to the Holy War; and that they should keep an exact
Register of what was thus collected; That all the Ecclesiastics should be
obliged to pay for this War the twentieth part of their Revenue for three
years, those only excepted, who took up the Cross themselves; and that the Pope
and the Cardinals should pay the tenth to give an example to others, who might
be ashamed not to follow them. And in short, all the Privileges granted by the
Councils, and by the Popes in Favor of the Crusades were confirmed, and all
those Punishments denounced by the Bullas and the Canons against such as
enterprised any thing against the Persons or Estates of the Crusades, or
against such as favored the Pirates, or carried Arms to the Infidels, were
also ratified. And for the obtaining the aid of God Almighty, it was ordered
that Prayers should be made in all Churches in the Octaves of the Nativity of
our Blessed Lady.

After this the Cause of the Emperor, who had refused to appear, was taken into
consideration; And as his Ambassador Thadeus, perceived that the Sentence,
which was already prepared, was going to be pronounced by the Pope, he
protested aloud against it, to stop it from proceeding any further, crying, That
he appealed to a general Council. To which the Pope replied with great
Moderation, That this was one that all the Prelates and Princes had been called
to; and that if the Bishops of Germany, and some others were not present, it
was the Fault of his Master, who had hindered them from coming.

On the other part, Hugh Bigod, William de Chanteloup, and Philip Basset, the
Ambassadors of England, who favored Frederick, the Brother-in-Law of their
King, whose Sister he had married, to gain time presented to the Pope Letters
in the Name of the whole English Nation, which contained two very nice points,
wherein they demanded to have Justice done them; and which doubtless would take
up a great deal of time. The first was upon what the late King John had done,
who in despite and contrary to all right, as well as against the Inclination
of all his People, had, they said, made a Donation of England and Ireland, to
the Pope, to have the Crown for the future held of the Holy See; which they
protested was wholly null and void, the Archbishop of Canterbury, having in
the name of the whole Body of the Realm opposed it. The Second was a complaint
to the Pope that his Legates, Nuncio's and other Ministers, England, besides
the levying of the Peter Pence, made there under a thousand Pretexts such
insupportable Exactions upon the People, as they were resolved no longer to
suffer. To this, Innocent, who easily discovered the Artifice, answered coldly,
That the Council being not assembled for those matters, the discussion of them
must be deferred till some other time, wherein they might be debated more fully
and with more leisure. And then, after having acquainted the Assembly with how
much respect, Honor, and all the Testimonies of a sincere affection, he had
treated the Emperor Frederick, both before and since his Pontificate, and
acquainted them how many times, he had ineffectually endeavored to reduce him
to his Duty by mild and gentle methods, he first pronounced the Sentence
against him viva voce, and afterward caused it to be read, by which, He
declared him excommunicate; deprived him of the Empire and all his Realms, and
of all manner of Honors, preheminences and Dignities, for all those Crimes,
which are therein at large expressed, absolving all his Subjects from the Oaths
of Allegiance, which they had taken to him; and expressly prohibiting all manner
of persons under pain of Excommunication, to acknowledge him either as Emperor,
or as King, or in that quality to give him either Counsel or Aid: And at the
same time the Bishops, who held the Tapers lighted in their hands, approved and
confirmed the Sentence, and in extinguishing them, pronounced the Anathema
against him. After which, the Pope rising from his Throne, began the Te Deum,
with which Hymn this famous Council was concluded; in which, there was neither
Decree, nor Canon made concerning matters of Faith, though there were many
Heresies in those times, there being nothing made, but certain Regulations for
the Discipline of the Church; and after the Judgment, which was given against
Frederick, the Pope decided nothing, but a Politic and tender Affair of State,
in which all Sovereigns seemed to have a great Interest.

For upon occasion of this Council, the Estates of Portugal being disatisfied
with their King Dom Sanches, whom in by reason of the weakness of his Mind,
they believed unfit and unable to govern, they sent to Lions the Archbishop of
Braganza, and the Bishop of Conimbra, to request from the Pope, that he would
permit them to place upon the Throne his Brother, Prince Alphonso, who was his
presumptive Heir, and who possessed all the admirable Qualities, which could be
desired in a King. Innocent, who understood that an action of this nature might
produce very dangerous Consequences, would by no means consent to what they
desired; yet nevertheless he was willing, that Alphonso should govern in the
room of the King, to whom he ordered, that they should give a sufficient
allowance for the support of his Royal Dignity, in what ever place he should
choose for his retreat. But the most of the Governors of places would not at
all consent to this Change, which they did not believe to appertain to the
spiritual Jurisdiction, to which the Popes in Virtue of their Authority derived
from Jesus Christ, either ought to pretend, or had any Right to determine. And
consequently they refused absolutely to receive Alphonso, contrary to the Oath,
which they had taken to the King. And the Action, which was done upon this
occasion by the generous Martin Flecho, Governor of the Castle of Conimbra,
deserves the commendation of all Posterity. This brave man having maintained
the Siege against Alphonso with so much constancy, that having spent all their
Provisions, he and the Soldiers were reduced to feed upon Hides and the
Coverings of Trunks; at length a Message was sent to him, that now he might
surrender the place and yet save his Honor, by reason that Dom Sanches, the
King was dead at Toledo without Issue; he desired a Truce for so many days as
was necessary for him to go thither and return back again; which being granted,
he took Post and so soon as he came thither, he caused the Tomb of the King,
his Master, to be opened in the Presence of a Public Notary and Witnesses, and
seeing that he was really dead he put the Keys of the Castle, with which that
Prince had entrusted him, into his hands, and had it recorded; And then
returning within the Term, which he had demanded, he set open the Gates to
receive his new King; leaving to all Subjects an Illustrious Example of that
Inviolable Fidelity, which they owe to their Sovereigns; and a fair Copy for
all Soldiers, to show them in what manner they ought to defend a place they are
instrusted with, that so they may answer the expectation, of their King, who
has done them the Honor to commit it to their keeping.

Frederick; that Prince, who was then at Turin, conceived at it an extreme
grief mixed with Fury, Choler, and Contempt, which he manifested by a most
surprising Action. For causing his Crown to be brought to him, he put it upon
his Head, and then addressing himself to those about him. This Crown, said he,
which you now see upon my head, is not to be disposed of, or lost by the
Decrees of the Pope or Council; there must be other kind of Arms employed to
take it from me, and there will be whole Rivers of Blood let out before that be
done. And thereupon he writ to all the Kings and Princes of Christendom, large
Letters, in which he answered in Order to every particular point of the
Sentence, showing the nullity of it by all the reasons, which could be drawn
either from Law or Fact, and above all he endeavored to interest all Kings in
his Cause, which he said was the Common Cause of all Sovereigns. He protested
that he did in this occasion, defend not only his particular, but all their
Rights in maintaining as he did, That though those Crimes which were falsely
objected against him, and those which might be objected against any other
Princes, were undoubtedly true, yet neither Popes, nor Councils had any manner
of Right to punish them by depriving them of the least part of their Temporal
Rights, over which Jesus Christ had not given them any manner of Power, and
consequently did not in any way appertain to them to concern themselves about.
Adding further, that as he was not the first Prince in whom ambitious and
meddling Popes had endeavored to depose and dispossess of their Crowns, so he
should not be the last, unless all Kings would join with him to oppose an
Usurpation so dangerous and prejudicial to the Rights of all Crowned Heads, who
for their Temporal Dignities depended upon no other except God alone. He
remonstrated to them, that according to his observation, the source and Spring
of all this disorder was the overgrown Temporal power of the Church; and so far
was he from retracting what he had been accused for in the Council to have
said, that it was necessary to reduce the Ecclesiastics to the condition,
wherein they were in the Primitive Church, that he took God to Witness that
this was his Intention, and to begin with the greatest and the richest; and
that this was certainly a work of great Charity, to take from them those great
Riches, which were the Cause of all their disorders, and to reduce them to that
State of happy Poverty, which rendered their Predecessors like to the Apostles
by doing of Miracles, and not thinking to triumph like Kings, but by their
Sanctity, and the holiness of their Lives and Doctrine, imitating and
submitting themselves to Jesus Christ. And in short he exhorted all Princes to
join with him to take from the Ecclesiastics, of what quality soever, all that
was superfluous, to the end that contenting themselves with a little, they
might have the greater Liberty to serve God the better.

I must needs say that there are many things to be answered to this design of
Frederick, and that it is easy to oppose it with many invincible reasons. But
this shall not hinder me here from making one little remark, which so far as I
believe has never been made by any Person, and which may be of use to such as
apply themselves to reading of History. Matthew Pariso, an English man, and a
Monk of St. Albans, a rich Abbey in England, who writ in those times, declares
himself openly upon all occasions for Frederick, whom he praises rather with
the Affectation of an Orator than the Modesty of an Historian, and does so
eternally exclaim against the Popes, whose conduct he blames in a Manner, which
is displeasing even to those, who are not too favorable to the Holy See; but
in this place he turns his Style on the sudden, and his own Pittance coming to
be touched in the Revenue of his Monastry, which according to Frederick's
Design was to be retrenched; he declames fearfully against this Emperor,
saying, that by his writing at this rate he lost all the Reputation, which he
had acquired of being a Wise and Prudent Prince, and rendered himself extremely
suspected of Heresy. This makes it evident, that an interrested Writer,
changes his opinion, not only according to the Nature and Quality of the
Persons, which are changed, but according to the differing Prospects, which his
Interest gives him, in which he finds himself engaged in what he writes.
Baronius, has inserted into his Annals, printed at Rome, where the Reader may
find this and much more to the same purpose that I have recounted,

But Frederick did not satisfy himself with Writings, but pushing on his
Sentiments to all things, which his Vindicative Nature, and his Anger furiously
inflamed could transport him, there was nothing which he did not attempt, or
which he did not put in Execution to revenge himself of the Pope; persecuting
and ruining his Relations, banishing and dispoiling them of all their Estates,
as he did all the Priests and Bishops, who refused to celebrate the Divine
Offices in those places where he was; constraining all the Ecclesiastics to
pay the third part of their Revenues to maintain the War against the Pope.
Making use of Fire and Sword and all those Violent Ways by himself and his
Gibelins against all those, who were of the Pope's Party. So that the Pope was
obliged in his own defense against such a Potent Enemy to cause a Crusade to be
preached by his Cordeliers against him and his Sons, who on their side acted
with as much Violence and Ardour as their Father. Thus the Succors designed
for Constaminople, against Vatacus, the Greek Emperor, and those for Hungary
against the Tartars, were frustrated, and the Troubles of Germany and Italy,
which insued upon the Condemnation of Frederick and the Crusade which was
published against that Prince, were so many diversions, which weakened the
Principal Crusade in such a manner, that notwithstanding that, it was resolved
in the Council against the Sarasins. Of all the Kings of Europe, there was
none, except St. Lewis, who with the French only undertook the Holy War, he
having taken upon him the Cross, even before the Council of Lions.

For as in the Year before, after his return from the War of Poitu, where he
had so gloriously vanquished the Earl of March, and the English, at the Battle
of Tailebourg, he fell sick in the Month of December, and by the Violence of
the Distemper, he was reduced to that Extremity, that he was believed to be
dead, remaining without pulse and without Sense for one whole day; insomuch
that they were consulting of his Funerals, when suddenly coming, as it were,
out of an Ecstasie, and blessing God, who had drawn him from the Gates of
Death; and looking upon the Standers by, he made choice among all the Bishops,
who where assembled in his Chamber, of the Bishop of Paris, who was at that
time the famous William d' Avergne, whom his learned Writings, and the eminent
Sanctity of his life have rendered so much celebrated. He presently called him
to him and desired him to fasten a Cross to his Right Shoulder, as a mark of
the immovable Resolution, which he had taken after the example, of his
Grandfather, Philip the August, and his great Grandfather, Lewis the young, to
undertake the Holy War, for the deliverance of the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ:
and he spoke to him in a manner so resolute, either because in that Extremity
wherein he was, he had made a Vow to take upon him the Cross if it should
please God to deliver him, or else as an ancient Writer assures us, that during
this long Swoon, which Nanges calls an Ecstasy, he had a Vision in which he
thought he saw the Christian Army vanquish by the Sarasins, as it was before
Gaza, and heard a Voice from Heaven, which said to him, King of France, Go and
revenge this irreparable Loss. Let it be how it will, it is certain, that
notwithstanding the Prayers and the Tears of the two Queens, his Mother and his
Wife, who conjured him upon their Knees to deferr the taking of such a
Resolution till he was in a better condition, he protested that he would
neither take any nourishment, nor Medicin, till such time as he had received
the Cross. Insomuch that in conclusion the Bishop of Paris, all in Tears,
fastened the Cross upon him, whilst the Queens, the Princes, his Bothers, and
all those who were present began afresh to weep as if he had again been at the
point of death; but he on the contrary with a pleasant Countenance and a
perfect assurance, notwithstanding his extreme weakness, Palestine, with many
Knights of the Temple and Hospital to encourage the Christians of Syria, to
defend themselves vigourously against the Forces of Egypt in Expectation of his
coming in person to their assistance.

Hereupon Pope Innocent in Execution of the Decree of the Council of Lions,
touching the Crusades, sent Cardinal Eudes of Castle- Roax, Bishop of Tusculum,
his Legate, into France, to publish it in that Realm. The King received him at
Paris, with all kind of magnificence, and to give the greater weight to the
Publication of the Crusade, he called to meet in the Month of October, in the
Octaves of St. Dennis, a great assembly of the Princes, Prelates, and Barons,
where he spoke so powerfully to animate them to the Holy War, taking upon him
the Office of a Preacher after the Legate, that the greatest part of the
Assembly following his example, took upon them the Cross. The most Illustrious
and signal among them were the three Princes, the Brothers of the King,
Alphonsus, Count de Poitiers, Robert, Count d' Artois, and Charles, Count d'
Anjou. The Princesses, their Ladies, imitating the example of the Queen, who
resolved to go along with the King, also took upon them the Cross. So much
Piety and Courage, so much love had they for these three brave Princes, their
Husbands, that they would also partake with them, the pains and the dangers of
this War, leaving to them all the Glory, to which their Sex would not permit
them to pretend. Also Hugh, Duke of Burgundy, Peter, Duke of Bretany, William,
Earl of Flanders, Hugh de Chastillon, Count de St. Paul, and Gautier de
Chastillon, his Nephew, Hugh de Lusignan, Earl of March, and his Son Hugh the
Brown, followed them, together with the Counts de Dreux, de Bar, de Soissons,
de Blois, de Retel, de Montfort, and de Vendosme. The Lords, John de Beajeu,
Constable of France, John de Beaumont, Admiral, and great Chamberlain of
France, Philip de Courtenay, Guion de Flanders, Archambald de Bourbon the
Younger, Raoul de Couci, John de Bars, Gaubert, and John de Apremont, Giles
de Mailli, Robert de Bethune of Arras, Oliver de Terms, and Simon, Count de
Sarbruc, and Lord de Comerci, Companion in Arms with the famous Seneschal de
Champagne, John Sire de Joinville, so celebrated for the gallant Actions, which
he performed in this Voyage for seven years, and for the History, which he writ
of the great Actions of St. Lewis, and for the extraordinary Esteem in which he
was to this great Prince for one of the most Wise and most Valiant Knights of
his time, insomuch that he thought him worthy to be honored, with being his
particular Confident. There were also many great Prelates, who resolved to be
of this Crusade, as Jubellus, de Mathfellons, Archbishop of Rheims, the Holy
Man Philip Berruier, Archbishop of Bourges, most Illustrious by his Virtues,
by his Doctrine, and by his Miracles, Robert de Cressonsart, Bishop of
Beauvais, Garnier, Bishop of Laon, William de Bussy, Bishop of Orleance, and
lastly the Cardinal Legate, whom the Pope had designed, not only to publish the
Crusade in France, as he did in many Provinces, but also to accompany the King
in this War.

It was with this magnificent and fair train of Lords of the Crusade, that
Lewis, accompanied with the Queen Blanch, his Mother, came about the end of
November, to the Famous Abbey of Cluny, where the Pope, who was arrived there
from Lions, met him with twelve Cardinals, the Patriarch of Constantinople, and
a great number of Prelates, to conferr with the King, where in Person he
celebrated the Mass in his Pontificalibus, upon St. Andrew's day. It is said
that this Famous Abbey, was then of so great extent, and had so many
appartments, that the Pope, the King, the Queen, the Cardinals, the Princes,
Prelates, and Lords, were all lodged most commodiously there with their
Domestics, without giving any disturbance to the Religious, or obliging them
to quit their Chambers, or any places in the Monastry, which were designed
either for their Service or for the performance of their Functions. The Pope,
the King and Queen Blanch were there for seven days in continual secret
Conferences, which as it was believed, were principally to treat of a
Reconciliation, Crusade; but all came to nothing, although this did not hinder
King Lewis, who was equally Wise and Religious, and who would not enter
further, into that Affair than became him, from living perfectly well with the
Pope, and yet without breaking with Frederick, who at the same time did what
lay in his Power, to preserve himself in Amity with the King.

And truly not contenting himself only to have writ in his own defense, as he
did to other Kings presently after the Council of Lions, he sent to him the
year following, the famous Peter de Vignes, his Counselor, and William d'
Ocre, one of the principal Ministers, with Letters addressed to all the French,
by which, after having complained of the Enterprises, which he pretended the
Pope's abusing their Power, made upon the temporal Rights, both of Princes and
private Persons, in many differing ways, which he exposed; he protested, that
provided this abuse were reformed, he was ready to submit to the Judgment of
the King and his Barons, all the differences, which were betwixt him and the
Pope; and moreover provided, that either the Lombards, were obliged to give him
that Obedience, which was due to him; or in case of their refusal, that whilst
he endeavored to compel them to it, the Pope should not support them in their
Rebellion, he promised to go to the Conquest of the Holy Land, either by
himself, or with the King of the Romans, or to send thither the King his Son,
as King Lewis should judge to be most convenient, and not to give over the
Enterprise, until the Christians were put into possession of the whole Realm of
Jerusalem. And if this Peace could not be had upon these reasonable Conditions,
yet he offered the King to furnish him with Provisions for his whole Army, with
shipping and all the Assistances, which he could wish from him, either by Sea
or Land. And to make it appear, that he would perform, what he had promised, he
writ to all his Officers in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, giving them
Orders to furnish the King liberally at the price Current, during the whole
time of the War in the East, with Arms, Horses, Victual, and all manner of
Provisions, forbidding all manner of Persons to hinder the transportation of
them upon any pretext whatsoever. These Letters, which were sealed with the
Golden Bulla of Frederick, and dated in the Months of Sptember and November, in
the year 1246, Chartres, and are inserted at large in the learned observations
of Monsieur du Cange, upon the History of St. Lewis, written by the sire
Joinville. And certainly it must be said, that this Prince did not make only
vain and Verbal Offers of his Service, either to amuse the King, or to acquit
himself of a pure piece of Civility without any other effects: For he gave such
orders in all his Ports, and especially in Sicily, for the transporting of
Wines, Corn, and all kind of refreshments into the Isle of Cyprus, where the
King erected his Magazins, that the Army found there a prodigious abundance of
all things necessary for their subsistence; so that the King held himself
mightily obliged to this Prince, and the Queen Mother writ to him Letters full
of acknowledgments, testifying her real sense of his kindness by magnificent
presents, which she sent him; adding that, which without doubt was most
agreeable to him, by confessing that all France was obliged to him for the
Conservation of the Kings whole Army.

In the mean^htime St. Lewis, who owed the first of his Care to his Dominions
made no great haste of his departure, by reason that he was resolved first to
finish what remained to be done before he engaged in so long and dangerous a
Voyage; And indeed it must be said, that such persons as speak not very
favorably of this expedition of St. Lewis, either are no great Politicians, or
else most unreasonable and unjust. For it is impossible that there could be
taken a more favorable Conjuncture, more just Measures, or more safe
Precautions than those which he took upon this occasion, to make an Enterprise
of this nature successful, to the Honor of France, without running any
manifest hazard; an Enterprise wherein in those times the greatest Princes of
the World thought the greatest of their Glory did consist. For all his Kingdom
enjoyed a profound Peace, after the glorious Victories, which this Prince, who
was one of the most valiant and wisest that ever Reigned in France, Bretany,
the Counts of Toulouse and March, and over the King of England, and the Prince
Richard, his Brother, who had endeavored to support the Earl of March, and by
a pretty piece of Policy he carried along with him all the Princes, and all the
Great men of the Realm, who might give any Suspicion, or the least occasion to
fear, that they had either the Power, the Will, or the Temptation during his
absence to trouble the Repose of his Dominions. For of the two most mutinous
Spirits, of whom he had most reason to be distrustful, he took one of them,
which was the Earl of March, along with him; and the other, which was Raymond
the Young, who was Earl of Toulouse, who had also taken upon him the Cross,
died before the Voyage, leaving his Dominions to Alphonsus, the King's Brother,
the Count of Poitiers, who had married the Princess Joanna, his Daughter and
Heiress; and the King, for his greater assurance, sent that Prince to establish
himself in his new Dominion of Languedoc before he imbarqued himself, as he
afterward did, to go and join him in the East.

Moreover he deferred his Voyage for almost four Years, to take the advantage
of two fair occasions, which presented themselves, the one to reunite the
County of Mascon to the Crown, which he bought of the Countess, who, after she
had distributed the money, for which she sold it to the poor, retired to the
Nunnery of Maubuisson, and there professed herself: the other was to bring the
County of Provence into the Royal House, which had been separated from it for
above three hundred Years. For Raymond Berenger, the Fifth of the Name, and the
last of the Catalonian Family, who had reigned in Provence, being dead the year
preceding, the King knew with so much Art how to gain Romee de Villeneuve, and
Albert de Tarascon, the Trustees and Guardians of the Princess Beatrix, the
remaining Daughter of the four, which Count Raymond had had, who was Sister to
the Queen, and the Heiress to the Count; that he obtained her for Charles d'
Anjou, his Brother; and without losing of time, advancing toward Provence with
one part of the Army, which was ready for the Holy War, he broke all the
measures of James the King of Aragon, Cousin German to the deceased Count, and
hindered his carrying the Princess away by force, as he had designed if he
could not procure her by other ways, in order to oblige her to marry his Son,
and by that means to retain this fair County in his Family, which lay so
conveniently for him. During this time Lewis had all the leisure which could be
reasonably desired to make his preparations and provisions, England also. For
he prolonged the Truce, which had been made with that King two or three Years
before, after the Victory of Taillebourg, and also engaged the Pope to be the
Guarranty that it should be inviolably observed, as it was during all the time
of his absence, although the English hearing of his being taken Prisoner
endeavored to break it. In short, this Wise Prince neither went as the first
Crusades had done by Land, and thereby he avoided the dangers, into which they
had fallen, of perishing by Famine, and the miseries which attended those vast
Desert Countries, which were possessed by the Barbarians, neither did he go
with a confused Multitude of all manner of Persons and People, who were to be
gotten together, who served for no other purpose, but to put all into disorder;
but with a good Army consisting in betwixt thirty and forty thousand men, which
was such a number as the Great Alexander had when he went to the Conquest of
Asia; but this Army was composed for the greatest part of Gentlemen, and choice
Soldiers, such as were capable of marching over the bellies of all that Egypt
and Syria could oppose against them, unless some accident should happen, or
some extraordinary misfortune befall them, against which no humane Prudence can
give any Warranty or Assurance. And that which was most considerable, the whole
Army was absolutely at his disposal, in regard that it consisted wholly of
French; for the King of England would not permit the Bishop of Berytus, who
went thither to preach the Crusade, to publish it in his Dominions, alleging
that he stood in need of all his Subjects to defend himself against his
Enemies, if they should attack him.

King Lewis having wisely provided all things necessary for his Voyage, which
he undertook in his very prime strength, being about three and thirty Years of
Age, he had nothing further to do but to take care of the Government of his
Realm in his absence, and this he left to his Mother, Queen Blanch, the most
able Woman, and most capable of Governing of any of her time; after which he
went, according to the Custom of those Ages, to St. Dennis, to receive the
Oristame, the Scarf, and the Pilgrim's Staff, which he did in great Solemnity,
for he parted from Paris upon the Friday after Whitsunday, in the year 1248.
accompanied with the two Princes, his Brothers, the Legate, Crusade, being
preceded by all the Processions of the whole City, which were followed by an
infinite number of People, who, all in tears, marched from the Palace to the
Nunnery of St. Antonina, singing Psalms and Letanies for the prosperity of his
Voyage. From thence he went by Burgundy to Lions, where he made his Entry with
all manner of Magnificence, for never any King was better acquainted with the
Art of making his Royal Majesty most conspicuous in those Public Ceremonies,
where he was minded to show it; and the Historians of that Age inform us, that
among other remarkable Circumstances of this Magnificent Entry, there were an
hundred Knights, who being completely armed, and mounted upon their great
charging Horses, caparisoned with their Coat Armor, according to the manner of
those times, marched before him with their Swords drawn in their hands; and
this is that which our present King, who in Magnificience and Grandeur
surpasses all his Predecessars, has revived in our days, to render to the
Majesty of our Kings, that which St. Lewis himself, as great a Saint as he was,
judged necessary upon some occasions, for the manifesting his Luster and his
Greatness.

After this, the Holy King having again conferred with the Pope, who kept his
Court at Lions, descended by the Rhone, and went to take Shipping with the
Queen upon the twenty fifth of August, at Aigues-Mortes, where the greatest
part of his Fleet waited for him, the remainder being at Marseilles, there to
take in the rest of his Army. After which setting sail upon the twenty seventh,
he arrived about the twentieth of September in the Isle of Cyprus, where the
other Ships, which came from Aigues-Mortes, and Marseilles, sooner or later, as
the Troops came up, which were to be imbarqued upon them, came to join him in a
little time after.

There it was that St. Lewis committed a great Error, which must not be
dissembled, and which most assuredly was the cause of his Misfortune, by
following, against his own Judgment, the advice of the Lords of his Army, and
the Barons of the Isle of Cyprus; For one part of them being very glad to
repose themselves, and the other to have time to prepare themselves for the
Voyage, which they promised to undertake with the French, and they lay so
continually at him, that they persuaded the King contrary to his Inclination to
stay in the Island till after Easter, pretending that the Winter was now
approaching, and that it was most convenient to expect the coming up of several
other Troops, which were to arrive; and this occasioned two great Mischiefs;
For first, the Waters in the Island were nothing so wholesome, as those of
Egypt, and the Air was very bad, and not at all favorable to Strangers, who
were not accustomed to it, by reason whereof Diseases fell into the Army, and
considerable numbers of them died, and diverse even of the first Quality to the
number of at least an hundred and fifty, among whom were extremely regretted,
the Counts de Dreux, Vendosme, St. Paul, and Montfort, the Bishops of Beauvais
and Noyon, and the Illustrious Archambaud de Bourbon. This is he, who was the
last of the Race of the Archambauds, who having held, during the time of seven
Counts of that name, Bourbon, and a great part of Avergne for three hundred and
eight years, lost them happily for the Glory of that House, by the Heiress
thereof, marrying into the August Race of St. Lewis, there to revive again in
the most glorious manner in the Descendants of that King, who are raised, as we
see them at this day, with greater Splendor than ever, to one of the tallest
Thrones of Christendom. For the Prince John de Burgogne, the second Son of Hugh
the Fourth, who was of this Crusade, having married Agnes, Archambaud, had by
her only one Daughter, Beatrix de Burgogne, a Princess of the Blood of France,
by her Father, and Heiress of Bourbon, by her Mother. Robert of France, the
fourth Son of St. Lewis, and Count de Clermont in Beavoise, married this
Princess Beatrix, by whom he had Lewis, who took the Surname of the Inheritance
of his Mother, and was the first Duke of Bourbon; and from him, by James de
Bourbon, Constable of France, his second Son, are descended the Princes of that
Royal House, of which the Eldest, after the Race of Valois was Extinct,
succeeded to the Crown of France, from Henry the Great, whose Grandson Lewis
fourteenth, the Inheritor of his admirable Virtues, and the glorious Surname of
The Great, has with the Crown rendered that Name the most August, and the most
revered of all the Earth, which he has received from so many Kings, his
Predecessors, accounting from this St. Lewis, to whom he is the Twelfth in a
Lineal Succession. And I cannot believe that this Digression will be
disagreeable, which I make of this Genealogy upon so favorable an opportunity,
since it falls in so naturally with the Subject of my History, which I now am
about again to pursue.

The second ill consequence which this too long stay in the Isle of Cyprus
produced, was the leisure, which was thereby given the Sarasins, who were then
at War among themselves, to reunite, or at least to suspend their private
quarrels, to put themselves into a condition to oppose the Forces of the
Christians. And in truth, when the King came to Land in the Isle of Cyprus, the
Sultan of Egypt, who sometime before had seized upon Damasous, and all the
other Sultans upon his hands, who were united against him for their common
defense, and would not treat at all of any peace, as he desired, unless he
would first withdraw his Forces out of Syria. He was himself sick at Damascus,
and fearing that the Christian Army should in the mean time fall into Egypt, he
was at last obliged at least to obtain a Truce from the Sultan of Alepo, and to
draw off his Army from before Emessa, which he had besieged; so that if St.
Lewis in stead of stopping in Cyprus, had gone directly to attack Egypt, he had
found it without any Forces capable of resisting him, and might have made
himself Master of it, with very little difficulty. Whereas during these six
Months, which were spent unprofitably in this Island, the Sultan of Egypt had
all the time and opportunity, which he could desire to accommodate matters with
the Sultan of Alepo, and to recover of his Distemper; as also to draw his Army
into Egypt, and there to raise new Troops, and put all things into a posture to
receive the Christians: on the contrary, the King's Army was extremely weakened
by this long time of lying still; and besides consumed all the great
Provisions, which had been made; insomuch, that unless the Emperor, Frederick,
and the Venetians to whom he made applications for Provisions, which the Isle
could not furnish him withal, and who served him with it, in a manner
infinitely obliging, had not furnished him, he had been constrained to return
into France, without doing any thing at all.

It was during his stay in this Island, and toward the end of the Year, that
he received from Nicosia the Ambassadors of one of the Tartarian Princes, whose
name was Ercalthay, and, who was then in the most Eastern Parts of Persia.
After they had presented their Letters of Credence, which were written in the
Persian Language, and in Arabic Characters, and translated into Latin by
Father Andrew, a Monk of the Order of St. Dominick, who had formerly known
these Ambassadors in Persia, whither he had been sent by Pope Innocent, they
informed the King, that the Great Cham of Tartary had about three Years before
been baptized, having been converted by the good Example and the Exhortations
of the Empress, his Mother, the Daughter of a King of the Indians, she having
always been a Christian; That their Master, Prince Ercalthay, who had also for
a long time been a Christian, had been sent by the Great Cham, with a Potent
Army against the Calife of Baldac, as great an Enemy of the Christians, as the
Sultan of Egypt. That that Sultan to afright the Sultan of Mussule, or Nineveh,
who was also a Friend of the Christians, had written to him, that the King of
France, being come to attack Egypt, had been defeated at Sea, and had lost
above sixty of his Ships, which had been carried in Triumph into Damiata. They
added, that their Master had not doubted but that this Defeat by the Egyptians
was a pure Fiction; Egypt, he had sent them to inform his Majesty, that he was
marching to besiege the Calife in Baldac in the beginning of the Summer, and
therefore requested him at the same time to attack Egypt; and that the Sultan
and the Calife being thereby hindered from mutually assisting the one the
other, they might both of them with more ease come to the ends, which they had
proposed. All this, which these Ambassadors had related, and the account which
they gave of the puissance of the Tartars, was exactly conformable to the
Letters, which the Constable of Armenia, who had made a Great Voyage into
Tartaria, had before written to the King of Cyprus; so that St. Lewis received
them with an incredible joy, February, that so he might treat with them with
more deliberation. After which he dispatched them, laden with Noble Presents,
together with Father Andrew, and two other Religious of his Order, two
Cordeliers, two Secular Ecclesiastics, and Gentlemen Attendants, whom he sent
Ambassadors, some to the Prince Ercalthay, and others to the Great Cham, with
most Magnificent Presents, both for the one and the other. There was sent to
the Great Cham, among other Rarities and curious Pieces of great value, a most
Sumptuous Tent of Scarlet, in form of a Chapel, where was to be seen in rich
Embroidery, all the Mysteries of the Life and Passion of Jesus Christ,
admirably represented in Silk raised with Gold, there was also belonging to the
Chapel sent all the necessary Ornaments and Furniture for the Celebration of
the Divine Offices; as also to each of them a small piece of the Wood of the
Holy Cross; and the King writ to them Letters full of the Spirit of Religion,
with which his Soul abounded, in which he exhorted them to persevere in the
love of God, who by his Grace had been pleased to illuminate their Minds. and
had called them to the happy knowledge of himself. The Legate also on his part
did the same, writing to the Mother of the Great Cham, and to all the
Christians of that huge Empire, exhorting them to take great care to preserve
themselves in the true Faith, and the Unity of the Catholic Church, under the
Obedience of the Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth.

After this the King spent the rest of the Winter in pacifying some troubles
among the Christians, especially those of Syria and Palestine, and in according
the differences, which were between the King of Armenia, and the Princes of
Antioch, who were continually in some quarrel or other. He caused also a great
number of slat bottomed Boats to be built in order to the landing of his men;
and at last after he had assembled all his Troops, who were with part of his
Ships in the neighboring Islands, and had received a reinforcement from
Europe, of about two hundred English Gentlemen, conducted by William Longsword,
Earl of Salisbury, who were resolved to have a share in this War, and after he
had escaped the Treachery of certain Sarasins, who were come disguised into
Cyprus with intention to poison him, he imbarqued the Week before Whit sunday,
together with Henry, King of Cyprus, and set sail for Egypt. But being by ill
weather, which separated his Fleet, driven into Limisso, he parted the day
after the Feast from that Port, and with a fair gale of Wind arrived in four
days before Damiata, which place he resolved to besiege.

Damiata, of which I have formerly given the description, both as to its
Situation and Strength, was at this time nothing so well fortified, as it was
when about thirty Years before it was taken by the Christians, after a Siege of
eighteen Months; neither was it defended by such gallant men as those, who
sustained that long Siege; and the Sultan of Egypt, Melech-Salah, although he
was a great Soldier, yet was much declined from his first Vigor, being in a
weak and languishing condition, by reason of the great Sickness, which he had
had during the Winter at Damascus. Nevertheless, as he did expect, that the
King would make his first attempt against the City of Damascus, which was the
Key of Egypt, he brought thither all the Army, which came with him from Syria;
and so soon as the Signal was given from the Tower of Pharus, that the
Christian Fleet appeared, he ranged his Army along the Shore, and caused his
Ships and Galleys to descend to the Mouth of the Nile; French, were two great
Armies, one by Sea, to oppose their Entry into the River; the other by Land
upon the Brink of the Shore to hinder their descent, from which two Armies they
heard the terrible noise of their Instruments of War, and the dreadful shouts
of so many millions of Sarasins, as made the Arched Roof of Heaven resound
again; the Sultan himself, as ill as he was, would put himself at the head of
them, armed completely from head to foot in his fairest Arms, all of fine Gold,
and sparkling with precious Stones, which receiving a mavelous reduplication
from the shining Beams of the Sun cast such glittering Rays, as made him seem
all on fire.

Hereupon the King held a Council with the King of Cyprus, the Duke of
Burgundy, and William Hardoum, Prince of Achaia, who came from Morea, John d'
Ybelin, Count de Jaffa, who was come from Palestine, and with the rest of the
Princes and Great Lords. They were all in the Opinion, that they ought not to
endeavor a descent in View of two such great Armies, they having not the third
part of the number of their Enemies, and that they ought rather to expect the
arrival of those, who had been separated by the Tempest, among whom there were
above twelve hundred Knights, who were the choice men of the Army. But the King
maintained the contrary opinion, and made it clearly appear, that if they
deferred it any longer, they might put themselves in evident danger of losing
all, in regard that they had no Port, to which they might retire and secure
themselves from a sudden Tempest, which as it had done before, might chance to
overtake them, and either separate them, or force them ashore upon the Enemies
Coasts. And that besides this delay, would not only give the Enemies an
increase of Courage, but the time to retrench themselves with greater
advantage. This resolution of the King, and the Power of his reasonings, having
dissipated the Fear, which they had, That they should not succeed in their
attempt with so small a number, it was ordered that the next morning, they
should move directly against the Enemies if they should again appear, to
dispute the descent the day following accordingly, being the Friday after
Whitsunday, the greatest part of the Knights and Soldiers, descending from the
Ships in their Arms into the Shallops and flat-Boats, which were built in the
Isle of Cyprus for the purpose, the King ranged them in two great Lines, which
extended upon a long Front, to possess the whole length of the Bank, upon which
the Enemies stood in Battalia, in the same posture as the day before, only the
Sultan was not there, by reason that his sickness increasing, he had caused
himself to be carried to a Country house, about a League from Damiata. The King
was upon the right hand accompanied with the two Princes, his Brothers, the
King of Cyprus, the other Princes, and the Flower of the Nobility and Knights,
who encompassed him with their Boats; He was in his with the Cardinal Legate,
who himself carried his Cross, which he held up aloft to animate the Soldiers
by beholding the Savior of the World represented, dying for them, and for
whose sake, they were going to expose their Lives. The Bark, which carried the
Oriflame or Banner of St. Dennis, went before all those, which accompanied the
King; The Count de Jaffa was upon the Left hand, drawing toward the Mouth of
the River, and appeared at the head of his Vessels, in a magnificent Galliot,
painted all over with his Arms. And Count Errard de Brienne was in the middle
of these two Squadrons, with Baldwin de Reims, who led a thousand Gallant
Knights.

As soon as the Signal was given all these Vessels began to row toward the
shore, and so soon as they approached within distance the Archers and
Cross-Bows, made a furious discharge to scatter the Enemy, who advanced to the
Bank shooting without Intermission from their side also; and at the same
instant, sooner or later found themselves aground according as the Sea was
deeper or shallower, in diverse places to which they rowed, the Soldiers leaped
out of the Boats, and advancing out of the Water upon the Sand, they drew up in
their Battalions, covering themselves with their Bucklers, and presenting the
points of their Pikes and Swords to their Enemies, who durst never so much as
once charge them. One of the first Barks, which landed, was that, which carried
the Banner of St. Dennis; which the King no sooner perceived,

Hereupon the Sarasins, whom those, who were already landed, had beaten and
repulsed twice or thrice, seeing that the whole Army began to move to charge
them in good order, and that the King himself marched at the head of his
Battalion, they no longer thought of sighting, but after a faint resistance,
the Governor of Damiata, who commanded them, being slain upon the place, with
two Admirals, and a considerable number of their men, they presently fell to
running with so much Precipitation and disorder, that they had not time to
break their Bridge of Boats, by which they entered into Damiata. And that which
was still more surprising was, that they instantly quitted the City, which was
one of the strongest in all Egypt, and after having set fire to the Magazins
and Merchants Warehouses, they marched out, and retreated toward Caire. And
to complete the good Fortune of this famous day, at the same time that the Army
gained the shore from the Enemy, and that they fought upon Land in this Heroic
manner, the great Ships and the Galleys entering almost without resistance into
the Mouth of the River, constrained the Sarasins Ships to save themselves by
Flight, as they did all, except those, who having sailed up the River as far as
the Bridge, could not pass so soon through the passage, which they had made,
but that they were taken by the Christians.

And in truth all this seemed to look like something miraculous, to see a
puissant Army, which consisted principally in Cavalry, routed in so short a
time by so few men, all on foot, and all moiled in the Mud and Water, so that
they could not land, but in small numbers, and had scarce time to draw
themselves up into some disorderly Battalions; and that the Ships, in which
there were scarce any besides the Seamen, should overcome and dissipate a great
Navy well armed; but above all, that one of the strongest Cities of the East,
which it was believed could never be taken but by Famine, should immediately
after be abandoned by men, who after all this were excellent Soldiers, and
wanted neither Skill nor resolution, as had well been made appear both in
Syria, and as too well appeared afterward in Egypt. But besides that they were
amazed at the Courage of the French, and the surprising Boldness of the King;
and that God, as it may well be believed, possessed their hearts with that kind
of Pannick fear, which makes valiant Men sometimes lose both their Judgment and
their Courage; I find that a false Rumor, which was brought them of the Death
of the Sultan, by some, who came from Caire, and which was believed to be true
by both the Armies contributed much to this extraordinary Event; in regard that
all the principal Officers, had an inclination to go directly to Caire, to take
care of their particular Interests; in this great revolution of Affairs, which
the Death of the Sultan would in probability make; so that they thought no
longer of Fighting, or of keeping a City, which they chose rather to set on
fire, than to leave it entire to their Enemies. However it was, it is most
certain that they did abandon it, and that so much of the Bridge of Boats, as
their precipitation had given them leave to break, having been in a few hours
repaired, a great part of the Army marched over and seized upon it, and having
extinguished the Fire, and cleansed the Houses, and put the great Mosquee into
the condition wherein it was, when it was consecrated to God in the Honor of
our Lady, at the first taking of Damiata, thirty years before the King made his
solemn entry into the City.

And certainly he did it in a manner, which evidently showed, that he had an
intention, that God alone should have the Honor of the Triumph of such a
memorable Victory, which had not been gained, but by the extraordinary wonders
of his Power and his Goodness. For he commanded that the Cross should enter
first, Cyprus, the Counts D' Artois and D' Anjou, marched bareheaded and
barefooted with a profound Humility, giving all the Glory to God only: he was
followed in this manner by all the Princes, the Lords, the Officers, and the
whole Army, which afterward continued there all the Summer, and the Autumn,
partly in the City and partly in the Camp, which he caused to be fortified
against the Sarasins, who endeavored to surprise it. That which made him take
this Resolution was the fear of falling into a misfortune by the inundation of
the Nilus, as the Christian Army under King John de Brienne had done. But in
regard that the River does not begin to swell till toward Mid-summer, if they
had marched presently toward Caire, and not deferred it to an unseasonable
time, as they did afterward, it is almost certain that in the disorder, which
the Sultans Sickness, and the defeat of his Army had occasioned, they might
have had time enough before the rising of the Nile, to have taken that great
City, which being not at all fortified, would upon its Reduction, have made
them Masters of all Egypt without ever drawing the Sword.

But it is the Misfortune which usually attends Prosperity, which is apt so to
Blind, and unbend Men's spirits, and to make them slacken their pace in the full
Career of their pursuit of Glory, and then to stop, when they ought by acting
most vigourosly to seek that safe Repose, which is only to be had by going
through with their great designs. The Pious King was not able to oppose the
Torrent of Opinions, which ran so impetuously strong for their stay at Damiata,
under a hundred specious pretexts, which were alleged for it; and during this
stay so fatal to their Affairs, the Army not only wasted with this long
idleness, but pulled down upon themselves the just Vengeance of the incensed
Omnipotence, by all manner of dissoluteness, and the most shameful and infamous
Debauches, into which both the Officers and Soldiers continually plunged
themselves; nor was it possible for St. Lewis by his utmost Efforts to prevent
them either by his Reproofs and Exhortations, by his orders, which were ill
observed, of by the Punishments which he did inflict upon the Criminals, in
banishing many Officers of his own household from the Court, or even by that
which is ordinarily most prevalent from Kings, by the admirable examples of all
manner of Virtues, which upon all occasions were so conspicuous in his Life and
Actions. At length, the Count de Poitiers, who had been so long expected,
arriving about the end of October, with his Sister-in-Law, the Countess D'
Artois, and a great and Noble Reinforcement of the choice Gentlemen of the
Arrier-ban, a Council was held, to consider what enterprise was to be
undertaken. And in this matter there were two Opinions, very remote and
different. The first was maintained by the Duke of Bretany, who was of Opinion
that they ought to Attack the City of Alexandria, in regard that if they could
take that place, they should thereby become Masters of all that side of Egypt;
that they should be Masters of an admirable and safe Port for the Fleet to ride
in; that they should thereby have the great convenience, not only of receiving
the Succors of Men and Provisions, which they should stand in need of, but
also be able absolutely to hinder any from coming to the Enemies by Sea. But
the Count D' Artois declared himself for the second Opinion, and strongly
argued, that as the certain way to destroy a Serpent was to crush his head; so
to finish the Conquest of Egypt in a little time, the certain way was to march
directly against Caire, which was the Capital City of the Realm. This advice,
which seemed most plausible, in regard it seemed to carry more Honor in it, was
embraced by all with great applause; and thereupon the King gave orders for the
Army to march, which they did upon the twentieth of November.

I have showed formerly that the Nilus entering into the lower Egypt, a little
below the Grand Caire, which is also the ancient Memphis, divides it self into
four Arms, which when this great River increases, as it does certainly more or
less every Year, from about the Feast of St. John the Baptist, till toward the
middle of September, it also makes several other great Channels, which remain
dry when the Waters fall, and retire within their proper shoars, from whence as
before was observed arises that opinion so common among Authors, Nilus. The
Ancient Pelusium stood upon the first of these Branches toward Palestine.
Damiata was situate upon the second Arm toward the left hand, about a good
mile from the Sea; for as for the City of that Name at this time, it stands
above two Leagues further up the River, and upon the other side; there is also
a little City called Massora on the other side the River in the Land of Goshen,
upon the Road that leads to Caire, in the place where this second Arm divides
it self from the first. And this is the true situation of these places, as
appears evidently by the Consequences of this History; and that which has
occasioned so much trouble in these matters, is the confounding of these Names,
whilst they give to the first of the Arms of the Nilus, that of Rexi or
Rossette, which at present is the Name of the Fourth, and was anciently called
Canonique upon which Alexandria stands, as the second upon which Damiata was
situate was called the Tanitique.

It was near the Angle which the parting of these two Arms of the Nilus,
formed near Massora, that the Sarasins were encamped with all their Forces,
commanded by the Emir Secedun Faroardin, the most renowned and bravest of their
Captains, to whom the Sultan Melech-Salah, who was almost ready to breath his
last, had entrusted the Government of all his Dominions, and the Conduct of his
Army against the Christians, in expectation of the return of his Son Almoadam,
whom he had sent into Syria to raise new Troops. The Kings Army which had
received a reinforcement of the Troops of the King of Cyprus, those of the
Prince of Achaia, of all the Forces of the Templers and Hospitallers, together
with those brought by the Patriarch, and the Arrierban of France, which the
Count of Poitiers had happily conducted to Damiata, consisted in sixty thousand
Men, whereof there were twenty thousand Horse; these were as many as were
sufficient to have conquered the Realm of Egypt, if they had been as well
disciplined, and as obedient to the Orders of the King, as they were brave and
resolute. But every one was for acting according to his own Opinion; and St.
Lewis, who together with his Devotion had as much Courage and Resolution, as
was capable of making him like a Hero desire to combat his Enemies without
fear of the greatest dangers, either had not power or severity sufficient to
make himself be obeyed, and to cause the discipline of War to be exactly
observed.

The Army therefore Marching over the Bellies of all those who presented
themselves to oppose them or molest them in their passage, and the Knights of
the Temple having cut in pieces five hundred Sarasin Horse, who pretending to
come over to the King, had a design treacherously to surprise his Person, a
little before Christmas came to incamp in sight of Massora, over against the
Army of the Sarasins, the River only parting them, but which could not hinder
the Christians from the Resolution of passing it, that so they might come to a
Battle with them. It is certain that there was committed a second mighty Error;
for whereas they ought to have sounded the River above and below to have found
some Ford, as King Lewis the Young had done at the Famous passage of the
Meander, they endeavored to make a Causway, over this Arm of the Nile, and to
turn the course of the River, that so they might gain a free passage for the
Army. For this purpose they built great Wooden Towers with several stories of
Stages, upon which the Crosbows and Archers were placed; there were also Wooden
Castles, and covered Galleys built for the defense of the Laborers; and
eighteen Machins, the Invention of Josselin Courvaut, a great Ingeneer of that
time, were framed in the manner of a Counter Battery, to oppose six great
Machins of the Sarasins, which did terrible Execution upon the Army; but after
they had spent near two Months in these Works, with the loss of a great many
Men, Greek Wildfire, which was discharged upon them in a most dreadful manner.
For these Fires which were with an extreme violence thrown from a certain kind
of Sling through their Pipes, which were almost as large as our Canons,
appeared in the Air like flaming Dragons of the bigness of a Barrel with a long
train like a Rocket,

For at length the Constable Imbert de Beaujeu, acquainted the King that an
Arabian, who had deserted the Enemies, offered to show them a Ford something
below the place where they were encamped, provided they would give him five
hundred Besants. The Condition was immediately accepted, and the Arabian was
assured of his Reward, if his Promise proved true, and thereupon it was
resolved, trial having been made, that the next Morning, being Shrove-Tuesday,
one part of the Army should pass the Ford, whilst the other guarded the Camp
against the Enemies, who had the passage open on the other side, and thereby
might fall upon them in the Rear. The King with the three Princes, his
Brothers, resolved to be of the number of those, who were to pass the Ford,
whilst the Duke of Burgundy remained to guard the Camp. The next Morning early
the Troops were divided into three Bodies; the Vanguard was given to the
Templers, Robert Count d' Artois lead the Body of the Battle, and the third the
King reserved as the Reerguard to himself, commanding the Troops, as they
landed on the other side, to draw up in the same manner. In this Order they
marched along the River, descending to the Ford, which was found very dangerous
and more difficult than they believed, there being in it several places so
deep, that the River being high, they were forced to swim. However they passed
it without loss, in the view of three hundred Horse, who made show as if they
would defend the Pass; the Templers being in the Van, according to the King's
Orders, drew up first in Battalia, and stopped in expectation of the passage of
the rest. But the Count d' Artois was no sooner got to the other side of the
River, but that seeing the Sarasins fly, he galloped in pursuit of them, with
his whole Brigade at full speed. The Templers, who could not endure to be put
out of the Port, which the King had assigned them, cried out to them to halt
till the rest of the Army was drawn up, but all was to no purpose, in regard
that a stout old Knight, whose Name was Fouquant de Melle, to whom the King had
committed the charge of the Count d' Artois, being deaf, understood not what
they meant, but on the contrary cried out with all his might, following the
Count, Fall on, Fall on, the Day is our own. Whereupon the Templers losing all
their patience, and believing their honor would suffer, if they did not
advance, spurred up after the Count, without staying till the King was passed,
and charged with the first, even to the Camp of the Enemies over against the
Causway, in the place where all their Machins were, upon which they instantly
seized.

But they were not satisfied with this, for seeing that those who guarded them,
being surprised with such a brisk Attacque, which they did not in the least
expect, fled toward Massora, they followed them at full speed, and passing
after them quite throw the Town, into the Champion, upon the Way to Caire,
never considered the danger to which they exposed themselves, of being
surrounded by the gross of the Army, which advanced from the other side of the
City, to fall upon their Rear. And thereupon the Fugitives perceiving their
disorder, and the small number of those, who so blindly pursued them, and
seeing themselves succored by their Men, who advanced to their relief, they
faced about, and stopped the Pursuers, constraining them to think of a retreat.
But it was now to late, for when they thought to repass thorough the Town of
Massora, they found all the streets possessed, and stopped by the Sarasins, who
having surrounded them on every part, and discharging upon them from the
houses, as at a certain mark, they were almost all Slain, the Count d' Artois
himself fell there also, after he had for a long time defended himself in a
House which he had gained and Barricado'd against the Enemy, and with him Raoul
de Couci, and above three hundred Knights with their Attendants, Templers there
lost their lives, after having made a wonderful Slaughter among the Sarasins,
both in the Field and in their Camp. The Great Master of the Temple, who made a
shift to disingage himself from his Enemies, yet lost one of his Eyes in the
Encounter; and Peter, Duke of Bretany, with some others who fought like Lions
after his Example, retreated from this Slaughter all covered with Wounds and
Blood, which issued in great quantity from his Mouth; the Seneschal Joinville,
and the Lords, Hugh de Trichasteau, Peter de Neville, Raoul de Vanon, Erard d'
Esmeray, Hugh of Scotland, Renaud de Menoncour, and a few more, who were not
got over when the Count ran upon the Enemy, were invested with above six
thousand Sarasins, who coming from all quarters charged them most furiously;
and after having slain the Lord de Trichasteau, and wounded almost all the
rest, they were just upon the point of taking them all Prisoners, when they
were stopped by the relief which the Count d' Anjon brought to their
assistance, and in a moment after forced to retire to the gross of their Army,
there appearing to them a mighty Cloud of dust, which rise from the
Neighboring heights, from whence also was to be heard the fearful Noise of
Trumpets, Cornets, Drums, Flutes and Fifes, mingled with the neighing of
Horses, and the shouts of War, like those of Men, who were going to the charge;
which made them imagine that all the Christian Army was ready to fall upon them.

And in truth, it was St. Lewis, who having understood the disorder of his
People, was advancing to their assistance, with all his Men at Arms, and had
made a halt upon that eminence, to give out his Orders according to the
Condition wherein he should find his own Men and the Enemies. There was never
any thing that appeared more beautiful and withal more formidable than this
Prince, so soon as this Cloud of dust which covered him was dissipated. For
whether it were that his charging Horse, was really larger than any of his
Guards, or that he raised himself upon his styrops, to speak to his Men, and to
encourage them in this dangerous occasion, or that God was pleased to increase
his Majesty in this great Day, and to make him appear taller than he was, it is
certain, that the Sieur Joinville, who saw him in this condition from the plain
where he was, assures us, that he surpassed all the Knights that were about him
by the Head and Shoulders; it was in this posture that having his head covered
with a Golden Cask, a mighty German Sword in his hand, his Shield upon his left
Arm, an assured countenance, and a Noble Fire sparkling from his Eyes, which
pierced the hearts of his Soldiers, communicating some part of his generous
Flames to every one that saw him, he so animated his People, that many gallant
Men, without staying for the Command, flew to charge these six thousand
Sarasins, who were retreating; and they also receiving them like Valiant Men,
and, contrary to their custom, Fighting Foot to Foot, there never was seen in
all these Wars a more furious Combat than this, which was maintained with
mighty blows of the Sword, the Mace, and Battle Ax.

The King, who beheld this great Combat, transported by a generous impatience
to come to blows, was upon the point of spurring up after his Men, to throw
himself into the midst of his Enemies; but John de Valery, one of the wifest
and most experienced Knights of his time, remonstrated to him, that it was not
there that the affair was to be decided; but that there was a necessity to draw
up in Battalia, more to the Right hand along by the River, that so he might not
be surrounded by the Enemy, who without this precaution might easily fall upon
his Rear; and that also by this means he might receive succor from his Forces
which were on the other side of the River with the Duke of Burgundy, who now
having no Enemy at their Head might have time enough to lay over a Bridge. And
the event presently showed that this was wholesome advice. For the Sarasins,
who after the defeat of the Count d' Artois, and the Templers no longer doubted
of the Victory, came all together to attack the King, whom they would easily
have encompassed with their innumerable multitude, if he had not been secured
by having the River at his back. The Combat was long and bloody, and the
Enemies charged at first with so much Vigor, and gave such a furious Volly of
Darts and Arrows, that many of the Kings People believing all was lost,
Sarasins fell upon him, and laid hold of the bridle of his Horse, to carry him
away by Force, before he could be rescued; but he disingaged himself from them
all by his own single Valor; and by the blows which he bestowed among them,
for he overthrew one with his Buckler, and spurring his Horse against a second,
laid Horse and Man upon the Ground, a third he ran quite through the Body, and
with a dreadful reverse made the Head and Cask roll from the shoulders of a
fourth, and one of them still hanging upon his Bridle he cut off both his hands
at the wrists, and so passed over the Bellies of them all, still pursuing his
point and advancing, as resolved either to vanquish or to die; so that if it
had been a private Soldier, who had so bravely acquitted himself, he must have
been esteemed an extraordinary Prodigy of Courage and Valor.

These great Actions, did so increase the Courage and Strength of all his Men,
that after they had for three hours after Noon sustained the utmost Efforts of
so many thousands of Enemies, who believed they should easily Triumph over so
small a Number, they constrained them to recoil, and, at last, after they had
in vain attempted to regain their advantage, to draw off toward the evening,
leaving to the Conquerors their Machins and their Camp, upon which the Count d'
Artois had seized at the beginning of this Famous Battle. The Slaughter was
great both on the one side and the other, but especially of the Sarasins, who
left among the Slain, with which the whole Field was covered, the Valiant
Fracardin their General, and diverse of their Admirals, who were surprised and
slain in the Camp. The King with those few Men, who escaped this bloody Day,
lodged himself near the Machins, which had been taken, and which the brave
Gaucher de Chastillon, to whom the King gave the Guard of them, preserved
notwithstanding all the Attempts which the Sarasins, who were posted close by,
vainly made, under the savor of the darkness, to recover them.

The two following Days were employed in fortifying the Camp, and passing over
the greatest part of the Troops, which were in the Duke of Burgundy's Camp on
the other side the River, and certainly this diligence was no more than
necessary; for the King was advertised by his Spies, upon the Thursday in the
evening, that he, who succeeded Fracardin, was resolved to attack the Camp the
next morning with their whole Army, which had received a great reinforcement
from Grand Caire. For this new General, whom the Sarasins had chosen for his
extraordinary Valor and admirable Conduct, having caused to be carried round
the Camp upon the top of a Lance, the Coat of Arms of the Count d' Artois,
which was richly Embroidered with his Arms, the Flowers de Lys Or, caused it to
be Proclaimed, that it was the King himself, who was slain, and that the
Christian Army being in the utmost Consternation after the loss of their King,
and so many gallant Men as were slain in the Battle, they ought to Attack them
instantly in those feeble retrenchments, without giving them leisure to recover
or to save themselves. The Sarasins, who believed that they were to be led to a
certain Victory, and to the Booty, rather than the Combat, by their great
shouts of Joy, witnessed, that they were ready to march against the Enemy; and
accordingly it was resolved, that they should go the next Morning to attack the
Christians in their Camp.

The King, who had received this advice, made very good use of it; for having
disposed all things during the Night for the receiving the Enemy, he caused the
Army to disloge about break of Day, and divided it into eight Bodies, d' Anjou,
who commanded the first Body, was upon the Right hand, above the River, toward
Caire; and had a this left, Guy d' Ibelin the Constable, and Baldwin his
Brother, High Steward of Cyprus, who lead the Auxiliaries of that Kingdom. The
Valiant Gaucher de Chastillon, followed with the third Body, composed of the
brave Nobility and Gentry of France. William Sonnac, Great Master of the
Temple, made the fourth, with the little remainder of his Knights. Gui de
Malvoisin, one of the stoutest Knights of the Army, led the fifth. The Earl of
Flanders was with his Body posted in the place where the Retrenchments turned
toward the River, to secure the Camp on that side. Joinville, Seneschal of
Champagne was upon his left, drawing down to the River, and the Count de
Poitiers, who was next him, appeared alone upon Horseback, at the head of a
great Battalion, which made the last of the Bodies, to whom Josserand de
Brianson, who came along with him, joined himself with twenty of his Knights,
who fought that Day on Foot: so that the two Princes, the Brothers of the King,
had the two Wings of the Army.

The General of the Sarasins, who observed it, and who was a great Captain,
ranged his Men also according to the order of the Kings Army, and extended
himself upon two great lines, which answered to the length of the
Retrenchments. He placed all his old Soldiers upon the first, dividing them
into so many Battalions, which were sustained by his best Horse, which were
drawn up in a separate Body before the Army. All his Battalions were
incomparably stronger than the Christians, and he strengthened them more or
less according as he observed the opposite Battalions, which they were to
encounter, were Stronger or Weaker. For as for Cavalry the French had but a
few, the greatest part of the Horses having been either killed or wounded in
the last engagement. Upon the second Line he ranged an infinite number of new
Troops, which were come to him from Caire, and all the upper Egypt. The Armies
stood thus facing one another till about Noon, when the Sarasins began to move
from all p arts, and with dreadful shouts mingled with the sound of an infinite
number of Drums, Trumpets, and Cornets, they charged upon all the French
Battalions all together, with so much Fury, that those, who had for a long time
been acquainted with the Wars in the East, assure us, that they had never seen
the like in all the Battles, wherein they had fought against the Sarasins. For
at the same time that some of them discharged their Darts and Arrows, in
infinite Numbers, to disorder the Christians, the first Ranks of their
Infantry, running in to them, threw from their long Brazen Pipes, their
dreadful Wildfire among them to break their Ranks; and at the same time the
Cavalry, which followed them, endeavored to enter by the breaches, which the
Fire had made, and to hinder the Soldiers while they were buisy to secure
themselves from the Wildfire, from closing their ranks and getting into order
again.

The Battalion of the Count d' Anjou which received the first charge from the
left Wing of the Enemies, and was at first so disordered, that the Soldiers
not being able to rally again presently, that Prince was in great danger either
to be slain or taken by the Sarasins. The King, who was in the middle of his
Troops, to give the necessary orders for all things, being advertised of the
extreme danger of his Brother, did an Action, which it will be very difficult
to find one to equal it, even among the most boasted Actions, of the so much
celebrated Heroes of Antiquity. For he had no sooner received the News, but
without deliberating one Moment, and without staying to give out his Orders, or
even so much as commanding any to follow him, he ran to his relief, and
spurring his Horse at full speed toward the Battalion of the Count, breaking
throw the Crowd, he threw himself with his Sword in his hand, like Lighting
into the middle of the Sarasins, who were carrying off the Count, wounding,
overturning, and trampling under his Horses feet what ever opposed his passage,
laying about him on both sides upon the Insidels with his terrible Sword,

But that which was still more odd, was, that the Count de Poitiers, his other
Brother, who fought upon the Left, against the Right Wing of the Sarasins, had
at the same time a Fortune much resembling that of the Count d' Anjou, but a
deliverance from his danger in a manner wholly different. For the Enemies
having overthrown him; as they had done his Brother, defeated his People, who
were all Infantry, and forced the Camp on that side, making the Count a
Prisoner; they were now leading him away, without any hopes of his being
relieved by the King, who could not work the Miracle after those others he had
done to be present in two places at one time. Thereupon the Sutlers, the
Grooms, and Servants, who were all Armed, and even the Women, who followed the
Camp to sell Provisions, not contenting themselves to cry out for help, ran
upon their Enemies with so much resolution and charged them so furiously, the
Men with Swords, the Women with great stones, that they drive them out of the
Camp, and followed them so closely still beating of them, till they came up to
those, who were carrying away the Prince; they presently caused them to quite
their Prize, and consult their safety by running away, and he thereupon
instantly rallying his Battalion, marched to sustain these brave Sutlers of the
Camp. And certainly the Courage and Valor, which so much to their Honor they
manifested upon this occasion, makes it evident, that provided they have heart
and Resolution, the most Heroic Actions may sometimes be performed by all
sorts of Persons, of what Quality or Profession soever, nay, even by the weaker
sex, since Virtue makes no distinction among such as follow her, with equal
Courage and Resolution.

The Fortune of the Knights of the Temple was not altogether so good; for there
being but a few of them left after their defeat in Massora, and their weak
Retrenchments which they had made of the Planks, which they had pulled off from
the Engines, which had been taken from the Sarasins, being quickly burnt by the
Greek Wild-sire, they were so overpowered with the multitude of their Enemies,
that they were almost all cut in pieces, together with their Great Master, who
having lost his Eye in the first Battle, lost his Life also in this second. But
at last all the other Bodies were Victorious, and constrained their Enemies,
after a most bloody Combat, to retire and leave behind them a great number of
their bravest Men dead upon the place; and to the Christians the Glory to have
gained the Day without Cavalry, and for the most part without defensive Arms,
in regard, that the Wounds, which they had received in the first Battle, would
neither permit them to put on their Curiasses, nor to endure to Fight on
Horseback, and in short to have vanquished them upon such great disadvantages,
repulsing so many Horsemen, who were well Armed, against whom they fought.

This was what King Lewis took notice of to his Lords and to the principal
Officers of his Army, thereby to raise their Courage and their Hope; but
nevertheless the plain truth was, that as on the one hand they did not find
themselves in a condition to attack those Enemies whom they had with difficulty
repulsed; nor able to force them, so as to March against Caire; so on the
other, a longer stay in the place where they were encamped, was but daily to
weaken themselves, and to give the Enemy the leisure to fortify themselves,
they ought therefore after these two Victories to have retired to Damiata, and
not to have stayed so long, till it was impossible for them to make a safe and
honorable retreat. But so it was, that they stayed there all the Lent; whilst
in the mean time the new Sultan Almoadan Caiatadin arrived at Massora with a
puissant Army, which he brought with him from the East. This redoubled the
Courage of the Sarasins, who, to let the Christians understand their Arrival,
Nile, and which after the breaking of their Galls, floated again upon the
Water, and were stopped at the Bridge, which was made for the Communication of
the two Camps, putrefying, infected the Air, and filled the Camp with diseases;
and above all the Scurvy in that moist Country seized upon the Soldiers,
insomuch that there was scarcely a Tent, wherein every Day there was not found
some Person either Dead or Dying. The Vessels also which brought Provisions
from Damiata to the Camp, by the way of the Sea and the River, were all taken
by the Sultan's Galleys, who possessed themselves of all the passages of the
Nilus, both above and below. Two great Convoys also, which came by Land, were
entirely defeated by great parties of Sarasins, who continually ranged the
Campaign, to hinder any thing from coming to the Army. So that all Provisions
being thus cut off, abundance perished most miserably by Famine; and they were
reduced to feed upon certain Fishes of the Nilus, which being fed with the
putrid Carcasses of the Slain, Poisoned rather than nourished, such as were
forced to live upon such corrupted food.

At last, to complete the Misfortune, the King himself was seized with this
Disease of the Camp, so that in conclusion the Army after having in vain so
obstinately and long contested with so many Evils, was obliged to resolve upon
a Retreat, which certainly in the condition wherein they were, was impossible,
and which two Months before, they might have hoped to have done with Honor. It
is true, that before this there had been some overtures of a Peace or Truce
between the Commissioners of the King, and those of the Sultan, and that it
proceeded so far that the King was to surrender Damiata, and that the Sultan
also should yield to the Christians all the Places which he held in the Realm
of Jerusalem. But it appeared plainly, that this was not proposed by the
Sultan, but to amuse the King; for he had the confidence to demand that, which
there was no probability that it should ever be condescended unto, which was
that for the security of the Treaty, the Person of the King should be delivered
to him as an hostage. Whereupon one of the Commissiones, Geoffrey de Sergines,
one of the wisest and most Valiant Knights of that Age, briskly broke up the
conference, protesting that the French would choose rather to be cut all in a
thousand pieces, than to endure being always subject to the intolerable
reproach of having given the King of France for an Hostage, or to owe their
safety to such a base and detestable submission.

It was therefore upon a Tuesday, the fifth of April, that the Army attempted
to retreat in view of an Enemy, whose Forces were infinitely augmented by the
conjunction of new Troops, which he had received from time to time, from all
parts of his Empire. All was done that could possibly be represented to the
King to oblige him considering his Sickness, to go before the Army, and save
himself as did the Legate, and diverse Bishops, who went off in a great Gally,
which breaking through the Sarasins, arrived safe at Damiata. But he constantly
refused, protesting that he would dye a thousand times, rather than abandon so
many Gallant men, who had so generously exposed their Lives for his, and the
Service of God. Thus by his orders, they began in the Evening to imbark the
Sick and wounded upon those Vessels, which were come up the Nilus, for the
Service of the Army, when they approached Massora; and for himself taking his
way by Land, he put himself with Geoffrey de Sergines, into the Reerguard,
which was led by the brave Gaucher de Chastillon.

But certainly it was impossible, without running the danger of losing all, to
make a movement before an Enemy, who was ten times stronger, and who only
watched for this opportunity, to fall upon an Army already half overthrown by
Famine and Diseases; and in truth they followed them so quickly, that they had
not so much time as to destroy the Bridge, but that the Enemy passed it almost
as soon as the Reerguard were got over, whilst that a Party of the Sarasins
falling into the Camp, pitilesly cut the throats of all the Sick and Wounded,
who waited upon the bank of the River, Nilus, to save themselves by Sea at
Damiata, there were only a few Boats, which secured themselves under the favor
of the Legate's great Gally, which opened her way by the Force of her Oars; all
the rest were either taken or burnt by the Saltan's Fleet; and one might hear
the piteous cries of the Poor Sick Men, who not being able to throw themselves
into the River, to yield themselves to the Enemies by Swimming, were miserably
consumed by the Flames, whilst the greatest part of those who could get out of
the burning Vessels, either perished in the Waters, or were slain by the
Sarasins.

On the other side, those who went by Land, finding themselves presently
surrounded by an infinite multitude of Enemies, were so vigorously at tacked on
all sides, that after having in vain done all that was possible to defend
themselves, and to make way through so many Battalions, and Squadrons, as
environed them, they were either all taken or Slain, not so much as one
escaping. There it was, that Guide Chastell of the House of Chastillon, upon
the Marne, Bishop of Soissons, a most Valiant Man, who chose rather to die by
this kind of Martyrdom in a Holy War, than to be taken Prisoner, threw himself
single, his Sword in his hand, into the middle of a Squadron of Sarasins, who
presently gave him that happy Death, which he sought among a thousand Swords,
in Fighting against the Enemies of Jesus Christ. The Greeks indeed are often
used to reproach us, that our Priests and Bishops make no scruple of going to
the Wars and Fighting contrary to the Canons, which prohibit them under most
rigorous penalties, to manage Arms; and I must acknowledge that there have been
great disorders in this particular among us in former Ages, and that the Popes
have frequently complained of it to our Kings. But in these times of the
Crusades, our Ancestors believed well, that the Canons did not extend to these
Holy Wars, to which when the Ecclesiastics had devoted themselves, by taking
up the Cross, as well as the Laics, it was permited them to fight against the
Infidels; and esteemed as Lawful as for a Shepherd, who leaves his Flock to
pursue the Wolves if he can to kill them.

Neither was it known that for this they ever abstained from the exercise of
their sacred Function; witness the Valiant Chaplain of the Lord de Joinville.
He was a Priest and constantly officiated for his Master, but that nevertheless
did not hinder him, but that Armed with a Curiass, and his Head covered with an
Iron Cask, his Sword in his hand, he went and attacked six Captains of the
Sarasins singly, in the sight of both the Armies, and beat them all, to the
admiration of all the beholders, who could not but praise his Courage, and his
bravery. This makes it clear, that the Canons and the Councils, which are the
Laws of the Church, ought to be taken and interpreted according to the usage
which they permit or tolerate. However it be, the Bishop of Soissons, believed
that inexposing himself in this manner to a certain Death, he should acquire a
Crown of Immortality, both in fame upon Earth and in Heaven; nor ought it
reasonably to be doubted but that he did.

At the same time Gaucher de Chastillon, his kinsman, who Commanded the
Reerguard, performed an Action of the like extraordinary Merit, and which
deserves the Honor of Posterity, the Recompense of Heroic Actions, of which it
may be, his was one of the greatest that was ever done. For having posted
himself the last Man, in a narrow passage, through which the King was to go, to
gain a little Village called Kasel; he alone for a long time sustained the
shock of all the Sarasins, upon whom, facing about, he threw himself like
Lightning, killing and slaying, all those whom he could overtake; and then,
after he had pursued them a while, making his retreat, whilst he received
their Arrows and their Darts, upon his Shield, his Curiass, and his Body, which
was all bristled with them, he would return again upon his Enemies with greater
fury than before, and every time as he charged, raising himself upon his
Styrrops, he cried amain, Follow Chastillon, Follow Chastillon, my Noble
Knights! Where are all our gallant Men? And thus he maintained continually this
strange kind of Combat, wherein he was singly against them all, Sarasins
pursued their Victory so eagerly, that they came up even to the Person of the
King, whom the Faithful and Valiant Geoffrey de Sergines covered with his Body,
and with his Sword in his hand, made those stand further off, who had the
considence to approach him. But in conclusion, all that they could do, whilst
they did to no purpose perform the bravest Actions in the World, was to Conduct
the King into Kasel, and it being impossible there to defend him against the
whole Army of the Sarasins, which had already enclosed the rest of the Troops,
and the Life of the King being in great danger, who was reduced to that
condition by his Sickness, that he seemed to be in the last extremity, a
Herald, either of his own accord, or by order, having Proclaimed that they
should lay down their Arms, and not expose the Life of the King, all yielded,
and submitted themselves to the discretion of these Barbarians, who did not
fail accordingly to make a most Barbarous use of their Victory.

For immediately, without Mercy or Compassion, they cut the throats of all the
Sick and Wounded, which they found in the Army; and then having separated all
the Persons of Quality, the Captains and Officers, from the private Soldiers,
and the Servants, they did upon the spot, cut of the heads of all the last, who
had the constancy to refuse renouncing of Jesus Christ, making so many Martyrs,
as there were Christians thus brutishly Murdered. As for the Persons of
Quality, who were Prisoners, the Covetousness of the Infidels prevailing over
their Cruelty, they spared their Lives, in hopes to draw from them,
considerable Sums of Money for their Ransoms: but they treated them in their
Imprisonment in a worse manner, than the most unfortunate Slaves are wont to be
used among Christians; and that they might make them suffer in their Souls as
well as Bodies, they vented before them a thousand Blasphemies, and committed a
thousand outrages against the Cross, thereby to dishonor that adorable God and
Man, who was Crucified upon it. And that which was most surprising in this
Rencountre, and which ought to serve the Christians with an excellent
instruction, which God was pleased to give them from the Mouth of one of these
Barbarians, which will one day confound them, if they do not change their
superstitious sentiments, was, That an old Sarasin Lord, who, by the richness
of his habiliments, and by the great train of Armed young Sarasins, who
accompanied him, appeared to be a Person of the first quality among the
Infidels, coming into the Pavilion, where most of the Lords were put, gravely
demanded of them by an Interpreter, if they believed really that their God was
made Man, and that he had suffered Death for them upon the Cross, and that he
was raised from the Dead after three Days? All the Lords, who believed they
should instantly be made Martyrs, upon their frank confession of Jesus Christ,
answered with one Voice, and without the least hesitation, That this was their
firm belief. If it be so Messieurs, replied the Wise Sarasin, comfort your
selves in your Affliction, you have not yet suffered Death for your God as he
has done for you; and since he had the Power to raise himself again, you ought
also to believe, that having had so much kindness for you, and having so much
Power, he will very speedily deliver you out of your Captivity and Misfortunes.
And thereupon without saying any more he instantly withdrew. And in truth he
could not have said a greater thing. For certainly it is all that can be said
to Christians, to give them the strongest and most solid consolation, in the
greatest of all adversities, which may befall them, in this Mortal State. And
this was it without doubt this admirable thought, in which Lewis had been long
confirmed, and from whence this Holy King drew that incomparable constancy of
Mind, which made him appear greater in this Gulf of his Misfortunes, into
which he was plunged, than ever he had appeared upon his Throne in France, in
the fairest day of his Triumphs, after so many Victories as had laid all his
Enemies under his Feet.

Paris. He praised God with all his Soul, that he was found worthy to suffer
for his sake, and resolved that he would do nothing for his deliverance to the
prejudice of his Honor or his Conscience, or disadvantageous either to his
Realm, or to the Affairs of the Christians in the East. It is true that at
first the Sultan, either that he was moved with Compassion for the miserable
condition, to which he saw so great a Prince reduced, or rather that he feared
to lose his Ransom, treated the King with great Humanity, and gave Order that
he should be served with all manner of Care and Honor, sending to him the most
able of his Physicians, who being acquainted with the Nature of the Malady,
with which he was afflicted, in a few days put him into a condition quite out
of danger. But the Infidel soon returned to his own Natural Barbarity, and
seeing that the King constantly refused to surrender any of those places, which
the Christians held in Syria and in Palestine, he suffered himself to be so
brutishly transported as to threaten to put him to the Bernacles, which was a
kind of most cruel Torture, which the Sarasins made use of to Torment their
Enemies, or their Criminals withal, by dislocation of all their Bones.

But when he saw that this admirable Prince received all his Menaces with a
generous disdain, and without Emotion; and that he remained fixed in his first
Resolution, he treated him more reasonably, and caused it to be demanded of
him, whether besides Damiata, he would give a Million of Bysances of Gold for
his Ransom. The Lord Joinville reduces it in his History to five hundred
thousand Livres, which in my Opinion, ought to be understood of so many Crowns
in Gold, for there is no manner of probability, that a Bysance of Gold, which
was a considerable Price, as appears in all Historians, should be of no greater
value, than six pence of our Money. To this the King answered instantly, with a
Mavelous greatness of Soul, that he would give that Million for the Ransom of
the Prisoners, and Damiata for his own, in regard, he said, it was
dishonorable for a King of France, to buy himself with Silver. This so
surprised the Sultan, who like a Merchant had demanded much more than he
thought ought to be given, to come at last to the finishing of a bargain, that
he cried out, that the French King was too Free and Generous, so soon to agree
to pay so great a Sum, upon the first demand, and that he would quit him of one
hundred thousand, and content himself with four of the five hundred thousand
Livres.

Thus the Treaty was quickly concluded, by which it was agreed, That there
should be a Truce for ten Years; That all the Prisoners which had been taken on
either side in Egypt or in Syria, as well those which had been taken since the
Truce, which the Emperor Frederick had made with Sultan Meledin, as those which
had been taken since the Arrival of the King in Egypt, should be set at
Liberty; That the Christians should peaceably possess all the places which they
held in Palestine and Syria; That the King should pay eight hundred thousand
Bysances of Gold, for the Ransom of all the Prisoners, and surrender Damiata to
the Sultan for his own; That all the movables which the King, the Princes, the
Lords, and in general all the Christians, should leave in Damiata, should be
there secured by a Guard from the Sultan, till such time as the King should
send shipping to transport them whither he pleased; That all the Sick, and
those who had any Affairs at Damiata, might remain there in safety, till they
were in a condition to be removed; And that then they might with Freedom retire
whither they should please; And that the Sultan should give those, who went by
Land, a Convoy, until they arrived at some place in the Possession of the
Christians.

This being agreed, the Sultan sent to the King the two Counts, his Brothers,
all the Princes and Great Lords upon four Galleys, which fell down the River to
a certain Place, where there was a Wooden Palace, built for the Sultan, upon
the Bank of the River, and a Magnificent Tent erected, where the King and this
Prince had an interview, in the beginning of May, about a Week before Ascension
Day; where after having reciprocally confirmed the Treaty, Damiata to him:
Insomuch that now there seemed to be nothing which might hinder or retard the
Liberty of the King, when upon a sudden their happened a strange Revolution in
Egypt, which overturned all; and as an unexpected Tempest happening at Sea,
forces out a Ship when she is just ready to drop her Anchor, and happily to
enter into the Port, so this unforeseen Accident, which in a moment changed the
Face of Affairs, ruined all the fair hopes of the approaching deliverance of
the King, and did not only plunge him again into the same Afflictions, but put
him into the manifest danger of losing both his Liberty and his Life. The
manner of this change was thus.

The Sultans of Egypt had for their Guard a great Body of Militia, of ten or
twelve thousand Choice Men, much like which we have since seen, and which to
this day continues among the Turks, composed of Tribute Children, of which
those who are looked upon as most proper to be made Soldiers, are instructed
in Military Discipline, and enrolled among the Guards of the Prince, which are
called Janissaries. For the Sultans caused to be bought in Europe and Asia, and
especially in the Countries which lie between the Euxin Sea, the River Tanais,
and the Caspian Sea, and in the greater Armenia, great numbers of Slaves, and
reserving the lustiest young men, and the Children of those who were born to
these Slaves in Egypt, after having caused them to be carefully instructed in
all Military Skill, they placed them into this Body of Soldiers of their
Guards, which were called Mamalukes, which in their Language signifies Servant
or Slave, and in regard that they were bought with the Sultan's money, and knew
no other Master, they were entirely at his devotion. And according as these
Mamalukes made themselves considerable by their gallant Actions, they were
advanced in their Charges, and made either Captains of Troops, or Governors of
Cities and Provinces, which in the Arabian Language were called Amir, or Emir,
and which the Writers of those Times have expressed by the Term of Admiral,
which we have borrowed from the Sarasins; and it is fit to advertise the
Reader, that one of our Writers, has had the confidence to affirm, that we
make use of that word upon this occasion, out of Ignorance; when in truth, he
himself was ignorant of the true Original of the Word, and was not acquainted,
that all the Learned World have constantly used it in this sense, giving
indifferently to these sort of Persons the Title of Emir, Amir, or, as it is
expressed in Latin, Admiral, as in the Greek also, as may be seen in all the
Historians of those Times. But it was ever thus, that they who see the least
are the most confident in pronouncing their decisive opinion; for having but a
short sight, which yet in their opinion is very good, they have not so much as
the Art of thinking or doubting there may be something which at present they
either do not discover, or cannot see.

Now the last of the Sultans, taking notice of this powerful Body of these
Mamalukes, who were the bravest Soldiers of the East, began to stand in fear
of their Captains; and for this reason, when any one of them grew Rich, or very
considerable for some great Action, they did not fail under some pretext or
other to take them out of the way of their Jealousy; thus the deceased Sultan
Mclech-Salah-Nayem-Addin, put to death the Admirals, who at the Battle of Gaza
had taken the Counts de Bar and Montfort. His Son Almoadam Gaiat-Addin
returning from the East to take possession of his Empire, had at his first
coming to the Crown, by this wicked and to him unfortunate Policy, taken the
Principal Charges from all the Ancient Admirals, the Captains of the Mamalukes,
and had conferred them upon those Strangers, whom he brought along with him
into Egypt. This did so furiously provoke the Captains against him, that
fearing, lest being now so firmly established by his Victory over the French
Army, and the recovery of Damiata, he should follow the Example of his Father,
and put them to Death; they resolved to be beforehand with him, and to cause
him to be slain by the Mamalukes, who they were assured were at their devotion;
and accordingly the next day, after he had conferred with St. Lewis, his own
Guards set upon him just as he rose from the Table after dinner, and when he
endeavored to save himself in the highest of the three Towers, Nilus, they set
it on fire, and constrained him to throw himself half burnt into the River,
where he was pursued by the furious Mutineers, who murdered him close by the
Gally where the Seneschal of Champagne was, who from thence beheld this
horrible Execution. After which, one of these Executioners having pulled out
the heart of this miserable Sultan, had the brutish impudence to enter into the
King's Tent, and in showing it to him, to say, What will thou give me as a
reward for having slain thine Enemy, who, if he had lived, would have done the
same to thee? To which St Lewis made no other reply, but by a Look, which made
him know, that he had a horror for this execrable Parricide.

At the same time the greatest part of these Murderers, following the Admirals,
entered like so many unchained Furies, with horrible Cries, and dreadful
Menaces, their Eyes sparkling with rage and fury, and with frightful
Countenances, in which was painted the lively Image of their Crime, they all
together presented the points of their naked Swords to the Throat and Breast of
this admirable Prince; who without the least sign of astonishment, and without
losing any thing of that Royal Air which inspires the most barbarous Persons
with respect for Sacred Majesty, appeared so resolute, and easy in the middle
of these Savage Beasts, as if he had been among his Barons. And whether it
pleased God, who governs all hearts, suddenly to sweeten those of the
Barbarians, and to calm the storm of their sury; or that these Admirals were
unwilling to lose the benefit of their Crimes, by losing the Ransom of the
King, which they might divide among themselves, they proceeded no further than
to Menaces, thereby to oblige him immediately to ratify the Treaty which he
had made, and presently to put Damiata into their hands. At the same instant
their Companions, who acted by agreement with them, used the Princes and the
Lords, who were aboard the Galleys, at the same rate; so that they believing,
when they saw them come rushing in upon them with their Swords in their hands,
that they should all be presently butchered by the Infidels, they all fell upon
their knees to confess themselves to an Ecclesiastic, who belonged to the Earl
of Flanders. The Sire de Joinville says, that as he was holding his neck ready
for these hangmen. The Steward of Cyprus Gui d' Ibelin, who believed also that
he was going to Execution, confessed himself honestly to him; and he adds very
ingeniously, that in good faith he gave him the best Absolution that he could,
giving him all that God had given him power to give; but tells us that he could
never remember one word of what the Cypriote confessed, so was he prepossessed,
and taken up with the thoughts of that death which he saw present before his
Eyes. But all this was done by the Emirs for no other reason, but to gain by
these Menaces, the present ratification of the Treaty, which lay close to their
hearts in consideration of that great Sum of Money which they hoped to get
before there should be a new Sultan.

The King, who had resolved to surrender Damiata for his Ransom, in regard that
he found by the Opinion of all the Lords of his Council, that it was absolutely
impossible to keep it in the condition wherein his Affairs then stood, answered
coolly to the Admirals, that what he had once agreed ought to be unchangeable,
and that he was ready to renew the Treaty with them, which he had before made
with the Sultan. Whereupon it was again concluded upon the same conditions on
one side and the other, only with this addition, That before the King parted
from the River, he should pay two hundred thousand Livres to the Admirals; That
the Count de Poitiers should remain their Prisoner at Damiata, till the whole
was paid; That for the security of the payment of two hundred thousand Livres
more, they should keep the Sick, the Munitions, the Arms, and the Machins, till
such time as the King should discharge this Sum in the City of Acre. There
remained nothing now to be done, but to confirm this Treaty by a Solemn Oath on
the one part and the other, as the Admirals desired. They made theirs in the
strongest terms, in which it could be made according to their Law; but when
according to the Counsel which was given them by some Renegado's, they would
have imposed upon the King a dreadful Oath, conceived in these Terms, That in
case he should fail in the accomplishment of his Promises, he would be reputed
perjured; as a Christian who had renounced his God, his Baptism, and his
Gospel; and as one that in despite of God had spit upon the Cross, and
trampled it under his Feet; Jerusalem also, whom the Admirals had already
caused to be tied to a Stake to torment him, because they believed that it was
he who had put this Scruple into the King's mind, cried out to him, that he
should boldly take the Oath, and that he would be answerable for, all that was
criminal in it; so did likewise one Master Nicholas an Inhabitant of the City
of Acre, who was very much esteemed by the Sarasins, in whose Customs and
Language he was very skilful, and of whom they made use in such occasions, as
his industry might be serviceable to them; and he told the King plainly, to
persuade him to it, that if he did not take this Oath, the Infidels were
resolved to cut off his Head, and those of all the other Prisoners. But all
this was not able to shake the constancy of St. Lewis, who would by no means
expose himself to the danger of committing what he thought so black a Crime;
but answered, with an admirable resolution, That they might do what they
pleased, as for his own particular, he would never do a thing of that Nature,
which was against his Conscience. Whereupon the Emirs, admiring the greatness
of his Soul, were so far from doing him any outrage, that they submitted with
respect, and receiving Law from him, satisfied themselves with such an Oath as
he was pleased to take. This shows us with how little light of Judgment and
Integrity, the Protestant John de Serres, has in his History recorded, as an
undoubted Truth, one of the most improbable Fables that ever was invented, when
he tells us that St. Lewis for the security of his Promises pawned to these
Emirs the Box wherein it was kept, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For what
appearance is there that this Holy King, who chose rather to die than to take
an Oath, which he believed was contrary to the Law of God, although he was
assured that he might do it with a safe Conscience, would thus throw Pearls
before Swine, and deliver Jesus Christ himself, whom he believed by a faith so
lively to be present under the Species of that adorable Sacrament, and like
Judas put him once again into the hands of his mortal Enemies, to be exposed to
those Outrages and Indignities which they might offer. And in reality with all
my search I could never find, nor can there one single witness be produced of
such an Extraordinary Action, nor among all the Authors of that time, any one
Writer be found, who has said the least thing upon which it is possible to lay
the Foundation of such a groundless Calumny. The Pledges which St. Lewis gave
for the security of the two payments, are positively told us. Alphonsus, Count
de Poitiers his Brother, for the first; all the Sick, all the Munitions and
Engines for the second; that there is neither necessity, room, nor one word
concerning the Holy Sacrament. How then can he dare to assure us that St. Lewis
left it in pawn with the Barbarians? A Modern Writer ought to say nothing of
the Ages past, but upon good Warranty from the Records of those Times for what
he writes; for otherwise he is so far from being a good Historian, that he
becomes a paltry Romancer and Inventer of Fictions. And herein du Haillan is
excusable, who having given this Account in a few words, adds very honestly,
that there is no certainty of this Story. And the Continuator of William of
Tire, Heroldus, another Protestant, is much an honester man, when he tells us
plainly, that all this is a mere Fable, which has been raised upon an ill
grounded conjecture, as many learned Persons have observed; For by reason that
after this the Egyptians caused a Chalice with the Hostia, to be represented
upon their Money, their Tapistry hangings, and their Public Buildings, some
have conjectured, that the reason was in commemoration, that St. Lewis had left
there the Ciboir or Box, and the consecrated Hostia: But from whence can one
draw this untoward consequence? or is it therefore that conjectures, and such
feeble conjectures as this must be imposed upon us for Truths in Fact, that men
take the liberty to publish them, as things of the greatest certainty? If
conjectures be of any value, it is more reasonable and natural to say, That the
Egyptians did this, as in Triumph, and that these were the Public Trophies and
Marks of the Victory, Christian Army, they believed they had gained against the
God of the Christians, who was adored in the Eucharist, and to whom they knew
very well that St Lewis did most assiduously pay his duty with an infinite
respect. And this is the more credible, in regard that this great Prince after
his return into France, carried money to be minted, whereupon was to be seen
Manacles, to show his imprisonment, and thereby to animate the French one day
to revenge upon the Sarasins, the Injuries and Outrages which they had received
from them during their Captivity.

I have thought it necessary, in short, thus to refute this gross mistake, that
so I might prevent many, and some even among the Catholic Writers, who have
suffered themselves to be miserably deceived, and who have misled others in
relating a thing so little credible, upon the bare word of Paulus Jovius, who
is their only Warranty for it in the first Book of his Elogies, which he has
written of illustrious men, in that of Saladin. And yet even this Author says
no more, but barely without quoting any Person, That it is reported that St.
Lewis gave him for a pledge the Holy Sacrament. And so little does he know what
it is that he says, that in the same place he adds, that it was to Saladin, or
as he believes it is most probable, to his Brother Saphadin that St. Lewis gave
this Pledge. Whereas it is of public notoriety in History, that these two
Sultans were dead, the one above fifty, the other more than thirty years before
the War, which St. Lewis made in Egypt. How can any one then pretend to be so
far in the Right, I do not say to assure it, but even to relate upon the
Authority of a Modern Historian of so little exactness and fidelity, as Paulus
Jovius, a thing so little probable, and so highly injurious to one of the
greatest, and without contradiction one of the holiest Kings of Europe.

But further, all the Mamaluke Admirals, and the Sarasins themselves were of a
quite different opinion, and could not imagine that St. Lewis was so cowardly,
as at last to resolve to give them for an Hostage, the Eucharist which he
adored, after that Geoffrey de Sergines had protested, as he did before them
all, that they would all choose to perish rather than give the King himself in
Hostage, as the Sultan had demanded. For they were so smitten with the bright
luster of the Royal Virtues of this great King, and with that Majesty with
which he treated them, as if they had been his Subjects, and indeed his
Prisoners, as they would say themselves in admiration of the strength of his
Mind, the greatness of his Soul, and his Heroic Courage, that one day in
sounding before his Pavilion, in honor of him all their Trumpets and Warlike
Instruments, they had it under debate, whether they should choose him for their
Sultan; and there was nothing that obstructed it, besides his immovable
Resolution to do nothing which might in the least shock his Religion, the
Exercises whereof he would perform aloud like a Master, and as if he were
assured, that they durst not so much as entertain a thought of opposing him; so
that they were used to say, That he was the most Fierce Christian, that they
had ever seen. And one may from hence well judge, whether after this these
Emirs would have the Confidence to demand from him to put that into their hands
which they knew he acknowledged to be, and worshipped as true God. And that
which was yet most admirable in this adventure, was, that this Holy King
demanded sometime after of the Lord De Joinville, what his opinion was in this
matter, and supposing the Admirals should offer him the Crown, whether he
should accept it? to whom the good Seneschal, after his manner answered very
bluntly, That he should be a very fool to accept it, and trust himself to these
Villains, who had murdered their Prince. And I, answered the King, For my part,
I declare to you, that I would never have refused it. And this without doubt
proceeded from the pleasure with which he was ravished, to have so fair an
opportunity of sacrificing himself, by accepting this Empire, for the
re-establishment of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in Egypt, where Christianity
had sometimes flourished by an infinite multitude of the Servants of God, in
the first Ages of the Church.

The Treaty being thus at last confirmed by all parties, according to the
agreement, the King surrendered Damiata, upon the Friday after Ascension-Day,
and was at the same time set at Liberty himself with all the Prisoners, so far,
as that the four Galleys fell down the River to the Bridge of Damiata, into
which place Geoffrey de Sergines entered, early in the Morning, Sarasins, after
he had drawn out all the French, together with the Queen, who after the
Imprisonment of the King, had been reduced to great extremities. For so soon as
she received the sad news, she fell into such an excessive grief, that
believing she was upon the point of falling into the hands of the Sarasins, she
threw her self upon her knees, before a Knight of fourscore years of Age, who
never forsook her, and obliged him to promise her with an Oath, to grant her
one request, which she desired him to do for her; and this was, that if the
Sarasins took the City he would cut off her head; the Old Knight promised her
he would, adding with great frankness, that before she had done him the Honor
to desire it of him, he had already resolved to do it, thereby to put her into
a place of security, and out of the Power of those Barbarians, The Extremity
and Violence of her grief, brought her also into her Travail three Days before
her time, and she was delivered of a Son, to whom they gave a Surname, drawn
from her Affliction, calling him Tristan, as being in truth the true Son of her
Sorrow. And upon the same Day understanding that the Pisans, the Genoese, and
all the rest of the People were resolved to abandon the place, fearing the
Siege, and Famine, she prevailed so far upon them with her Prayers, and Tears,
that they were contented to stay, she promising to furnish them with Provisions
at her own Charges, which she did at the Expense of above three hundred
thousand Livres.

At length the Queen, the Legate, the Bishops, and the Duke of Burgundy, who
retired thither in a good hour, together with all the Garrison, which was
Commanded by Oliver de Terms, imbarqued upon the Ships which expected them
below the Bridge, and steered away directly for Acre, according to the Order of
the King; and the Sarasins entered into Damiata, where presently making
themselves Drunk with the Wines they found there, they most brutishly slew all
the Sick, and fired the Machins, which according to the Treaty they were to
surrender. But the Admirals did far worse, for instead of delivering the King
and the Prisoners, so soon as Damiata was put into their Possession, they put
it under deliberation, Whether they should not rather cut all their throats;
and one among them maintained, that having committed so great a Crime against
the Law of Mahomet, as they had done in killing their Sultan, they should yet
commit a greater, as he showed them out of one of their Books, if they should
suffer the greatest Enemy of their Law, to escape with his Life out of their
hands. And the matter went so far, that the four Galleys rowed up the River
till they came within a League of Caire, insomuch that all the Prisoners,
except the King, whom they Guarded in his Pavilion upon the Bank of the River,
had now lost all manner of hopes of Life or Liberty. But at last the better
Opinion prevailed, and there were some among them who urged vigorously, that
if, after having slain their Sultan, they should again imbrue their hands in
the Blood of one of the greatest Kings in the World, after having given their
Faith to him, by such a Solemn Treaty; they should pass through the whole
Earth, for the most infamous, and the most abominable of all Mankind; but to
speak truth, I am rather of an Opinion, that the eight hundred thousand
Bysances, which they would have lost by committing such a horrible Crime,
without any manner of advantage, was the weight which turned the Scale, and was
the strongest reason to persuade them, for this time at least, to be honest,
and to keep their Word and their Oath. And this informs us, that interest is
the best Guarranty of any Treaty, being the thing which has more Power over
most People, to oblige them to stand to their agreements, than all the Oaths,
and all the Hands and Seals which they can give.

Thus then, after two and thirty Days Captivity, the King, all the Princes, and
the Lords of France and Cyprus, and of the Realm of Jerusalem, with the poor
remainder of Soldiers, which there was left after such a terrible defeat,
wherein there were lost near thirty thousand Men, were set at Liberty, the
Count de Poitiers, only excepted, who was kept at Damiata for the security of
the first Payment, and the same Evening the King was Conducted by twenty
thousand Sarasins, who to do him Honor, Marched on Foot, to a large Genoese
Gally, which attended him below the Bridge, and upon which he imbarqued with
his Brother Charles, d' Anjou, Alberic Marshal of France, the Lord de
Joinville, Philip de Nemours, who sold the Town of that name to the King, the
brave Geoffrey de Sergines, and Nicholas, General of the Order of the Trinity
or the Mathurins. The others went aboard the Vessels which were prepared for
them, and the next Day the Counts of Flanders, Bretany, and Soissons,
accompanied with diverse Great Lords, took their leave of the King, and set Sail
for France, where they all happily arrived, except Peter de Dreux, Duke of
Bretany, who being very much indisposed when he took Ship, died upon the Sea
three Weeks after. His Body was carried by his Knights into Bretany, where he
reposeth in the Nunnery of Villeneuve near Nantes; and although the War which
he made with St. Lewis in the beginning of his Reign, and which thrive so ill,
that he only got by it, the shameful name of Illclerk, will be a blemish to him
in History, yet his Zeal and Courage, which he made so highly conspicuous in
his two Voyages to the Holy War, have so effaced that blot, by the Blood which
he therein shed, for the interest of Jesus Christ, and by the happy Death which
he found in that service, that one may lawfully give him a place among the
Hero's of the Crusade.

The King stayed yet two Days, the Saturday and the Sunday after Ascension,
upon the River in his Gally, in expectation of the finishing of the first
payment, that so the Count de Poitiers might be set at Liberty, and
understanding in the Evening of the Sunday, that there wanted thirty thousand
Livres to make up the two hundred thousand, and that the Templers, who had
store of Money aboard their Galleys, refused to lend him so much, under pretext
that by their Rule they were under an Oath, to part with nothing of their
Revenue, but to their Great Master; the devout King made them know upon this
occasion, that he was their first and their greatest Master, and that he would
dispense with this Article of their Rule, from which they could every day
dispense with themselves, in other points that were much more Essential. For
the Lord Joinville who executed his Orders most punctually, going into one of
their Galleys, with a good Hatchet, which he had already lifted up to break
open one of their strong Coffers, in the name of the King; the Marshal of the
Temple, who found that he would be obeyed, caused the Keys to be given him, and
thereupon he took out what Money he pleased, and the King, who was very well
satisfied with the Action, instantly caused to be paid to the Sarasins, not
only the thirty thousand Livres which was wanting of the Sum which was due, but
also ten thousand more, of which they had cheated themselves without perceiving
it, in weighing the Money in their Scales. So exact was this incomparable
Prince, religiously to observe his Word and Faith, even to those who had none
themselves, and who had so brutally violated that which they had given him,
with so many horrible Oaths. After which the Count de Poitiers, whom the
Sarasins set at Liberty, being come up to the Road, which Philip Count de
Montfort, where the King, who after the Money was paid, was now gotten, and
staid for them; they set Sail, and in a few Days, came happily to an Anchor in
the Port of Ptolemais, where this great Prince was received with as much Joy
for his deliverance, as there had been sorrow for his Captivity.

THE HISTORY OF THE CRUSADE, OR, The Expeditions of the Christian Princes for
the Conquest of the Holy Land. PART IV.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS of the Third Book.
The General Consternation all over France, upon the News of the King's
Imprisonment; the Tumult, the Shepherds, their Original, their Disorders, and
Defeat. St. Lewis after his deliverance performs his Articles with great
Justice. The Admirals fail on their part. The Original of the Hospital of the
Fifteen Score. The Council debates the matter of the King's return. The Reasons
on the one side and the other. It is at last concluded for his stay in
Palestine. Four Famous Ambassages to St. Lewis; from Pope Innocent, from the
Sultan of Damascus, from the Ancient of the Mountain, and from the Emperor
Frederick. The Death of that Emperor, and the different Opinions thereupon. An
Error of St. Lewis, who loses a fair opportunity of making use of one Party of
the Sarasins, to ruin the other. The Election of a Mamaluke Sultan. The gallant
Actions of St. Lewis in Palestine. The Death of Queen Blanch, and the return of
the King into France. The Rupture and War between the Venetians and Genoese
occasions the loss of the Holy Land. The Conquests of Haulon, Brother to the
great Cham, stops the Progress of the Sarasins. The Relation of the Mamaluke
Sultans. They vanquish the Tartars which ravage Palestine. The Character of
Sultan Bendocdar, the great Enemy of the Christians. His Conquests upon them.
His Cruelty, and the Glorious Martyrdom of the Soldiers of the Garrison of
Sephet, and of two Cordeliers, and a Commander of the Temple. The taking and
Destruction of Antioch by this Sultan. The quarrels between the Popes and the
Princes of the House of Suabia, obstruct the Succors of the West. The
Histories of Pope Innocent, and the Emperor Conrade; of Pope Alexander and
Mainfrey, against whom he vainly publishes Crusades. The History of Charles d'
Anjou, to whom Pope Urban, the Successor of Alexander, and Pope Clement the
Fourth, give the Realms of Naples and Sicily, as Fieffs escheated to the Church
by Felony. His Exploits, his Battles, and his Victories over Mainfrey and
Conradin. The deplorable Death of that young Prince. The Victories of Charles,
cause the Pope and St. Lewis to entertain a Design for a new Crusade. An
Assembly at Paris about that Affair, where the King, the Princes, and Lords,
take upon them the Cross. All other Nations decline the Crusade. The Collusion
of the Emperor, Michael Paleologus. The Condition of the King's Army. The
Resolution taken to Attack Tunis, and the Reas^ns wherefore. The Description of
Tunis and Carthage. The taking of the Port, the Tower, and the Castle of
Carthage. The Malady makes great Destruction in the King's Army. His Death,
Elogy and Character. The Arrival of Charles, King of Sicily. The Exploits of
the Army. The Treaty of Peace with the King of Tunis, who becomes Tributary to
Charles. The return of the two Kings; their Fleet is horribly beaten by a
Tempest. Prince Edward of England saved, his Vow to go to the Holy Land. His
Voyage, his Exploits, and his return. The vain endeavors of Pope Gregory the
Tenth, for a new Crusade. The second Council of Lions. The last causes of the
loss of the Holy Land. The quarrel among the Christian Princes for the
Succession to the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Death of Bendocdar. The defeat of
his Successor by the Tartars. The hopes of the recovery of all Palestine, by
the Arms of King Charles of Anjou, ruined by the sad accident of the Sicilian
Vespers. The new division among the Princes, and the Progress of the Mamaluke
Sultans. The Relation of the lamentable Siege, and the taking of Acre by these
Barbarians. All the other places are lost, and the Christians of the West
wholly driven out of Palestine and Syria. The vain and fruitless attempts which
have since been made to renew the Crusades.

France, of the two Victories, which the King had gained near Massora, was
followed with a false report, which was current, of the defeat of the Sultan,
and the taking of Grand Caire. And this coming from the Court of the Pope, to
whom the Bishop of Marseilles, who had seen it in Letters Written to the
Commandator of the Hospital of St. John, had sent it, Men being apt easily to
believe that which they passionately desire, there was no doubt made but it was
true; so that all was full of rejoicing, even then when upon the sudden, they
were obliged to change this excessive joy into an extreme afflicton, by the
certain intelligence which they received of the loss of the whole Christian
Army, and the Captivity of the King and all the Princes. And this Affliction
was followed by most furious disorders, Germany a Troop of Vagabonds, mingled
with young People, and the Scum and Refuse of the Peasantry, ran all over,
crying that they must make a Crusade for the deliverance of the Ring of France.
And a certain Hungarian Apostate, of the Cistercian Order, one of the most
prosligate Villains in the World, but very able and Learned in many Languages,
put himself at the head of them, and undertook to be their Captain Conductor.
For this purpose he passed into France, with his Company, and fell to Preaching
as if he had been a Prophet, and published this Crusade, as he said from God
Almighty, for the deliverance of the King, telling of a world of Miracles,
Visions and Revelations which he had, especially from the Blessed Virgin and
the Angels, which these simple well meaning People, especially the Countrymen
and Shepherds, looked upon as the express Commands of God.

For he said himself, and caused it to be Preached also by his Impostors, whom
he sent abroad, that Jesus Christ, who was the good Shepherd, and Innocence it
self, was resolved to make use of Shepherds, and the good innocent Country
People for the deliverance of the best King in the World. And herewith he
assembled an infinite number of young People, Shepherds and Peasants, who,
leaving their Teams and their Toils, their Flocks and Herds, took upon them the
Cross, and took up Arms; all the Rabble joining with them under this new head
of the Crusade, thereby to gain their Liberty under such a specious pretext, as
this of the deliverance of the King. And in truth it was an Army of Villains,
of Thieves, Murderers, and Sacrilegious Wretches, which was divided into
Companies, who had a Lamb painted in their Colors, which gave occasion to
their name of Shepherds. He also himself created Captains among them, who were
called Masters, to whom he gave the Sacrilegious License, to exercise the
Sacerdotal and Pontifical Functions: so that they undertook to bless the
People, giving remission not only for Sins already committed, but such as
should be committed for the future, making Marriages and Divorces according to
their pleasure, committing a thousand other Sacrileges, and above all,
declaring War against the Priests and Monks, whom they cruelly Murdered,
alleging they had drawn down the indignation of God upon the People, and were
by their dissolute Lives the cause of the King's Misfortunes and Captivity.

The People at first were so Sottish as to favor these new Crusades, who,
wherever they came, committed infinite disorders. Those of Orleans were so
silly as to permit them to do what they pleased in their City, where they put
all the Clergy to the Sword. They would have done the same at Berri, where they
began to Plunder; but they found there some People too Wise and Courageous to
endure it. For after they had been driven out of Bourges, where they thought to
have done the same they did at Orleans, the Gentlemen of Berri took Arms
together with the Commons, and pursued these Robbers, and overtaking them
between Mortemer and Villeneuve upon the Char, they cut the greatest part of
them in Pieces, together with their Apostate General, who was slain upon the
place. The remainder of this Rout, who saved themselves by Flight, and all that
could be found of them in the other Provinces, perished shortly after, either
by the Halter, or by the hands of such as followed the Example of these brave
Gentlemen of Berri, to whom the Queen Regent, was obliged for the Tranquillity,
which they restored to the state in the absence of the King, who in this time
was busy in the Affairs of the Realm of Jesus Christ in the East.

The first thing which he did after his Arrival at Ptolemais, was to deliver
all the Sarasin Prisoners according to his Promise, and to send Men and Ships
into Egypt, to bring the Christian Captives from thence, according to the
Treaty, as well those, who were taken last, as those who had been made
Prisoners after the Truce of the Emperor Frederick with Sultan Meledin, who had
so generously exposed their Lives and Liberty, for the Glory of Jesus Christ.
But these perfidious Admirals, who already repented, and reproached their own
folly as they called it, in letting so great a King escape out of their hands,
could never be persuaded to restore more than four hundred, Caire, unless he
would pay more Money for their Ransom. It is reported also, that they did most
inhumanely cause the Eyes of three hundred of the most Noble and bravest among
the other Captives to be put out, before they sent them back to the King,
thereby to put them out of a condition of ever being able to bear Arms against
them any more. And it was, as it is credibly believed, in Memory of these three
hundred blind Gentlemen, that St. Lewis afterward founded the Famous Hospital
of the fifteen score at Paris, as it is declared in the Bulla which Pope Sixtus
Quartus, gave in the year one thousand four hundred eighty three, in favor of
that Famous House, wherein there are at this Day maintained three hundred poor
blind People of both Sexes, according to the intention of their Founder St.
Lewis. But it was not here that the Perfidy and the Cruelty of these Infidel
Emirs stopped; for besides that they would never restore either the Arms, the
Horses, the Munitions, nor the Baggage of the Christians, they picked out all
the handsomest young Men, and making them kneel down one after another, under a
Scymiter which the Executioner held up ready to give the blow, they pressed
them to renounce Jesus Christ, and embrace the Law of Mahomet. And in truth
some of them overcome by a Cowardly fear of Death, abandoned their Religion to
preserve a Criminal Life, which rendered them Infamous before God and Man, for
their base Apostasy; but the greatest number of them dispising the Menaces of
these Barbarians, died gloriously in confessing Jesus Christ, for whose sake
they had taken upon them the Cross. And thus it was that the Success of this
Crusade, which appeared so unfortunate in humane appearance, became most happy
in the sight of God, whose Glory was highly exalted by these new Martyrs.

The King was surprised with this News and the perfidiousness of these
Barbarians, meaning well himself he thought during all the time of the Truce,
which he had concluded for ten years, that nothing was to be feared as to
Palestine; but now perceiving he was deceived, although he had caused the Ships
to be made ready for his return into France, yet he called an Assembly of all
the Princes and Lords both of France and Palestine. Where having opened to them
the condition of his Affairs in France, where it was apprehended that the
English would make advantage of his absence; as also the terms in which they
then stood with the Egyptians, who openly infringed the Treaty of the Truce,
and that in the most Barbarous and insolent manner in the World, he commanded
them to consider seriously what they thought fit to advise him thereupon; and
to give him their Opinions within eight Days, Whether he ought to return into
France, or remain some time longer in the East. The eight Days being expired,
the Council was reassembled, where there were two Opinions, directly opposite
one to the other, proposed. The first was that of the greatest number of the
French who concluded, That he ought with all convenient Expedition to return
into France. First, to give the necessary Orders for the Affairs of his Realm,
which stood in great necessity of his presence. Secondly, in regard that having
but a very few Knights, and Soldiers, and who having nothing to subsist upon,
nor being Master so much as of any one place in the Realm of Jerusalem, he
could not remain there either with safety, Honor, or Advantage to himself or
the Affairs of the Christians in the East. And that he might serve them much
more effectually, if after having been sometime in France to raise Money, and
Levy new Troops, he should have a desire to return into Egypt, to take
Vengeance upon these perfidious Enemies of God, who had so barbarously violated
their Faith and Treaty.

But all the Knights of the Temple, and the Hospital, the Patriarch, the
Prelates, and all the Lords of Palestine, Cyprus, and Syria, and even diverse of
the French Lords among which was the High Steward of Champagne, the brave Lord
Joinville, declared themselves of the contrary opinion, and strongly urged,
That the Honor of the King, and welfare of all Christendom in the East,
obliged him to stay some time longer in the Holy Land; That it would be most
shameful to abandon so many brave Men, as had so faithfully served him in
Egypt, and also to expose them to the fury of their Enemies, who would find
them after his retreat much weaker than they were at his coming thither; That
it was most certain that in the condition wherein things were, the Christians
of Palestine would not stay there; Jerusalem, for the Conquest whereof the
Christians of Europe, and especially those of France had spent so much of their
Blood, and undertaken so many Crusades; and that so many thousands of poor
Captives, who sighed in the Prisons of Caire, whereof many were the Relations,
the Allies, or the Friends of those who were in the opinion for the King's
return, would be reduced to the utmost despair, having once lost all hope of
even a possibility of their deliverance; since the Infidels would have nothing
either to hope or fear from the Christians, after having once chased them out
of Palestine. And in conclusion, they added, That the stay of the King in the
Holy Land for some time longer, would without doubt produce the quite contrary
Effects to all these Misfortunes, which would infallibly be consequent upon his
return; That it was well known, that the King notwithstanding all his losses
sustained in Egypt, was in a condition to repair one part of them, and to
strike a terror into his Enemies, in regard that all the Money which he had yet
expended, he had drawn out of the Purses of his Receivers, who had gained it
unjustly from him; That he had still his whole Treasure entire, with which he
might raise store of good Troops, and that so soon as it was known that he
would pay well, he could not want Soldiers, but that men at Arms, and Knights
would resort to him from all places, with which he might serve himself, upon
the present occasion, to very good purpose, there being in reality so great a
Division among the Infidels, that the Sultan of Alepo, the most potent of the
Sarasins of Syria, made War against those of Egypt; That he had already taken
Damascus from them, And that he was resolved in Person to lead his Army into
Egypt to revenge the Death of the Sultan his Cousin, whom those infamous
Mamalukes had so barbarously murdered; That the least advantage which the King
could draw from this War, would be to oblige these perfidious Wretches by the
fear which they would have lest he should join with their Enemy, to set all the
Prisoners at liberty; That however hereby he would hinder the Infidels from
invading the Lands of the Christians; And that in the mean time he might
fortify the places, which were demolished; and thereby leave the Country in a
Condition to defend it self whenever at last he should be obliged to return
and leave the Holy Land.

After he had patiently heard all these Reasons, the King took eight days more
to consider of what Resolution he ought to make; after which having again
caused his Lords to be assembled, and imploring before them the Light and the
Grace of God's Holy Spirit, he spoke to them in these Terms. That he gave all
of them hearty thanks for the Counsel which they had on both parts given him;
That if any worldly consideration could oblige him to return into France, most
assuredly it was the Interest of his Realm, to which he owed his Principal
Applications, and his greatest Care; But in regard that he was sufficiently
satisfied, that France had nothing to fear, so long as it was under the wise
Government of the Queen, his Mother, who had Forces, Courage and Conduct enough
to defend it against all those, who should in his absence have any designs
against it, he was resolved not to abandon the Interests of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ in Syria; but that he would stay there some time longer to put
them into a posture of safety; That nevertheless he left all Persons, who had a
desire to it, at liberty to return if they so pleased; but withal he promised
also on the other side to all those who were resolved to run his Fortune, that
he would make their choice so advantageous, that they should have sufficient
reason to be satisfied with it.

This Discourse of the King moved the whole Assembly, though with very
different Sentiments; in some it excited tenderness and Devotion, so that they
devoted themselves most heartily with this amiable Prince to the Service of
Jesus Christ; in others it occasioned Grief and Sadness, by understanding the
King's Resolution, which was so unexpected to them, and by seeing that their
honor obliged them against their Inclinations still to remain in Palestine.
But hereupon St. Lewis did not fail presently to give out Commissions, and
Money for making of Levies; however for the satisfaction of the Queen, his
Mother, he sent home the two Princes, his Brothers, into France, whither he
writ to all the orders of the Realm, that admirable Letter, by which, after he
had given them a full account of all the transactions, which till then had
happened, he exhorted them by all the considerations both Divine and Humane,

Whilst these things were doing, the King, who made his preparations with so
much diligence, received the Ambassadors, which came to him from Europe and
from Asia. Pope Innocent sent to give him consolation by his Legates for his
misfortune; and writ to him most excellent Letters, dated from Lions the
twelfth of August, by which, after he had said all the finest and most
Christian things suitable to give consolation to a Prince in Afflictions of
this nature, he conjured him by no means to abandon Palestine; but offered him
all that he himself should think the Holy See was able to assist him in. The
Sa^tan of Damascus also by his Ambassadors, desired the conjunction of his Arms
against the Mamalukes, promising to yield to him thereupon the whole Kingdom of
Jerusalem; to which St. Lewis willingly accorded, provided that the Admirals
refused to give him satisfaction. But they fearing the Arms of the King offered
to give him all manner of satisfaction, and to surrender to him all the Realm
of Jerusalem, which was in their hands, provided that he would assist them
against the Sultan of Damascus, who, they said, offered the King what was none
of his own. And to manifest at this time that they dealt sincerely, they sent
immediately to him all the Christian Prisoners, as also the Bones of Count
Gantier de Brienne; and sometime after the King peremptorily demanding that as
a preliminary, before he would enter upon a new Treaty with them, they sent him
the Heads of the Christians, which they had set upon the Walls of Grand Caire,
and all the Children and Young People, whom they had compelled to deny the
Faith of Christ; which alone were considerable Effects of the resolution, which
this Prince had taken to stay in Syria. The Ancient of the Mountain also, who
at first, according to his insolent custom, had sent to demand a kind of
Tribute, which the other Princes had been used to pay him, that thereby they
might live in safety, sent new Ambassadors to him, with presents of
Rock-Crystal in diverse Figures, which was the only Rarity of his Country,
desiring his Amity and Protection in a most submissive manner. And the King in
return also sent him, with rich presents, Father Breton, a Dominican, who was
very skilful in the Sarasin Language, to endeavor his conversion, although
that pious design was not followed with answerable Success.

But that which was most taken notice of by the French Lords, was the Embassage
of the Emperor Frederick, who believing the King was still a Prisoner offered
him all that lay in his Power for his deliverance; and assured him, that he had
writ in most positive terms to the Sultan of Egypt, of whose death he was then
ignorant, to let him know, that he would renounce his Amity and his Alliance,
if he did not immediately restore the King to Liberty, with all his People, who
were Prisoners. In truth the greatest part of the French Lords distrusted the
Intention of this Emperor, in regard that although the King would never break
with him, notwithstanding his differences with the Pope, yet nevertheless, that
Prince had always manifested a displeasure, because St. Lewis had protected Pope
Innocent, by affording him a Sanctuary in France, and giving him the Liberty to
hold a Council at Lions, where matters were carried so high against him.
However they rejoiced mightily, that these Ambassadors did not arrive till
after the King had regained his liberty; in regard their was reason to be
afraid lest if they found him still a Prisoner they might possibly have
endeavored underhand to hinder his deliverance: But let it be as it will, this
was one of the last Actions, good or bad, that Frederick did, for he died not
long after in the same Year at Tarentum, the third of December.

As the Actions of his Life were diversely discoursed of, so was also his Death;
some will have it, That he died impenitent, without any fence of God or
Religion, without Sacraments; That he was poisoned, and also strangled by the
hands of Mainfrey, one of his Natural Sons, whom he had made Prince of
Tarentum, and who, by this Parricide, thought to seize upon his Treasure, and
the Kingdom of Sicily. And the Monk of Padua, makes no manner of difficulty to
send him directly to Hell, laden, as he clownishly enough expresses it, with
a Sack full of his sins. On the contrary others affirm that he died very
peaceably in his Bed, between the Arms of the Archbishop of Palermo, Crusades,
I only say, that as appears by an extract out of his last Will and Testament,
which may be seen in the Imperial Constitutions of Goldastus, he gave a Legacy
of a hundred thousand Ounces of Gold, toward the carrying on the War for the
recovery of the Holy Land; and certainly this deserves so well, that an
Historian of the Crusades, is bound to show some respect to the Memory of an
Emperor, who after all, performed many most brave and noble Actions, if he had
not had the misfortune to do some very ill ones.

Acre toward the end of the Winter, and went to incamp near Cesarea, which the
Sarasins had demolished, and which he undertook to rebuild and fortify, as he
did, neither the Sultan of Damascus, nor the Egyptians offering to oppose him;
in regard that both the one and the other, were in continual hopes to conclude
their Treaty with him, and to strengthen themselves by his assistance in the
War which they were about to make. Here it was that the Admirals of Egypt, to
anticipate their Enemy and engage the King into their Party, sent their
Commissioners to assure him, that they were ready to surrender the Young
Runnegado's, and the Heads of the Christians, which they had set upon the Walls
and Towers of Grand Caire, and that they would also acquit him of the two
hundred thousand Livres, which were yet unpaid, which the King resolved before
he would treat with them, in regard that they had broken the Truce, by not
observing the Conditions of their former Treaty, and thereupon, as the Admirals
gave him all the Satisfaction, which he demanded, he appointed them a day to
meet him at Jaffa, where a new Treaty was to be made, by which the Admirals
obliged themselves to put into his hands all the Places of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, to which they should for the Future make no more pretensions; and
the King reciprocally promised to assist them with all his Forces against the
Sultan of Damascus, their Enemy.

So soon as the Sultan, who was a man of Courage and Conduct, understood that
the King had accorded with the Egyptians, he sent twenty thousand men to seize
upon the Passes between Egypt and Palestine; but this did not hinder the King
from leading his Army to Jaffa, the Castle whereof was very strong though the
Town was wholly ruinous; and fell to rebuilding and fortifyng of it at great
charges and with incredible diligence, although the Enemies gave continual
Alarms to his Camp, and daily made a show as if they would attack it. This made
the Mamaluke Admirals, who had not yet set their Army on foot, and therefore
durst not repair to Jaffa, request the King to deferr their Interview, and to
appoint another day, when they might be in a condition to attend him; and in
the mean time the Sultan of Damascus, having assembled all his best Troops,
took a review of them about Gadres, which was anciently called Gadara, a strong
City on the other side the Sea of Galilee; and from thence passing over the
Jordan he went and joined with thirty thousand Horse, which he had sent before
him to the Frontier of Egypt, into which he entered to revenge upon the Admirals
the death of his Cousin. And they who had had leisure to prepare for his coming
did not fail to give him a welcome like men of Courage, Egyptians,
understanding that their Army was Victorious in the other Wing, rallied, and
came to the charge more furiously than before against their Vanquishers; and
then those also, who had been Victorious on the other side falling upon their
Rere, cut them in pieces and made the Victory so complete, that all the Sultan
could do was to save himself, and retreat to Gadres sorely wounded, with two
thousand men which only escaped in that Bloody Battle.

After this great Victory, the Admirals made a sudden turn like able
Politicians. For now perceiving that they had no more need of the Arms of the
King, they believed that to preserve to themselves the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
which by Treaty they were obliged to surrender unto him, it was much better for
them to make Peace with the Sultan, who seeing himself abandoned by the King,
would without doubt be very glad to revenge himself, and for fear of having
both Armies upon his Hands, Gadres, offering him Peace, and at the same time
desiring it from him. They excused themselves for the death of the Sultan of
Egypt, his Cousin, by the necessity, which they had to prevent their own by
giving him his; and remonstrated to him, that it was for their Common
Interests, rather to unite against the Christians, who were their Common
Enemies, than by their divisions to give them the opportunity to make use of
their Arms to the mutual destruction one of another. The Sultan, who desired
nothing so much, willingly harkned to the Proposition, so that without any
difficulty, a Peace was presently concluded betwixt them; and the King by too
long deferring to conclude with the one or the other of them, was miserably
deceived by them both, and lost not only the noblest opportunity of recovering
the Kingdom of Jerusalem by an honorable Treaty, but on the sudden found he
had two puissant Enemies, to encounter, who would now no more hear either of a
Peace or a Truce, and who might easily have both been ruined, by keeping up the
Quarrel between them, and uniting with the one against the other, as they both
desired. But though the King was a great Saint, we must not believe that
Saintships render men infallible, especially in Policy, and above all not in
matters of War, which is the remotest thing from Religion, whose Principles are
those of Love and Peace.

All the advantage, which the King gained by this Rencontre, was to quit
himself of the two hundred thousand Livres to the Admirals, which yet in
reality he was no ways obliged to pay, after they had so perfidiously broken
their first Treaty. Sometime after they had made this Peace with the Sultan of
Damascus, although they saw they had nothing to fear, either from this Prince,
their Allie, or from the Christians, who were in too weak a condition to attack
them; yet considering that it was impossible for their Empire to subsist any
considerable time without a Head, they resolved at last to create one of their
own Body to the exclusion of the Arabians, Egyptians, and all the Descendants
of the Great Saladin and Saphadin. And being well assured that there were none
able to oppose them, they accordingly chose for their Sultan one of the
Mamaluke Admirals, whom they named Azzadin Aibec, or Elmahec: For there is not
one of these Sultans, but who have different names, in diverse Authors, who
have writ concerning them. This Sultan was a Turcoman by Nation, and from
thence it is, that many Historians call him Turquemin. However from this time
the Mamalukes held the Empire of Egypt, not by Succession but Election, till
the Year one thousand five hundred and seventeen, when Selim the Emperor of the
Turks conquered it, after he had in a great Battle overthrown and near Grand
Caire taken Tomombey their last Sultan.

Mean time the Sultan of Damascus under the Favor of this Peace, having
assembled his Army, came with thirty thousand men to discharge his Indignation
upon the Territories of the Christians. He presented himself before Acre, and
threatened to fire the Suburbs, if they would not redeem them from that danger,
with fifty thousand Bysances of Gold; but the Lord of Assure, the Constable of
the Realm, thought fit to pay him in another Metal, Jaffa, was about to repair
Sidon or Sajetta, had but a few Troops with him, by reason that he had sent the
greatest part of his Soldiers to seize upon Belinas, formerly called Cesarea
Philippi, he marched with a design to surprise him. The King, who was
advertised thereof, was obliged to retire into the Castle and to quit the Town,
which was not yet in a condition to be defended. The Sarasins therefore having
surprised and cut in pieces two thousand of the Servants and Peasants, who
followed the Camp, entered without resistance into Sidon, which they once again
demolished, overthrowing the Walls to the very Foundation. But the Sultan being
afraid that the other part of the Army, which had by force taken Belinas,
should march and take Damascus, he marched away in all haste to defend his
Capital City. Whilst the Troops which he feared, having not been able to take
the Castle of Belinas, and being drawn from a dangerous Country by the Wise
Conduct of Oliver de Terms, one of the most hardy and Valiant Knights of the
Army marched back again by another way to join the King of Sidon.

Sarasins, and lay unburied, whose Bodies lay half putrefied above ground near
the City, he himself took the most infected of them upon his Royal shouldiers,
carrying those to their interment, whose offensive smell was scarcely to be
endured, without showing any manner of aversion for his loathsome burden, as
did those of his retinue, and without receiving the least inconvenience from
these infected Bodies. A rare example even among the greatest Saints, but much
more among the greatest Princes, and which may well make the delicacy of those
blush, who being so much below such elevated Majesty have such an extreme
aversion for the Exercises of Christian Piety, when they are never so little
contrary to the Inclinations of Nature; so that they are only contented to
serve God when they can so accomodate his service with their own, as that they
may do it without losing any thing of either their profit or their pleasure.

After this, the King, according to the desires of the Lords of the Country,
began to repair the ruins of Sidon, which he made stronger than ever it had
been before. He did the same to the City and Castle of Caiphas, which was very
necessary for covering the City of Acre, whose Walls and Towers also he took
care to repair, and to fortify the Suburbs in such a manner as to put them in
safety against the attempts of the Sarasins. This did so much surprise them
with wonder, that they were not able sufficiently to admire the Power, the
Riches, and the Magnificence of this great King, who after he had, as they
thought, by his extreme misfortune lost all in Egypt, had still so much
treasure as to defray those prodigious expenses, which it is well known are so
necessary for the maintaining of Armies, building of Cities, and erecting of
Fortresses. In short, during the time that he remained in the Holy Land, he
fully satisfied his devotion to God as well as his Duty to the Interest of the
Country, for he visited the Holy Mountain of Tabor, and the Sacred Chamber of
Nazareth, where, accompanied with the Legate and all the Lords, he celebrated
the Feast of the Annunciation with the magnificence of a King, thereby to
honor God more eminently among the Infidels with the Piety of a Saint, and to
inflame the devotion of the Christians of the Country, who generally were not
addicted too much to it, or to lead their Lives conformable to the Holiness of
those sacred places, which they did inhabit. Above all, he had an extreme
desire to visit the Holy City of Jerusalem, whose Walls the Sarasins had
rebuilded, and who would willingly have given him the liberty to enter into it
as a Pilgrim. But his Council did not think it convenient, that one of the
greatest Kings of Christendom ought to go thither to worship Jesus Christ
before his Holy Sepulcher, before he had conquered it from the Infidels; for
otherwise they said, the other Princes, who after him should undertake the
Voyage to the Holy Land, would believe themselves acquitted of their Duty,
France had done, which might be of great prejudice to the Crusades, the end of
which was to be the deliverance of Jerusalem.

Blanch, his Mother, for whom he had ever had a most Infinite tenderness and
Reverence, and seeing that thereupon his presence would be absolutely necessary
in his Realm, he resolved at last to return. But for the safety of Palestine he
left the Legate there with considerable store of money, and a good part of his
Army, under the Command of the Wise and Valiant Geoffrey de Sergines. After
which, upon the three and twentieth of April, he embarked with the rest of his
People upon fourteen Ships, in the greatest of which he would have, together
with the Queen and the Princes, his Children, Jesus Christ himself present in
the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar, both for the consolation, and the
security of his Voyage. And it was under the Conduct of this Divine Pilot, who
nevertheless seemed sometimes to sleep during the Tempest, that having escaped
the most extraordinary dangers, which during two months he had run at Sea, he
at last landed at Years, from whence coming into France, he went directly to
St. Dennis, to render most humble thanks unto Almighty God for his return,
which he acknowledged he had obtained by the intercession of the Holy Martyrs,
the Protectors of France. The Queen, who in an eniment danger of suffering
shipwreck had made a Vow, that if she escaped, she would send a ship of Silver
to St. Nicholas in Lorrain, did not fail to accomplish it. She caused this Ship
to be made, wherein is to be seen her Picture from the Life, together with that
of the King, and the three Princes, her Children. The Steward of Champagne, and
Joinville, who had persuaded her to make this Vow, did himself carry this
Offering, marching barefoot from Joinville to this famous Church of St.
Nicholas, where it has pleased God to continue to this day, the working of an
infinite of Wonders for the Honor of this Holy Bishop, the Protector of those
who sail upon the Sea.

France enjoyed the happy Fruits of the Presence of the King, who by his wise
Government maintained it in a most profound tranquillity, Palestine began to
feel those misfortunes, which fell upon it in his absence, by the deadly
division, which had he been there he would have prevented, and which was the
last cause of the loss of the Holy Land. The Venetians, the Genoese, and the
Pisans, who had most advantageously served in all the Crusades by their
shipping, had in Acre their quarter and their Jurisdiction assigned them, and
their Magistrate, who was Independent of any other; though the Church of the
fair Monastery of St. Sabas was common to the three Nations for the celebration
of the Divine Offices. The Venetians and the Genoese, who in those times rarely
agreed, had abundance of quarrels under diverse pretenses, which served to
cover the true cause of all these Embroilments, which in truth was the
Jealousy of State and the Ambition, which they had to be the sole Masters of
the Sea; and every one of them equally pretended, that this Church appertained
solely to their Republic. And whereas Alexander the fourth, who succeeded to
Pope Innocent, had declared that the Church ought to be in common to the three
Nations; the Genoese, who first received this declaration, nevertheless being
supported by the Authority and the Forces of Count Philip de Montfort, who was
then the Governor of Ptolemais, chased the Venetians from the City, and seized
upon the Church and the Monastery, which they fortified in the form of a
Citadel. They took for their Pretext a great violence, which a Venetian had
offered to a Genoese, whom he used very scurvily, and which had been
sufficiently revenged by the Genoeses upon the Venetians, who would never
receive the excuses, which had been offered to them in the name of the
Republic, which constantly disavowed these actions of private Persons. The War
then being declared in this manner, by the Way of Fact, Venetians, assisted by
the Pisans, who declared for them, in renouncing the Amity of the Genoese, with
whom they were confederated before, rigged out a potent Navy, Ptolemais, burnt
the Genoese ships, entered the City and there fought, gaining by Inches the
quarter of the Enemy; besieging and forcing the Monastery, Sabas, and chasing
from Ptolemais Count Philip and the Genoese, who retreated to Tire; from
whence, coming the year following, with nine and forty Galleys and four great
men of War, they came to a great Battle which they lost between Ptolemais and
Caiphas. So that the Cities, the Princes, the Lords and all the Knights of the
Country, being divided upon this quarrel, some declaring for the Venetians, and
others for the Genoese, their happened between these two Potent Republics a
most cruel War, which being from time to time suspended by Feeble Treaties,
which were quickly broken, continued for a whole Age, to the great prejudice of
all Christendom, and especially to the Affairs of the East, being the principal
Cause of the irreparable loss of all.

And certainly the Sarasins of Syria and Mesopotamia had not failed upon such a
deplorable opportunity, as was this miserable division, to have ruined the
Christians of the Holy Land, if God had not at the same time raised other
Enemies against those Infidels to destroy them. For the Tartars having subdued
all Persia passed over the Tygris under the Conduct of Halon, the Brother of
Mangon, the Great Cham of Tartary. That Prince, who is reported to have been a
Christian and a great Enemy to the Mahometans, having endeavored to push his
Conquests to the Mediterranean Sea, was now going to lay Siege to the City of
Bagdad, which is not, as has been believed, the ancient Babylon of the
Chaldeans, which was situate upon the River Euphrates, and of which there are
now not so much as the ruins remaining. For this which still carries something
of the Name, is above fifty miles from Euphrates, and stands upon the Tygris,
near the place, where was anciently the Famous City of Seleucia. There was the
principal Seat of the Mohammedan Empire in those times, where the Caliph, whom
all the other Sultans acknowledged at least in appearance for their Head, and
the chief Priest of their Law, kept his Court. Now the Caliph, then in being,
as he was not at all martially inclined, so was so extremely covetous, that
though he was prodigiously rich, yet would he not be at any Charge, either to
fortify the City or to maintain a good Garrison; so that the City was
instantly taken by the Tartar, who after he had put to the Sword all the
Sarasins, which he found there, caused the miserable Caliph to be locked up in
one of the Chambers, where his Treasure lay, amongst an infinite quantity of
Rich Furniture, Plate Money, and Jewels, telling him with a terrible and Bloody
Rallery, that since he so delighted in Riches, and was so passionately in Love
with Gold and Silver, he should be treated according to his Inclinations, and
eat nothing less delicate than Gold. Thus this Unfortunate Miser, who was the
last of the Caliphs, the Successors of Mahomet, died with hunger, in the midst
of a most incredible abundance of Gold, Silver, Pearls and Gemms, the sight
whereof would not content nature, or satisfy her necessities, and with which,
if he had known how to use them, he might have avoided this miserable Destiny,
and at least have died nobly at the head of an Army sighting for his Life and
Liberty, with this Treasure, which would have raised and paid them and have
possibly secured him from this insolent Tartar. A great but most just
punishment of a Covetous Wretch, who having all his Life made Idols of his
Riches, without daring to touch them more than if they had been most Sacred
things, deservedly learnt at his death, that these false Divinities had not the
Power either to save his Soul or his Body, and that Gold and Silver are no
further valuable than by the good use which is made of them.

Tartar Prince entered into Mesopotamia, which yielded to the Conqueror without
resistance, took Edessa, passed the Euphrates, made himself Master of
Samothracia, Emessa, Haman, Harenc, and all the places which the Sultan had
taken from the Christians in Syria; besieged, and by storm took Alepo, which is
thought to have been the Ancient Berea; and there he took the Sultan Prisoner,
whom he carried in Irons to Damascus, constraining the Inhabitants to yield,
after they had seen their Captive Sultan put to death before their Eyes. And
from thence returning with a small retinue into Tartary upon the news, which
arrived of his Brother's death to whom he was to succeed, Cathogoba. And he,
who was imbroiled with the Christians, whom before he seemed to favor, entered
into the Realm of Jerusalem, and there took Cesarea and Sidon, and began to
threaten Ptolemais, when the Christians received a sudden assistance from
Egypt, from whence they least expected it.

The first of the Mamaluke Sultans Atbec or Elmehec, having been strangled in a
Bath by his own Wise, after he had reigned five years; the Admirals, who
revenged his death by the Punishment of this Murderess of her Husband, by
common consent made choice of his Son Almansor, who was within a year dethroned
by one of his Emirs, whom the rest placed upon the Throne and made him Sultan,
giving him the name of Melech Elvahet. This new Sultan, who was a great
Captain, searing that the Tartars, after having conquered Palestine would come
pouring into Egypt, resolved to prevent them. For this purpose therefore having
drawn together, all the Forces of Egypt, he entered into Palestine, and made an
Alliance with the Christians of the Country against their Common Enemies; and
after he had for three days refreshed his Army about Ptolemais he marched
directly against the Tartars, who ravaged Galilee, and upon the third of
October gave them Battle in the Plain of Tiberias, where he cut the greatest
part of them in pieces and routed the rest, and slew their General Cathogoba
upon the place; and having thus delivered himself from this formidable Enemy,
he returned covered with Glory and laden with Spoils into Egypt. But a while
after, one of his principal Emirs, whose name was Bondogar or Bendocdar, who
continually importuned him to turn his Victorious Arms, against the Christians,
seeing that, contrary to the Custom of these Barbarians, he would not violate
the Faith which he had given them, he most barbarously murdered him, and caused
himself to be chosen Sultan by the Mamalukes, who infinitely esteemed him for
his Courage.

And in truth, as he was the most brave, the most able and Politic, so he was
also the most wicked, persidious, and most cruel of all these Barbarians. For
to the end, that he might reign in safety, he put to death all that he could
find of the race of the former Sultans; and in a little time fourscore of the
Admirals also fell, under diverse Pretexts, as Sacrifices to his Jeasousie,
being in reality guilty of no other Crime, but the fear of the Tyrant, who
believing that they were as wicked as himself, was under the continual
apprehensions, whilst they were living, that they should treat him one day in
the same cruel manner as he had done his Predecessor: and by this procedure he
rendered himself so terrible to all his Subjects, that no person durst so much
as adventure to make a Visit to an acquaintance, or to talk with a particular
Friend, lest it might raise a Jealousy in the Sultan, which did not fail to be
followed by the death of him against whom it was conceived. But as for any
thing else, he had whatever was requisite to make him a Conqueror, for he was
Bold, undertaking, fearless, cunning, vigilant, sober, chaste, not permitting
his Soldiers, either Wine or Women, which he said weakened both there Bodies,
and their Minds, and took away from them all the Vigor of Warriors, and above
all he had Fortune for his Reward, and a constant Success when ever he acted by
himself.

Such a Person was Bendocdar, who had not slain his Predecessor, but because he
refused to make War against the Christians, against whom consequently he did
not fail presently to lead the Victorious Army, which had defeated the Tartars.
Christians of the Holy Land. For the Infidels having at first defeated the
Troops of the Lords of Baruth and Giblet with those of Ptolemais, Templers, who
were got together to oppose this Enemy, who surprised them, he wasted and
ruined all the Country, as far as to Antioch; after which he came and presented
himself with thirty thousand Horse before Ptolemais, Bethlehem, Cesarea by
Treason, the City and Castle of Assure by a long Seige, and the impregnable
Fortress of Sephet by composition. But the Persidious Infidel, basely broke his
Articles, Mahometans, they were so encouraged by the Fathers, James of Pavia,
Jeremy of Geneva, two fervently Religious of the Order of St. Francis, and by
the Prior of the Temple, that the next Day they all unanimously chose to lose
their Heads, which were accordingly taken from them, to receive the Glorious
Crown of Martyrdom. As for the two Cordeliers, and the generous Prior of the
Temple, who had so well animated the others to suffer for the sake of Christ,
they also received the Palms of Victory, but after a manner more Glorious than
the rest. For the Tyrant furiously incensed against them, for having snatched
the Prey out of his hands, and robbed him of what he thought to have made the
Glory of his Victory, was so filled with Rage and Madness against them, that he
caused them to be roasted alive, and cruelly beaten with Cudgels, whilst they
were in this dreadful manner exposed to the Flames, and afterward causing them
to be dragged to the place where the others were beheaded, he caused their
Heads also to be cut off there. But he had the amazing displeasure, to see that
God did Honor to his Martyrs, by a Heavenly Light, which he himself with all
his Sarasins, saw shining every Night about their Bodies; insomuch that he was
obliged for the hiding of their Glory and his own Infamy, to enclose the place
with a mighty high Wall, to hinder the sight of this wonder, so confounding to
his, and so honorable to the Christian Religion.

Jaffa by treachery, a little after the Death of Count John, for he never durst
attempt it so long as that Noble Earl lived. He also made himself Master of the
Fortress of Beaufort, and the most part of the places which appertained to the
Templers. And after having ravaged all the plain Country about Acre, Tire, and
Sidon, and burnt the Suburbs of Tripolis, he turned once again short upon
Antioch. Conrade, Cousin of Conradin, to whose assistance he was gone into
Italy, that he took it without resistance, slew there seventeen thousand Men,
and carried above a hundred thousand into Captivity. Thus this City so
illustrious, that it was sometimes called the Eye of the East, in regard of its
admirable Beauty, and which the first Crusades were not able to take but with a
nine Months Siege, which a thousand Heroic Actions, which were there done,
have rendered so Famous in History, was taken in a moment, and desolated to that
degree by the Mamalukes, that it became a vast solitude, as it still continues
to this Day. So little assurance is there of any thing in this World, where
there needs no more but one Moment to Ruin and Destroy what has been growing a
many Ages. Thus Bendoedar who found no more Enemies in the Field, to give the
least check to his Conquests, still pushed his good Fortune forward into Syria,
whilst the Christians of the East, divided into diverse Factions, seemed to
combine with him for their mutual destruction. And in vain were any Succors
expected from the West; for the Assistance which the Armenians and the Tartars
came to desire against the Sarasins, were always either hindered or diverted by
the Quarrels, which continued between the Popes and the House of Suabia, and
which were not to be determined, but by the downfall of that Noble House, to
raise upon its ruins that of France, which consequently took up the design of
that Crusade again. And it is this which I am now obliged to relate for the
finishing of this History of the Crusades.

After the Death of Frederick the Second, Pope Innocent did not fail to
Excommunicate Conrade, the Eldest Son of that Prince, because he styled himself
Emperor, against William, Earl of Holland, whom some German Princes, who were
of the Pope's Party, had chosen to oppose Frederick. Conrade, who wanting the
good qualities of his Father, had all the ill ones, and all the fierceness, the
Cruelty, the insatiable desire of Revenge, and the implacable hatred against
the Popes, entered with great Forces into Italy, where he was with joy received
by the Gibelins, and favored by the Venetians, upon whose Shipping he passed
the Gulf into Pavia; and having joined the Troops of his natural Brother
Mainfrey, his Lieutenant General in that Realm, Naples, he there executed his
most cruel Vengeance, by the Desolation of that fair and flourishing City. This
so amazed the Pope, Innocent, who after he had struck him with the Anathema,
had no other Arms, to which he might have recourse to oppose him, that he
believed he was obliged, to cause a Crusade to be published against him; which
without doubt did not contribute much to the Success of that which proved so
unfortunate against the Sarasins. And at the same time he caused the two
Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily to be offered, first to Charles d' Anjou, who
would not then accept them without the consent of the King, his Brother, who
was then in Syria; and afterward to Richard, Brother to Henry, the King of
England; but he also refused them, not thinking it was at all agreeable to
Justice or a good Conscience, to despoil the young Prince Henry, his Nephew, to
whom the Emperor Frederick had left, for his share, the Kingdom of Sicily.
Whilst matters stood thus, Conrade, who had underhand procured the Death of
this little Prince, his Brother, that he might have his Kingdom, died himself
of Poison, which as it was believed was given him by his Brother Mainfrey, to
whom, as not suspecting him Guilty of his Death, Conrade left the Tuition of
his Son Conradin, then an Infant of the Age of three Years.

Innocent resolving to take advantage of his Death, went and presented himself
before Naples, where in hatred of Conrade, he was received with great
Applauses. Mainfrey himself, being surprised, also submitted to him, and was
received with all Civil treatment. But presently after throwing himself into
Nocere, whither the Emperor Frederick had transplanted the Sarasins of Sicily,
he raised an Army and took the Field, and Fortune declaring her self at first
in his favor, he in a Battle defeated the Army of the Pope, which was
Commanded by the Cardinal de Fiesque, the Nephew of Innocent, who being then
Sick, when he received this News at Naples, died in a few Days after. Alexander
the Fourth, his Successor, had also the same Fortune; for having Excommunicated
Mainfrey, this Prince, who from the Example of his Father, had learnt not to
fear these Roman Thunderbolts, Marched directly against the Pontifical Army,
which had taken the Field under the Conduct of Cardinal Vbald; and he, not
being so great a Captain as his Enemy, also lost a Battle which was fought
between them. Hereupon Mainfrey, fierce with these two Victories, and sure of
the Favor of the Populace, which always follows the strongest side, caused
himself to be Proclaimed King of Naples and Sicily, with as much ease, as he
had with dexterity caused the report to be spread of the Death of the little
Conradin, his Nephew. After which he lead his Victorious Army into the
Ecclesiastic Estates, where finding little resistance, he seized upon the
County of Fondi, and his Partisans being animated by the report of his
Victories, the Gibelin Faction became presently the most powerful, but
principally in Lombardy, Tuscany, and even in Rome it self.

Alexander astonished with this Progress, and fearing that he should at last
fall under the Power of such a formidable Enemy, had recourse to the King of
England, and following the Example of Innocent, he offered him the Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicily for his Son Edmund, to whom he also sent the Investiture of
them: and to oblige that King to undertake the enterprise, he absolved him from
the Vow, which he had made in taking the Cross, to be of the Crusade against
the Sarasins in the East, by changing it into that which he caused to be
Preached every where against Mainfrey. Also fearing lest the Partisans of the
House of Suabia should place Conradin upon the Imperial Throne, in the room of
Count William, who had been slain in the War against the Frieslanders, he sent
Prohibitions to all the Electors, requiring them under pain of Excommunication,
not to choose that young Prince. But all this, which signified just nothing
against Mainfrey, did a World of mischief to the Crusade, which was designed
against the Sarasins. The Parliament which the King of England had called at
London, upon the subject of the Neopolitan War, would give the King no Money;
and afterward all the great Men of the Realm, happening to be Embroiled with
the Royal House, this Project of the Pope's did not Succeed. And for Germany,
one part of the Princes having chosen for their Emperor Alphonso King of
Castile, and the other, Richard Earl of Cornwall, England, there arose a Schism
in the Empire, which occasioned mighty Troubles and Disorders there. So that
Italy, Spain, England, and Germany, having so many troublesome Affairs upon
their hands, there remained only France in a condition to serve the Holy See,
to any purpose in this occasion, and all Christendom indeed against the
Infidels.

For this reason therefore Urban the fourth, the Successor of Pope Alexander,
having again vainly tried the way of a Crusade against Mainfrey, which, for
want of Money to pay the Crusades, came to nothing, and seeing himself
straightened by that Prince, who joining with the Rebels of the Church, had
constrained him to withdraw to Orvieta, he had at last recourse to France. He
therefore made new Offers and Solicitations to Count Charles of Anjou and
Provence, to accept the Realms of Sicily and Naples, as Fiefs escheated to the
Church by the Felony of the Princes of Suabia, who had enjoyed them after the
Normans. And that he might do this more effectually, he sent the Archbishop of
Cosenca into England, to redemand from the King, and Prince Edmond his Son, the
Right which he had invested him within these Kingdoms, to which they could now
no longer pretend, since they had not accomplished the conditions upon which it
was granted.

After which, Simon de Brie, Cardinal of St. Cecily, passed as Legate into
France, to bestow the Investiture upon Charles, who accepted of it by the
King's consent, and upon the pressing Solicitations of the Countess Beatrix,
his Lady, who was ready to die with longing to be a Queen, as well as her three
other Sisters, who had been so for a long time. He therefore promised the
Cardinal, that he would presently March with a Powerful Army against Mainfrey.
And accordingly after that Clement the Fourth, the Successor of Urban, had
confirmed his Election, he Sailed from Marseilles with thirty Stout Men of War;
and arrived safe at Rome, where he expected his Land Army, which this new
Queen, like a Female Hero, led over the Alps, quite through Italy, receiving,
all the way as she passed, the Auxiliary Troops of the Guelphs; and being come
thither, she was Crowned Queen, as the Count was King of Naples and Sicily, in
the Church of St. John of Latran, by five Cardinals, delegated by the Pope, for
the performance of that Ceremony, he himself being then at Perusa. After which
the new King at the Head of his Army took the Field, and forcing the passage of
Goriglian, and the Fortress of St. German, he Marched directly toward the
Enemy, and in short, gave Mainfrey Battle near Beneventum. The Battle was
bravely fought by Mainfrey, who showed himself a great Captain and Valiant
Soldier, but in Conclusion he lost it; abundance of his gallant Men, and he
himself remaining among the Dead. After which the young Conradin, who was now
about fifteen years of Age, coming with a flourishing Army of Germans,
strengthened with the Gibelins of Tuscany and Lombardy, attempted to recover
the Inheritance of his Father, but not being able to pursue the advantage,
which he had entirely at the beginning of the Battle, which he fought against
Charles, he lost all. For Charles, who knew how to improve his error to his own
advantage, in conclusion won the Day from him, near the Lake of Celano, in a
second Victory more Glorious and Complete than the first. But his Policy,
without doubt too severe, not to say inhumane in this Rencontre, made him
dishonor it, by cutting off the head of this unfortunate young Prince, and
that of Frederick of Austria, by a Conduct which had nothing in it of the
Genius, and nature of St. Lewis, or of the French Lords, who all condemned this
Action, as Posterity will certainly do, and which as it fails not to do justice
to the good or evil Actions of Princes, will certainly never pardon to his
Memory.

In the mean time the great progress which the Sarasins daily made in the East,
against the Christians of Syria, during the troubles of the West, arriving at
Rome, the Popes, Urban and Clement, failed not to write to St. Lewis, and to
the other Kings to pursue the Crusade, which had been begun against these
Barbarians. But those which the Popes were obliged, at the same time, to
publish against the Princes of Suabia, and the Wars of Italy, obstructed the
doing of any thing effectually toward the General Crusade, till such time as
Charles, after his two great Victories, was peaceably established in the
possession of his two Kingdoms. For then the troubles of Italy being appeased,
Europe, the Pope and the King, by agreement, took up the design of that
Crusade, which it was impossible to execute, whilst the private ones were
published against Mainfrey. King Lewis, as much St. as he was, could not hinder
himself from retaining a boiling displeasure, for the unhappy Success of his
attempt upon Egypt; and moreover inflamed as he was with a Zeal for the House
of God, he was wonderfully afflicted with sorrow to hear every Day, that
Bendocdar was ready to swallow up all, and to chase the Christians wholly out
of the Holy Land of Palestine. It was therefore his passionate desire to take
up the Cross again, and to employ the remainder of his Days in combating
against the Enemies of Jesus Christ, for the reconquering of his Inheritance,
which was almost entirely lost. But in regard he was unwilling it should be
said, that in a matter of this importance, he acted by the sole movement of his
own Inclinations, he sent privately to Pope Clement one of his Confidents, to
Communicate to him his design, and to desire him to send a Legate into France,
with Command to exhort him, and all his Subjects, to undertake the Holy War.

The Pope, who was very Wise, considering that this Great Prince had already
done beyond what could be expected from a most Christian King, in the War
against the Infidels, deliberated a long time about this Affair. But at last,
having well examined the matter, he kindly assented to the King's desire, and
highly approved of his Pious Design; and consequently resolved not to lose so
fair an opportunity to form a Holy League against Bendocdar, to which, in the
beginning of his Pontificate, he had exhorted not only all the Kings of Europe,
but also the King of Armenia, and Abagas, the King of the Tartars in Persia.
For this purpose therefore he sent Simon de Brie, Cardinal of St. Cecily, his
Legate, into France, and the Cardinal Othobon into England, with order to pass
from thence, as he also did, into Spain and Portugal; then he ordained, as he
had done formerly, that the Religious of the orders of St. Dominick and St.
Francis, should Preach the Crusade through all Germany, as far as Denmark and
Poland. But nothing of all this had any Success, except only in France, by the
diligence, the Care, the Example, and admirable Zeal of St. Lewis. For so soon
as the Legate was arrived, this devout King called a general Assembly of the
Princes, Prelates, and Barons of his Realm, to his Royal Palace in Paris, where
with all his Power and Eloquence, animated with his Ardent Zeal, he himself
exhorted the whole Assembly To take upon them again the Cross, to avenge the
Injuries which the Sarasins had for so long time done to Jesus Christ, in the
fairest part of his Empire, and to maintain the Christians in their proper
Inheritance, out of which the Sultan of Egypt and his Mamalukes, the particular
Enemies of the Name and Nation of France, were upon the point of driving them,
unless they were speedily assisted. He protested, That he was resolved, even
tho he were abandoned by all the rest of the World in such a Noble Enterprise,
to pursue it vigorously himself, and to employ all that he had, his Forces, his
Fortunes, and his Life in this Glorious Service; and that he should infinitely
rejoice to lose it in his Service, who had laid down his precious Life for the
Love which he had to Mankind, in that precious spot of Earth, for the Recovery
whereof he exhorted all the French, who he doubted not had doubtless the same
Courage with which their Ancestors had so gloriously conquered it, to take up
their Arms and accompany him in this Noble Enterprise.

A Discourse of this Nature spoken with unexpressible Graces, and by so great a
King, whose Age, Experience, Wisdom, Equity, and Love, which he had for his
People, and above all his Eminent Sanctity, rendered so much beloved and revered
by his Subjects, did so sensibly affect the Hearts of all the whole Assembly,
that after the Legate had made his Speech upon the same Subject, and the King
himself had with a Mavelous Devotion received the Cross, the greatest part of
the Princes and Lords, following his Example, also took it upon them. The first
among them were the three Princes his Sons, Philip his Eldest, John Tristan,
Count de Nevers, and Peter, Count d' Alenson, Alphonso, Count de Poitiers, and
Toulouse, his Brother, Thibald, King of Navarr, and Count Palatine of
Champagne, his Son-in-Law. Robert, Count d' Artois, his Nephew, John Son to the
Duke of Bretany, Son-in-Law to the King of England, the Counts, Guy of
Flanders, Philip of Nemours, Guy de Laval, and Philip de Montfort. de
Courtenay, de Beaujeu, de Montmorenci, de Harcour, de Valeri, de Neele, d'
Estrees, de Longueval, de Varennes, de Clermont, de Fiennes, de Rochefort, de
Mirepoix, de Cleri, de St. Cler, de Roye, de Precigni, de Chastenoy, de Saux,
de Beaumout, de Mailly, de Vandieres, de Lionne, d' Auteil, d' Orillac, and the
brave Oliver de Terms, all Illustrious Names, known, and still reverenced in
our days, after so many Ages, in the Persons who are honored by them, and who
have done them Honor by their Merits.

These were followed by all the other Knights and Lords of the Assembly, except
only the Lord Joinville, High Steward of Champagne, who having had enough of
the first Voyage, dispensed with himself for the second, alleging that by the
first he had ruined his poor Subjects of the Lordship of Joinville; and in the
ill humor in which he was by reason of this second Undertaking, which he did
not at all approve, he has written very plainly, That it was the opinion of
many Learned Men, that those who gave the King this Advice sinned mortally, in
regard that the King was so weak in Body, and brought so low, that he was but
just in a condition to maintain that Peace and justice, which by his presence
he caused to flourish in his Kingdom, and which would by his absence be most
certainly banished from thence. But this was not the opinion of Clement the
Fourth, who was esteemed one of the most learned and pious Popes, which the
Church had ever had, and who, St. Lewis, having consulted him concerning this
Voyage, extremely approved of it, as did also the Confessor of this Holy King.
And this makes it evident, That in all times the most severe Casuists have not
always been the most knowing, nor the safest advisers in difficult matters.

After this great Action, St. Lewis applied himself with an indefatigable Zeal,
to dispose all things for the Crusade, sparing neither diligence, pains, nor
cost to put it into a condition to have better Success than he had met with in
his first Voyage, and to draw along with him not only the French, his own
Subjects, but also such of other Nations, as were willing to share with him in
the Enterprise. And for this purpose he did what was possible in conjunction
with the Pope to make an Accord between the Venetians and the Genoese, that so
they might enter with him into this Holy Union: But it was all Labor in vain,
for these two Republics, whose difference occasioned so many mischiefs to
Palestine, had too much animosity one against the other, to unite so easily or
so quickly. As for the Venetians, who had at first treated with him for his
passage, they at last excused themselves from furnishing him with Shipping, by
the fear which they said they had, that the Sultan of Egypt resenting it,
should seize upon all their Effects within his Ports. But the Genoeses, who
always ran counter to their Enemies, and who upon this occasion acted more
nobly, offered him theirs. He also by his Royal Liberality obliged Edward,
Prince of England, to take up the Cross, a Prince whom he highly valued for his
Spirit and his Valor, and gave him thirty thousand Marks in Silver, to put him
into an Equipage to accompany him like a great Prince; offering the same Sum to
James, King of Arragon, who had some years before taken upon him the Cross.

The Pope also on his side did not fail to excite the Kings and Princes of
Europe, as also the Greek Emperor, by the Example of St. Lewis, to join their
Arms with those of this great King for the deliverance of the Holy Land from
the oppression of the Sultan of Egypt, who wanted not above two or three
Cities, to be Master of all that the Christians possessed in Syria, Palestine
and Egypt, since the time that they were conquered by Godfrey of Bullen; but
all was in vain. Ottocare the King of Bohemia, the Dukes of Saxony, Bavaria and
Brunswick, Otho, Marquess of Brandenburg, and diverse others, whom Clement
excited to take the Cross, and some of which had already taken it, were so
encumbered by the Schism of the Empire, and besides so exasperated by the Death
of Conradin, which for a long time rendered the Name of the French odious to
them, that they could not be persuaded to entertain a thought of uniting with
them in the Holy War. The King of Castile, who disputed the Empire, and whose
Brother had been taken with Conradin, was in the same opinion. The King of
Portugal, Alphonso the Third, took the Cross indeed, and abtained a Grant to
receive the Tenths of all the Goods of the Church in his Realm for the Holy
War; but after all he performed nothing.

James, the King of Arragon, made the fairest advances in the World toward
this War: He protested in the Assembly of the Princes at Toledo, That he would
accomplish his Vow, although his Age seemed to dispense with him for it, and
notwithstanding all that could be done to divert him from it. He promised at
Valentia to the Ambassadors of the Greek Emperor, and to those of Abagas King
of the Tartars, that he would go in Person into Palestine against the Sultan
Bendocdar. He also caused a fair Fleet of Men of War to be fitted out at
Barcelona, and a great many Galleys, and embarked himself in the beginning of
September, one thousand two hundred sixty nine, a year before St. Lewis. But
being near the Isles of Majorca and Minorca met with a furious Tempest, which
threw him upon the Coasts of Languedoc, he went no farther than Aigues-Mort,
from whence he returned by Land into his own Kingdom; alleging, for the hiding
of a certain shameful and criminal Passion, which governed his Soul, and which
possibly was the true cause of his altering his resolution, That he was well
satisfied, that God dispensed with him for his Voyage, which he made known by
this accident was not at all pleasing to him; so that there were only some few
Ships of this Fleet which arrived at Ptolemais, with Dom Ferdinand Sancho, the
Son of this King, who presently after returned again without doing any thing.

As for what concerned the Greek Emperor, he acted in this occasion only like a
Politician, for his own private Interest, without ever intending to have any
share in this War. This Emperor was Michael Paleologus, who, about eight years
before, had taken Constantinople by Treachery from the Latins, who lost that
Empire under Baldwin the Second, which Baldwin the First had so gloriously
conquered with the French and Venetians, about fifty eight years before. This
Greek Prince, who feared to be attacked on the side of Asia by Bendocdar, after
that Sultan should have conquered Syria and Palestine, and who was already on
the Coast of Greece by the New King of Sicily, did all that possibly he could
with the Pope and the Princes of the West, to engage them in a War against the
Sarasins. And in regard that the Pope had written to him, That the way to
secure himself from the Arms of the Latin Princes, was to unite the Greek
Church with the Latin, and to go in Person as did St. Lewis to this Holy War,
he promised Shipping, Provisions, and Soldiers, and all that could be desired
for the War. He also sent his Ambassadors into France, offering to make the
King the Arbiter of the difference which was about the Reunion of the two
Churches, but St. Lewis, who would not undertake to be Judge in a matter of
this nature which was purely spiritual, remitted him to the Judgment of the
Sacred College, the Holy See being then vacant by the Death of Pope Clement,
who deceased about the end of the preceding year. But after all, this Emperor,
who was extreme politic, had no desire or design, either to make a true
Reunion, or to join with the Latin Princes in the Holy War. All his Design was
only to engage them in a Crusade, and thereby to deliver himself from the fear
which he had of the Sarasins, and the King of Sicily. So remote are the
Intentions of Princes, who act purely according to the Maxims of human Policy,
from what they seem to appear to those with whom they negotiate, with a design
to delude them.

And for the King of England, to whom the Pope had at first sent the Cardinal
Othobon, his Legate, he was too far advanced in years, and too much oppressed
with his own Affairs, by reason of the troubles of his Realm, to be in a
condition to perform the Vow, which he had made, in taking upon him the Cross,
and to acquit himself of the Promise by which he was engaged to the King to
accompany him in this War with five hundred Knights, for whom the King gave him
a years pay in hand; and believed that without restoring the Money, he
satisfied fully for all, in giving his Blessing to his Son, Prince Edward, who
not being in a condition to enter upon Action till after the Death of St.
Lewis, was able to do almost nothing in Palestine. Thus of above two hundred
and fifty thousand men, which were levied in Europe, there were none but the
Troops of St. Lewis, which were about sixty thousand men, and the few
Spaniards, which went with the King of Navarr, his Son-in-Law, which were in a
condition to pursue this Voyage. Nevertheless, he undertook it with so much
resolution, as if he had had the Forces of the whole Earth. Sicily, he resolved
at last to go first against Tunis, before he undertook to attack the Sultan of
Egypt.

It was for this purpose represented to the King, that he ought to begin with
the Realm of Tunis, if he would go immediately, as in reason one ought to do,
to the Spring and the Root of the Mischief; in regard that it was from Tunis
that the Sultans of Egypt drew their principal Forces; their Horses, and the
best of their men: And besides that in leaving this Kingdom in their Rear, as
they must do if they marched directly against Egypt, or into Palestine, they
must expose themselves to the hazard of losing their Convoys and the Supplies
which were to come from Europe, which would run the Fortune of being defeated
and taken by the Shipping of these African Pirates, who were continually
crusing upon the Seas: There were also many other Politic Considerations
added, which are easy to be found out, when People are resolved to maintain an
Opinion. But in Truth that which was most prevalent, was, that the Inclinations
of the two Kings were both conformable to this Enterprise, for two very
different Reasons. For Lewis, who, like a great Saint regulated all his Actions
by the Principles of Piety and Christianity, believed that in showing himself
before Tunis, that Moorish King, who had given him hopes of his Conversion,
would turn Christian, and be baptized, which the King most passionately
desired, as appeared by what he said to the Ambassadors of that Prince, whom he
commanded to acquaint their Master, That he would be contented with all his
heart to be a Slave to the Sarasins again, and to pass the rest of his Life in
the most dreadful of their Dungeons, and never more to see the Sun, provided
that the King of Tunis would with his whole Realm embrace the Faith of Jesus
Christ. But Charles, who was more Politic than Devout, resolved to make use of
such a fair opportunity, to assure himself of that Realm, which without doubt
was very convenient for the security of the Coasts of Naples and Sicily. Thus
the two Brothers resolved each upon the same thing, though both of them for
private Reasons, which they did not impart to any Persons, but only concluded
upon the Enterprise against Tunis; the King, who foresaw that it would not
meet with a general approbation, reserved the Declaration of his Resolution
till he came to Cagliari in the Isle of Sardinia, at which place he had
appointed the Rendezvous of his Navy.

Matthew de Vendosme, Abbot of St. Dennis, and Simon de Clermont, Count de
Neele, Regents of the Realm during his Absence; and after that having taken the
Standard of St. Dennis, according to the custom of his Ancestors, as also the
Scarf and the Pilgrim's Staff, he parted the first day of March, in the year
one thousand two hundred and seventy, accompanied with the Cardinal d' Albano,
whom Pope Clement had nominated his Legate for this Crusade, and came to
Aigues-Mort, where he did not imbark till the beginning of July, at the same
time that the other part of his Fleet sailed from Marseilles, and at last all
of them, after having been soundly beaten by a furious Tempest, arrived at
Cagliari. There it was that the King held a great Council of War, to which all
the Princes, the Lords, and principal Officers of the Army were called. He then
proposed to them the Enterprise of Tunis; and after it had passed by plurality
of Voices in the affirmative, although there were many who had much rather have
gone directly to the Holy Land, they set sail and steered away directly for
Africa, and within two days about the twentieth of July came within view of
Tunis and Carthage.

Upon the Coast of Africa, over against Sicily, there is a Peninsula, whose
circumference is about three hundred and forty Stadia, or two and forty miles,
which advances it self into the Sea between two Gulphs, which it there makes.
That which is upon the West, forms it self into a most commodious Port, and the
other turning a little between the East and South, joins it self to a very
narrow Chanal, by which there is an Entrance into a great Lake, which Extends
it self three or four Leagues within the Land; and which has since been called
by the name of the Lake of Guletta. It was in this fair Peninsula, that the
famous Rival of Rome, Carthage stood, in the place between these two Seas. But
since its last destruction by the Arabian Sarasins, about the seventh Age,
there remained nothing at the time of this Crusade amidst the Ruins of that
Magnificent City, but a little Borough upon the Port, which was called Marsa,
and a Tower upon the point of the Cape, with a strong Castle upon the Hill of
Byrsa, where anciently stood the Fortress of Carthage. About some five Leagues
from this great City, drawing toward the South East, a little below the Gulf
and the Lake of Guletta, there stood a little City called Tynis, or Tynissa,
and at present Tunis, of which the Great Scipio made himself Master before he
besieged Carthage, and which afterward grew so great by the Ruins of Carthage,
that it was in the time of St. Lewis one of the greatest, fairest, and
strongest Cities of all Africa. For the Walls which the Turks afterward
demolished, were forty Cubits high, with very good Ramparts, and Fortresses to
support them, and with diverse Towers to flank them for their mutual defense. It
had eight Gates with their Portcullisses, a very deep Ditch, which environed it
on the Land side, and all manner of Fortifications, which were used in those
Times, with large Suburbs which contained about ten thousand Houses. But it was
still become much greater, since the greatest part of the Moors of Granada, who
had been driven out of Spain, retired thither, and applied themselves to all
manner of Arts and Trades. It is at present a kind of Republic under the
Protection and Domination of the Grand Seignior, ever since it was taken by
Sinan Bassa from the Spaniards, in the year one thousand five hundred seventy
four; It had before been twice taken by the Spaniards, once by Charles the
Fifth, in the year one thousand five hundred thirty five, and a second time by
Don John of Austria, after the Battle of Lepanto. But formerly it had been
under particular Kings, since a certain Person, one Abraham Aben Ferez, who
commanded there for the King of Morocco, usurped this Realm from him about
sixty years before this Crusade, and it was his third Successor Muley Otmen
Ostensa, who reigned at Tunis, then when St. Lewis, whom he had made to hope
his conversion, undertook this Voyage.

At first this Holy King had reason to believe that this Prince had an
Intention to accomplish his Promise, by reason that there was not found any who
opposed his landing, and that he had opportunity to seize the Port of Carthage,
and after that the Tower, almost without any resistance. But he was quickly
disabused, by seeing a great Army sally out of Tunis, to relieve the Castle of
Carthage; but that did not hinder, but that it was taken by the Seamen only
with the assistance of five hundred Cross-bows, which they desired of the King,
assuring him that they would carry the place by Scalade, which they accordingly
did with so much Courage and Success, that they made themselves Masters of it
in an instant, without any other loss than only one of their Companions, whose
Death they revenged by that of all the Sarasins, who defended the place, who
were partly cut in pieces, and partly smothered in the Vaults, whither they
retreated to save themselves, and to the Entries of which the Seamen put fire.
The King, who was advanced and drawn up in Battalia between the Castle and the
Enemies, to hinder their relieving the place, stopped them so well by the brave
Countenance which he made, that the Sarasins durst never quit their Post; they
retired at Night toward Tunis, and satisfied themselves with returning every
day in greater numbers, giving continual alarms, and pickeering on all sides
according to their manner, without staying in one place, either regularly to
attack one Quarter, or to march in Battalia and combat foot to foot with their
Enemy.

This was what was done in this last Enterprise of St. Lewis in nine or ten
days, toward the end of July. For in regard the King of Tunis had an Army
composed of an infinite multitude of Arabs and Moors, who had always a safe
retreat under the Walls of Tunis, which was extraordinarily provided with all
sorts of Machins of War, it was not thought convenient by his Council to attack
them, or to undertake the Siege of the City before the arrival of the King of
Sicily, who was daily expected. In the mean time the King retrenched himself,
and fortified his Camp in a Valley below Carthage, whither the Enemies came
continually to Skirmishes, in which they constantly had the worse, but without
ever coming to a General Battle.

Sicily, whom St Lewis daily pressed to hasten thither, and who notwithstanding
did not arrive till a Month after him, was the Cause, by his long delay, of the
unfortunate Success of this Voyage, which he had with such earnestness advised
for his private Interest. For it being high Summer, which is a season very
improper, for making of War in Africa, and that they wanted refreshments, and
above all fresh Water, which is very scarce in that Country; Diseases, and
especially the Flux and Fevers, fell into the Army, and in a short time made a
most fearful destruction. The greatest part of the bravest and youngest men of
the Army were unable to resist the violence of this terrible Enemy, which daily
carried off abundance of them. And among the rest, John Tristan, Count de
Nevers, a Young Prince of about twenty years of Age, died upon the third of
August, and the King, his Father, who loved him most tenderly, although it was
a most sensible Affiction to him, yet sacrificed it to the Will of Heaven, with
the resignation and constancy of a Christian Hero. The Cardinal Legate did not
survive the Young Prince above four or five days; and Philip, the eldest Son of
St. Lewis, was also seized with a quartan Ague, of which, by the Strength of
his Age, and the heat of the season, he was quickly delivered. But the King,
his Father, who had already fallen into the Flux, being shortly after seized
with a continual Fever, left the whole Army languishing with extreme Grief for
his death, which happened the five and twentieth day of August, after he had
received the Sacrament with an admirable Presence of Mind, an incomparable
Piety and Sedateness of Spirit, having nothing in his heart or upon his lips,
but the Glory of God, for which only he had undertaken this Voyage. He was
constantly saying with a dying, but Intelligible Voice, to those who applied
their Ear to his Mouth to receive his last words. For the Love of God let us
endeavor some way to have our Holy Faith preached and received at Tunis. Ah!
My God, whom shall we find to send thither to declare thy Gospel? It must be
such a one, would be say, naming a certain Religious of the Order of St.
Dominick, who was known to the King of Tunis; and with these Zealous
Ejaculations, and this Apostolic fervency, which he had for the conversion and
salvation of Tunis, he rendered his pious Soul into the hands of Almighty God,
precisely at the same hour, that Jesus Christ gave up his to his Father, making
the same wishes for the Salvation of the whole world.

I have believed that in the quality of an Historian of the Crusades, I was
obliged, in giving an account of the death of St. Lewis, to recount this
admirable circumstance, which is so essential to my Subject, since it shows so
well what was the end, which he proposed to himself in forming this Enterprise
of Tunis. and for the other particularities, which in such a wonderful manner
appeared in his death, and all that which is so precious before God in the
death of the greatest Saints, as they do not properly began to my Crusades, I
leave them as well as the other admirable and Holy Actions of his miraculous
life to those able Writers, who so many years ago have promised us, and who as
I hope will write it exactly after so many Originals and so many Copies, as the
Writers of his own and the following times have left us.

I shall only add, to give some Idea of his Body, and of his Mind, that he was
then about the Age of five and fifty years, of a middle Stature, and a delicate
Complexion, but which he had greatly weakened by his great Austerities. His
Visage was something long, but full, his Forehead large and Majestic, his head
a little inclining to one side, his Eyes extreme sweet, his Mouth little and
pleasing, his Speech easy and very agreeable, and in his whole Person, an Air
of Goodness so winning, and so charming, especially in a King, that it was
impossible to look upon him without loving him, or to love him without paying
him that respect which was due to the Majesty of so great a Prince. And for the
Qualities of his Soul, whether Natural or acquired, one may say, That there are
few Princes, who have possessed them in those high Degrees of Perfection as he
did; for he had an admirable composure of Spirit, quick, and clear, and which
he had cultivated by the Study of polite Learning, and a solid Judgment; so
that he was always the most able Person of his Council, always penetrating
further than any of them, when any difficult matter was under consideration,
having very easy conceptions of things, and expressing himself extempore, with
much Gracefulness and Ingenuity, Holy Land, but yet never acting but with the
advice of his Council, except in the Treaty, which he made with the English, to
whom, to oblige them to quit the rest, he surrendered Guienne and Gascony, not
out of any scruple, as Nangis writes, since he himself acknowldged in Council,
that the Kings of England could not pretend any Right to them; but for Peace
sake: although herein his Policy was much mistaken, by reason that this Treaty
having brought a Stranger into France, brought a War upon it, which lasted
above two hundred years, before he could again be expelled out of it. This
indeed is the only blemish, with which St. Lewis can be reproached for having
in this occasion, contrary to the advice of his Council, suffered himself to be
too far misled by the Goodness of his Nature. For as for any thing else, there
was nothing to be found in his Life but an admirable composure of all Royal and
Christian Virtues, in a most exact Temperament. For he was the most valiant,
courageous, fearless, firm and immovable in the midst of the greatest dangers;
and withal the most sweet, pacifick, kind, and most easy of Mankind. Austere,
humble, modest, devout, respectful to the Holy See, zealous for the Glory of
God and the Salvation of Souls; retired, patient, and mortified, above all that
is admired in the most Apostolic Men, and the most Renowned among Recluses for
their penitent Life: and yet nowithstanding at the same time he was obliging,
affable, complaisant, and of an agreeable humor in his Conversation, familiar
with his Confidents, easy in his Domestic Affairs, an admirable Husband, an
indulgent Father, a sure Friend, a good Master and a most excellent King,
loving his Subjects, and reciprocally beloved by them; firm and inexorable in
causing Justice to be done, his Ordinances, and Laws to be observed; Jealous of
the Rights of his Crown, and those of the Gallican Church, conformable to the
Common Law, against all the abuses, all the Novelties and the endeavors of
such as would shock them; he was liberal and magnificent in the ordinary
expenses of his Household, in Ceremonies and public entertainments, which upon
certain occasions he made very much to the Honor of France, with a Splendour
and Majestic Pomp, far surpassing all his Predecessors, which made him be
equally admired both by the French and strangers. In short there was never seen
a more perfect accord, than what appeared in this admirable Monarch of Royal
Majesty, mingled with true Sanctity of Christianity, without Illusion, without
Weakness, and without Defaults. And I cannot tell whether one can find another,
of whom may be said with so much Justice, what I have said of this Christian
Hero; to finish in one word his Character and his Elogy, That he Was the
greatest King of a Saint, and the greatest Saint of a King, that ever any age
has known.

The Army of France was under an extreme consternation for the death of the
Holy King, and for the Indisposition of Philip his Successor; and their was
great probability, that they should in that very moment abandon this unlucky
Enterprise if the King of Sicily, who was in a great measure, by his long
delay, the Cause of this ill Success, had not by a strange adventure arrived
with a fair Fleet at the very same time that his Brother, the King, breathed
out his last. As he was a great Captain, and that his Army, which was composed
of Neapolitans, Sicilians, and Provencals, was very fresh, and he, having still
in his head his first design to assure himself of the Kingdom of Tunis, in at
least making the Sarasin King become his Tributary; he easily persuaded the
French, that it was for their Honor to finish the War, which they had begun
with so much Courage, and which they might bring to a happy period being
strengthened by the Conjunction of such a Potent Army as desired nothing so
much as to be led to the Combat against the Sarasins. Hereupon the Army
advanced toward Tunis to block it up more closely, and for three Months there
were every day some little Encounters with the Moors, who always went off with
disadvantage; And it is also reported, that they were once overthrown in a set
Battle, that their Camp was taken and plundered, and that such of them as fled,
thinking to save themselves in the City, blindly precipitated themselves into
those trenches, which they had dug in the Fields, with a design to have the
Christians fall into them: but in regard those of our Historians, who writ in
those times, say nothing of any such matters I dare not be confident of the
truth of them.

Tunis seeing, that the Christians daily gained upon him, and that he was
always beaten, fearing that in conclusion he should lose his Kingdom, he sent
to desire a Peace, or at least a Truce, offering to submit to such conditions,
as the two Kings themselves should judge to be fair and reasonable. This matter
was long debated in the Council of War, in which many were of opinion, that the
Siege ought to be vigorously pressed on, without harkening at all to the
Proposition of the Sarasin King, who, they said, after the losses, which he had
sustained, was in no Condition for any long time to defend the City. But the
King of Sicily remonstrated to them, That if they should take the Town, of
which they were not to be too confident, yet it was impossible for them to keep
it, in regard, That though the whole Army might be commodiously quartered
there, it being now very near Winter, they could not receive either from Italy
or Sicily so much provision as was necessary for the subsistence of the Troops;
and that if they left there only a Garrison, it would not be able to defend it
against all the Forces of Africa, which would most certainly attack it: And
therefore he concluded, that the way for them to come off with Honor, and
safety in this Affair, was rather to treat with the King of Tunis in an
honorable and advantageous manner, and like Conquerors, rather to give him
Law, than to put themselves into the manifest danger of losing all. Thus, in
regard that King Philip was also very willing to go, as soon as he could, to
take possession of his Kingdom, a Truce of ten years was concluded with this
Insidel Prince upon these following Conditions. That he should presently pay a
round sum of Money, upon which they were agreed to defray the Charges of the
War; That he should deliver all the Christian Slaves, which were in his whole
Realm; That he should permit the Religious of the Orders of St. Dominick and
St. Francis to preach the Gospel, and to build Monasteries there, and to all
his Subjects Liberty to receive Baptism; And that he should yearly pay to King
Charles a Tribute of forty thousand Crowns, which was the sum that the King
paid to the Pope for the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily. See what were the aims
of Charles for his private Interest; and what it was, which made many honest
People murmur against him, as beleiving that he had no mind to take Tunis,
because he could not hope to dispose of it as he pleased, and that he had not
advised this War but for his own Ends, to make this Sarasin King his Tributary.

Prince Edward of England also, who arrived before Tunis with his Fleet, at the
same time that this Treaty was concluded, could not hinder himself from making
the extreme displeasure, which he had at it, appear publicly, especially, when
he saw that the Fleets of France and Sicily, without thinking any further of
their principal design, which was the Holy War, were upon the point of
returning home. And indeed so soon as the King of Tunis, who was very desirous
to quit himself of these People, who had put him into the fear of losing his
Capital City and his Kingdom, had delivered the Captives, and paid the Money
which was agreed upon by the Treaty, the two Kings embarked; Philip with the
Bones of his Father, which, according to the Custom of those times, were
separated from the Flesh; and Charles with the Flesh and Entrals of that Holy
King, which he caused afterward to be magnificently interred in the Church of
the Abbey of Montreal near Palermo. And certainly it was very advantageous to
these two Kings, that they carried with them, in their Ships, the Sacred
Remains of that Saint, which preserved them from that Lamentable Wreck, which
the greatest part of the others suffered in View of the Port of Trepano in
Sicily; eighteen of the biggest men of War, and a great number of smaller
Vessels, with all the Money which was received of the King of Tunis, and above
four thousand men were cast away in this Tempest; and it was not without great
difficulty, that the Kings were able to make the Port of Trepano, where
Thibald, King of Navarr, who was sick before, when he came from Tunis, in a few
days after his landing, died; Queen Isabella his Wife, the Daughter of St.
Lewis, did not survive him long, for about four Months after she died at Years
in Provence. And for King Philip having taken his way by Land as far as
Messina, he passed over into Italy, and so crossing quite through it and
France, he came to St. Dennis, Lewis, his Father. They were received at Naples,
at Rome, and at Viterbum, where the Cardinals were assembled upon the Election
of a Pope, and at all other Cities in their passage, with honors of a
different Nature from those, which are accustomed to be given to Kings, and
which sufficiently showed that they were esteemed to be in a Rank much Superior
to them, the Voice of the People, which is said to be the Voice of God, being a
forerunner of that of the Church, which six and twenty years after solemnly
canonized him for a Saint.

Edward, Prince of England, who had renewed his Vow during the Tempest, and
which he weathered so well, that he lost not one of his ships, sailed toward
Ptolemais, where he arrived in the Month of May, having only three hundred
Knights, English and French, with John, Duke of Bretany. It was with these few
Troops, strengthened with five hundred Frisons, and another small
Reinforcement, which Prince Edmond, his Brother, brought to him from England,
that he hindered Bendocdar, who had taken diverse Castles about Ptolemais, from
besieging that City. He also prevailed with the Tartars, the Enemies of this
Sultan, to enter into Palestine to oppose the Progress of that Conqueror. But
as on one part these Barbarians, after having according to their manner ravaged
the Country, marched home again; and on the other that Hugh, King of Cyprus and
Jerusalem, not being strong enough to do any great matters, obtained a Truce of
Bendocdar, who concluded it with him only to amuse him, he was able to do
nothing of Moment. And therefore as soon as he was recovered of a dangerous
Wound, which he had received from an Assassin, whom he trusted, and whom he
himself killed with the same poisoned Dagger, with which the Traitor had struck
him, he returned opportunely to take possession of the Kingdom of England,
which Henry, his Father, dying left unto him.

Crusade, from which there was reason to expect such great things, produced no
manner of Effects for the deliverance of the Holy Land. And since that time
there could never any more be raised, although the Pope's had frequently made
great attempts to excite the Zeal of Christians, therein to imitate that of
their Ancestors. For first of all Gregory the tenth, who from being only
Archdeacon of Liege was chosen Pope after the Sea had been vacant for three
Months, then when he was at Ptolemais with the Prince of England, did more than
any of his Predecessors to unite all the Christian Princes, and even the Greeks
and Tartars in a Holy League to chase the Sarasins out of Palestins and Syria.
Lions, which was one of the greatest and most numerous Assemblies, which the
Church had ever seen; for there were present at it above a thousand Prelates,
with the Ambassadors of two Emperors of the East and West, of the Kings of
France, Cyprus, and all the Christian Princes beyond the Sea, together with
those of all Europe; besides that James, King of Arragon, and the great Masters
of the Temple and the Hospital were there in Person. There a Decree was made
for the prosecuting the Holy War, and an Alliance was made for this purpose
with Abagas the King of the Tartars, who had sent his Ambassadors thither.
There Michael Paleologus, was recognized for Emperor of Constantinople, upon
condition That he should join with the Latins in the War against the Sultan of
Egypt; and there the Election of the Emperor Rodolph was confirmed, upon
Condition, That he should march at the head of the Crusades into Palestine,
which he also promised to the Pope with an Oath, receiving from his hands the
Cross at Lausanna, whither he followed the Pope after the Council in his return
to Italy.

Cordeliers and the Jacobins, whom the Pope sent all over Europe to preach up
the Cross, could not meet with so much as one man, who would take it. Michael
Paleologus, who had made a Reunion of short continuance between the Greek and
the Latin Churches, had never any other intention, but thereby to hinder the
Latins from uniting again to recover Constantinople, and to restore Baldwin,
who did what lay in his Power to that purpose, Charles, King of Naples and
Sicily. Rodolph, who from a bare Count of Habsbourg near Bale, issued from a
younger Brother of the House of Alsatia, was come to be raised to the Empire,
thought of nothing but how most powerfully to establish his own House in
Germany; and herein he succeeded so well, that it is since become so great and
August under the Illustrious name of Austria, which this Emperor bestowed upon
it, in giving that Duchy to his Son Albert, who afterward also came to be
Emperor, as well as his Father. So that this Emperor Rodolph never accomplished
the Vow, which he had made between the hands of the Pope, who himself gave the
Cross to him and to his whole Court, and yet nevertheless he was not
excommunicated for it, as Frederick the Second had been. Abagas singly was not
strong enough to stop the Course of Bendocdar's Conquests, who insolently
laughed at all the vain attempts of the Princes of the West, and openly
threatened to make all the whole East the Trophee of his Arms, and oblige it to
submit to his Empire. And as for the poor Christians of Palestine, who most
pressingly implored the succors of Europe, they every day themselves advanced
their own ruin by the fatal Effects of their division, which became still
greater by the Quarrel, which arose among them at this time, concerning the
succession of a Kingdom, which thereby they made all the haste they could to
lose.

The Subject of this Quarrel is one of the points of History, which Writers
have made the least clear, and which in fews words I will endeavor to explain.
Isabella the Daughter of Amauri, King of Jerusalem, and Heiress of that Realm,
had four Husbands. The first was Aufrey de Thoron, by whom she had no Children.
The Second was Marquis Conrade de Momferrat, Prince of Tire, by whom she had
the Marchioness Mary, who married John de Brienne, and made him King of
Jerusalem. Of this Marriage issued Jolanta, the Wife to the Emperor Frederick
the Second, Mother to the Emperor Conrade, who was Heir to this Realm, and
consequently without contradiction left it as of right to the Unfortunate Young
Conradin. The third Husband of Queen Isabella, was Henry, Count de Champagne,
whose Daughter, Alice, married Hugh de Lusignan, the first of that name, King
of Cyprus, by whom she had the Princess Isabella, who was married to Prince
Henry de Poitiers, the Son of Bohemond the fourth of that name, Prince of
Antioch, and of Plaisance, the Daughter of Hugh, Lord of Giblet. From Henry de
Poitiers and Isabella de Lusignan, sprung Hugh the third, who after the death
of his Cousin Hugh the Second, who died without Issue, was King of Cyprus in
Right of his Mother. The last Husband of Isabella, the Daughter of Amauri, King
of Jerusalem, was Emeri, King of Cyprus, who had by her the Princess
Melisantha, who was second Wife to Bohemond the fourth, Prince of Antioch, and
Father to Henry de Poitiers, and by her he had the Princess Mary of Antioch,
who was the Subject of this difference.

For immediately after the death of Conradin, Hugh the third, the King of
Cyprus, who was descended in a right Line, from Alice de Champagne, the
Daughter of Queen Isabella by her third Husband, passed into Palestine; and at
Tire, caused himself to be crowned King of Jerusalem, in right of his
Grandfather. But the Princess Mary of Antioch maintained, that the Realm
appertained to her, in regard that being the Daughter of Melisantha, she was
nearer by one degree to Queen Isabella, than Hugh, who was the Son of her
Cousin. The Process hereupon lasted a long time. The Princess Mary opposed the
Coronation of Hugh; but perceiving that the Patriarch took little notice of her
opposition, she appealed to the Holy see, and came in person to pursue her
right before Pope Gregory the tenth, who appointed Delegates for the
Examination of the matter. She also presented her self to the Council of Lions,
and there demanded Justice. And the cause being remitted to the Barons of the
Realm, who neither esteemed, nor much loved King Hugh, the Princess at length
with the consent of Pope John the twenty first, judicially transferred to
Charles d' Anjou, King of Naples and Sicily, all her Right and Title upon
certain conditions, by a Treaty, Rome. And by this Right it is that the Realm
of Jerusalem, which has been possessed by the Princes, of the House of Suabia,
Kings of Sicily, as Descendants from Queen Isabella, Jolanta her
Granddaughter, the Wife of Frederick the Second, was devolved to Charles d'
Anjou, and his Posterity, and for this reason the Dukes of Lorrain, who are
descended from Ranatus d' Anjou, King of Sicily, by Jolanta his only Daughter,
Mother to Ranatus, Duke of Lorrain, bear the Cross of Jerusalem, together with
the Arms of the House of Anjou, which they have added to their Achievements.
The Kings of Arragon, who usurped Sicily from the Anjouin Family, and after
them the Kings of Castile, heirs to the House of Arragon, have also taken to
their Arms, the Cross of Jerusalem, and the Title of that Realm. And thus these
Princes have pleased themselves with the Shadow, the Name, and the empty show,
leaving the Body, the Substance, and the reality to the Infidels, the weak for
want of Power, and the strong for want of Zeal, choosing rather to employ their
Arms in less difficult Enterprises. For it is more easy to take what may be had
of what is our own, than to recover what belongs to us, and might be had,
though not without trouble, charge and hazard.

In the mean time Charles, who resolved to take possession of his new Realm,
sent Roger, Count de St. Severin, to Ptolemais, where he was received by the
Governor, who put the Fortress into his hands. And King Hugh having refused two
or three several times, to appear before the Barons, to make out the Reasons of
his pretensions to that Realm, they acknowledged Charles d' Anjou for their
King, and did him Homage; which did still more augment the Division, by reason
that the King of Cyprus having his Party, although it was weak, yet was it able
to give abundance of trouble, even in Ptolemais, which he had like to have
surprised. And certainly there was much danger lest Bendocdar, who was so
admirably skilled in making his own advantage in such opportunities, should lay
hold of this to seize upon those small remainders, which were yet possessed by
the Christians in Syria, but that God himself was pleased to deliver them from
this formidable Enemy. For this Sultan receiving information, that the Tartars
had besieged a Fortress which he had upon the Euphrates, he Marched immediately
to relieve it, and causing his Cavalry to Swim over this great River, he
thought to have surprised his Enemies; but they received him so well, that they
cut in pieces almost all his Troops; and it was not without great difficulty
that he himself escaped, having received a dangerous Wound in the Encounter:
but at last he got to Damascus, where the Flux and Fever coming upon him, by
reason of his Wound, he died in a few Days after the Battle.

It is impossible to express the joy which his Death occasioned among the
Christians, but it was much increased by the taking of the Fortress of Margath,
and by the Defeat of the Sarasins, who endeavored to retake it from the
Knights of the Temple; but above all by the great Victory of the Tartars: for
these People being entered into Syria, laid all wast before them, without giving
any Quarter to the Sarasins, when at length Melech-Sais, the Successor of
Bendocdar, Marched out of Egypt with an Army of two hundred thousand Men to
give them Battle. The two Armies met and fought most furiously in the plain of
Emessa, and after a most terrible Slaughter on both sides, the Egyptians in
conclusion lost the Day; and the Tartars, who had also lost abundance of Men,
satisfying themselves with their Victory, and the huge Booty which they had
taken, returned again beyond the Euphrates. This without all doubt had been a
conjuncture extremely favorable to the Christians; and Charles King of Sicily,
who was the greatest Captain of his time, an extreme lover of Glory and
Greatness, and who, at the Solicitation of Pope Gregory the Tenth, had taken
the Cross, and as King of Jerusalem had the principal Interest in the Holy War,
would certainly have led a powerful Army into Syria, to recover the Realm of
Jerusalem, as was the Expectation of the whole World. But the cruel adventure
of the Sicilian Vespers, Hugh, Cyprus, entered now again into Syria, Charles,
and seized upon Tire; Henry his Son, who succeeded to his Brother John, was
received in Ptolemais, besieged, and in five Days took the Fortress, Jerusalem;
this also made the division increase among the Christians, who divided
themselves between the two Parties.

On the other side the Sultan Melech Sais, retook the Fortress of Margath, and
made himself Master of the Castle of Laodicea, and that of Crac, which was one
of the strongest places in Syria; Tripolis, he abandoned all, upon the news
which he had of the Death of his Son, and returned into Egypt, where Elsis one
of his Emirs, who was mightily esteemed by the Mamalukes, tumbled him from the
Throne, and was chosen Sultan in his place, by the name of Melech-Messor. This
Sultan, who was a great Soldier, re-entred presently into Syria, where he
besieged Tripolis, Cyprus, and partly in Ptolemais. The Sultan who was as able
and dexterous, as he was Valiant, caused this great City to be demolished, that
so he might not be forced to keep a whole Army in Garrison there, and after
having taken several places thereabout, he made a very advantageous Truce for
two Years, thereby to frustrate the Design of the Forces, which he foresaw,
would be sent out of Europe against him. And indeed a very considerable
assistance, which the Pope sent at his own charges, into the East, upon twenty
Venetian Galleys, arriving not till after the conclusion of this Truce, was
constrained to return without doing any thing. It happened also that an
infinite conflux of People, of all Nations, without Order, and without Leaders,
coming to Ptolemais, and finding no employ, committed so many disorders,
indifferently upon the Lands of the Christians and the Sarasins, that the
Sultan, who only wanted an occasion to break the Truce to his advantage, laid
hold of that which he believed very favorable, to execute the design which he
had upon Ptolemais, whilst the Christian Princes, whom he knew to be engaged
in Wars one against another in Europe, had neither Power nor Will to assist it.

October, in the year following, and advanced toward Phoenicia; and then when
he was upon the point of going to invest Ptolemais, the Emir, whom he had made
his Lieutenant, thinking by the favor of the Soldiers to obtain his place,
gave him Poison whereof he died. But this did not prevent the Execution of the
Design; For the Mamalukes, who loved Melech-Messor extremely, pulled the
Traitor who had poisoned him, in a thousand pieces upon the spot, and
Proclaimed his Son Ely, Sultan, by the name of Melech-Seraph. This new Prince
resolved to pursue the design of his Father, who at his Death conjured him, not
to suffer his Body to be Interred, before he had taken the City, and driven out
the Christians. And for this purpose therefore, without giving them leisure to
make any advantage of this so sudden and great change, turning short to the
left hand toward the Sea, he came and laid Siege before Acre or Ptolemais,
upon the fifth of April,

Ptolemais, of whose Situation and Strength, I have given an account in the
fifth Book of this History, was at this time one of the fairest, richest, and
most flourishing Cities of all the East, by reason of the great Commerce of all
the Merchandises, which were brought thither from Egypt and Asia, by Land and
Sea, to be from thence transported into Europe. And as it was become the
Capital City of the Realm, since the taking of Jerusalem, and the Sanctuary,
where all the Christians of Palestine took Refuge, after the loss of their
Cities, so it was also then more Populous than ever it had been; and such great
Industry had been used in these late times, in fortifying it, that it was
thought to be impregnable; above all having at least thirty thousand Men well
Armed to defend it, besides eighteen thousand Crusades, who were arrived there
a little before, without a Commander. But this unfortunate City had within its
Walls, two kinds of Enemies infinitely more formidable than all the Forces of
the Sarasins, and which were the cause of its being lost.

Cyprus, and the other for the King of Sicily, the Venetians, the Genoese, the
Pisans, the Florentines, the English, the Templers, the Hospitallers, the
Teutonick Knights, the Princes of the Country, and even the Patriarch, and the
Legate of the Pope, would every one so divide the Government, as to be
independent upon all others; so that it might be said, that there were in
Ptolemais, so many different Cities, as there were quarters possessed by these
Orders, and different People, who were not only without a Head, whose Supreme
Authority and Orders they should all obey, but who were for the most part in
Arms one against another. And that which was yet more deplorable, and which
doubtless was the principal cause of the Desolation of this unfortunate City,
was, that the Corruption of manners was so great, and the irregularities of
Peoples Lives, or rather the inundation of all manner of Crimes, and even of
the most Infamous and Scandalous Vices, were so excessive and horrible, that
the Divine Justice was even necessitated to exterminate such an abominable Race
of Men, who calling themselves Christians by their Actions, so Wicked and
Impious, Blasphemed that and his Sacred Name among the Infidels. So that one
may say, as one of the Authors of that time does, who was a long time in the
Holy Land, and averrs it for a deplorable Truth, That of all the People which
inhabited Syria and Palestine, the Christians were the most notoriously lewd
and wicked.

The Sultan, who had such a numerous Army, and composed of expert Soldiers,
and above all his Mamalukes, who were extreme brave, attacked the City upon the
Land side by main Force, battering the Walls and the Towers Night and Day,
making abundance of Mines every where, and sapping the Foundations of the
Towers, particularly those of the Tower called Judasses, or the Cursed Tower,
which was as it were the Fortress of the City. The besiged also at first
defended themselves vigorously, being in continual hopes of relief by the way
of the Sea, which they had open, and being united for their better defense
under one Chief, whom by common consent they chose among all the Captains,
which was William Beaujeu, Great Master of the Temple, a most Valiant Man, and
perfectly skilful in Martial Affairs. But there arrived to their assistance
only five hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, who were conducted by the King
of Cyprus. And the Great Master of the Temple being unfortunately slain with a
poisoned Arrow, they lost their Courage, and finding themselves without a
Commander, they fell into all their former Quarrels and Disorders; insomuch
that the Sarasins, who had already made themselves Masters of two or three
Towers, giving a General Assault, upon the eighteenth Day of May, carried the
City first by the Gate of the Cursed Tower, and after by all the other
passages, which those of the City basely abandoned presently after, to save
themselves upon the Ships.

But nevertheless there were but a very few that escaped, who threw themselves
first into the Ships; and who with the King of Cyprus, and the principal among
the Knights and the Officers of the Nations, arrived at last in the Isle, after
having been in great danger of perishing by a dreadful Storm, which overtook
them in their passage; for by a surcharge of Misfortune, the Sea ran so high
that Day, that the greatest part of those, who, to avoid the Swords of the
Sarasins, threw themselves into the Water, thinking to gain the Ships, were
Drowned. The Patriarch himself, who had already boarded a Gally, upon which he
was just going to imbark, desiring out of his Charity to take into his Skiff,
as many as he could of these miserable People, which were in Shoals got into
the Water to come to the Ships, was sunk to the bottom, by the too great Number
with which the Boat was laden, and at least at his Death did the Office of the
good Shepherd, who gives his Life for his Sheep, although he could not thereby
save theirs, by dying for them in this manner. All the rest were exposed to the
fury of these Barbarous Victors, who filled all with Death and Slaughter,
making Slaves of all those whom the Sword spared, after they had, by all manner
of Disorders and Violence, glutted their insatiable Cruelty and Lust.

There were there always a certain Number of Virgins, consecrated to God, who
nevertheless found out a Mavelous way to preserve their Virginity inviolated,
even by the assistance of these Enemies of their Honor, Clare, seeing that the
City was taken, and that they could not escape the hands of the Sarasins, whose
Cruelty was less terrible than their brutish Lust, she exhorted her Daughters
with a most Heroic Courage, and an admirable servor of Spirit, to imitate her
example, if they would preserve that treasure, which ought to be a thousand
times dearer to them than their Lives. And thereupon she cut of her own Nose,
making her self horribly deformed in the Eyes of Men, to be admirably beautiful
in the sight of God, whom only she desired to please. All the others doubtless
animated by a like inspiration of the Holy Spirit, which had formerly inspired
a Holy Abbess in England, in the same manner, did presently the same Execution
upon themselves, by their Blood to extinguish the brutish Flames of these
Barbarians, who finding them in this condition, which gave them a horror, they
instantly Murdered them all, and by this obliging Cruelty, gave them the means
to add the Palm of Martyrdom, to that of their Virginity, and as the Scripture
expresses it, to wash their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb; to have the Honor
to follow him. The Cordeliers, who were their spiritual Fathers, and had a fair
Convent in Ptolemais, were also all Slain without Pity, and above sixty
thousand perished in this fatal loss of the City, or were carried Captives into
Egypt.

The next Day, which was the nineteenth of the Month, the Templers, who yet
held the principal Tower of the Temple, after having cut in pieces three
hundred Sarasins, who were entered into their quarter, and who during a
Capitulation, had attempted the Honor of the Ladies, had a destiny like that of
Sampson: For they were all overwhelmed with the fall of their Tower, which was
overthrown with the Sape, and which Buried with them under the same Ruins, the
Enemies which did Attack them. Thus the Famous Ptolemais, which had been taken
a hundred years before, by Philip the August, King of France, and by Richard
Coeur-de-Lyon, King of England, after having maintained a Siege of three years,
against more than three hundred thousand Crusades, who came thither
successively, was retaken by the Sultan of Egypt, in four and forty Days, and
with it the Christians lost all their Courage and their Judgment to that
degree, as to suffer all that remained to them in Syria, and the Holy Land, to
follow the same, or rather a more shameful Fortune, than that of Ptolemais. For
those who might very well have defended Tire, a City which was extremely
strong, forsook it, and fled away upon their Ships, so soon as they heard the
sad news of the loss of Ptolemais, so that the next Day the Sarasins entered it,
without resistance. The Templers which were in Sidon, and in the Pilgrims
Castle, did the same, upon seeing one of the Lieutenants of Melech-Seraph,
prepare to besiege them by Sea. And those of Baruth, trusting to this
perfidious Emir, who had promised to treat them as Friends, if in his passage
through their Lands, they would repair to him, were all either cut in pieces,
or sent in Chains, to suffer a miserable Captivity in Egypt.

And thus these four Maritime places, being all that remained to the Christians
in the Holy Land, after the taking of Ptolemais, were also lost, and it was
precisely at this time, that they were wholly chased from thence, a hundred
ninety and two years after that Godfrey of Bullen, and the other Princes of the
Crusade, had so gloriously Conquered and founded this Realm, which continued
for near two hundred years, under fifteen or sixteen Kings. And this makes it
appear that it cannot be absolutely said that the Crusades were unfortunate, no
more than that by the same reason it can be maintained that the enterprises of
the great Cyrus were not prosperous, because the Monarchy of the Persians,
which he founded by his Conquests, did not last more than two hundred years,
under thirteen Kings. But such is the fatality of all Earthly things, which
after their Birth and Establishment, increase and continue till a certain
Period, which Nature, or rather Divine Providence has prefixed to them, as the
term of their perfection, after which they decrease either insensibly, as in
natural productions, or else suddenly by some great Revolution of Fortune, by
which they cease to be, what they had never been, but upon that necessary
condition of fatality, that one Day they are to be no more. As for the rest,
the Victorious Sultan that he might take from the Christians the hopes and the
desire to recover what they had lost, Maritime places, he demolished, burnt,
and overthrew from the very Foundations all these Cities as well as Ptolemais,
which having been one of the fairest Cities of the World, but also one of the
most wicked, is no more at present but a miserable remnant of ruins the
greatness whereof make apparent both that of the City, when it was in its
flourishing estate, and that of the terrible punishment which it drew upon it
self by its Enormous Crimes.

This sad news of so great and unexpected a loss, did wonderfully surprise Pope
Nicholas the fourth, who for above a year last past had used all imaginable
industry to form a general Crusade of all the Christians of the West against
the Mamalukes, who continually threatened Palestine. He had with powerful
Solicitations, invited all the Kings of Europe into it, and had prevailed so
well, that Edward King of England had declared himself chief thereof, and had
made great preparations throughout his whole Kingdom, to put himself into a
Condition to march at the time, which this good Pope had named, which was at
the Feast of St. John Baptist, in the year one thousand two hundred and ninety
three. When in the mean time, he understood, that the Christians had lost all
in Syria, in the Month of May, one thousand two hundred ninety one. This was
like a mighty clap of thunder, which did mightily amaze him, but which
nevertheless did not hinder him from redoubling his endeavors by his Letters,
by his Legates, and by his Preachers, whom he dispatched to all places, to
excite the Christians to take upon them the Cross, and to unite the Princes of
the East and West, and even the Kings of the Tartars, the Iberians, Georgians
and Armenians with their forces in the design to recover together from their
Common Enemy, what had been lost for want of this Union. But the Evil being now
believed to be desperate and without Remedy, all that this Pope did, and all
that his Successors endeavored to do afterward upon this Subject, was never
able to produce one Crusade, to procure the recovery of the Holy Land.

Boniface the eighth upon the desire of Cassan King of the Tartars in Persia,
that the Princes of Europe would join with him in a War against the Sultan of
Egypt writ indeed to them, but in terms so high and lofty, that there were not
any, who would take notice of them. Clement the fifth, following the Example of
his Predecessors, acted in the Council of Vienna by the way of powerful
exhortation, and caused it to be ordained by a particular Decree, that the
Cross should be preached in all places, for the recovery of the Holy Land, and
there were many of all Nations, who took it upon them. But as it was only a
confused Multitude, without any head of Reputation, the Princes of those times,
having other interests than that of the Holy Land, he gave them all absolution
from their Vow, and sent them back into their own Countries.

John the two and twentieth made a far greater Noise, but produced no more
effect. This Pope, who with a mighty passion desired the reestablishment of the
Empire of the Christians in Palestine, acted by Agreement for this noble end,
with King Philip de Valois, who was then the most potent and renowned King of
France, especially after that glorious Victory, which he obtained against the
Flemmings at Cassel. For this purpose he created Patriarch of Jerusalem the
famous Doctor of Paris, a noble Burgundian or Brescian, of the Illustrious
House of the Lords of Varembon, a Religious of the Order of St. Dominick: and
the King, who had procured this Dignity for him, in honor of his extraordinary
Merit, sent him presently after into Egypt, with order to treat with the Sultan
about the restitution of Jerusalem upon reasonable terms, before he went to
compel him to it, by making War upon him with all the Forces of Europe. And in
the mean time Philip taking the opportunity of a Pilgrimage, which he made to
Marseilles, to do honor to the sacred Relics of St. Lewis, Bishop of Tolouse,
his Kinsman, went also to Avignion to conferr with the Pope concerning this
great Affair, where the Pope gave him the tenths of all the Ecclesiastical
estates in France, to be employed in the Holy War.

reason of the troubles, Lewis of Bavaria had raised in the Church. Philip, to
whom the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was returned from his Ambassy, had given
an account of the Obstinacy of the Sultan of Egypt sent some time after to
Avignion, Peter de Roger, Archbishop of Roan, a Prelate of consummate Wisdom
and learning, where at length a Pope was chosen to the throne of St. Peter by
the name of Clement the sixth. This great man very strongly harangued the
Council upon the necessity of a general Crusade, and upon the means, which the
King, his Master, had taken to make it successful to the glory of the Church,
provided that she would contribute her Authority to it. He promised also with
an Oath, that this generous Prince should march within less than two years at
the head of the Crusades; so that the Pope declared him General of the Holy
League, and confirmed to him the Grant of the Tenths for six years, and sent to
him the Archbishop with a most ample Commission to bestow the Cross, and all
the privileges and perogatives, which the former Popes had granted to the other
Crusades. Thereupon the King in Ceremony received the Cross from the hands of
the Prelate in his Chapel at Paris, with John, King of Bohemia, and Philip,
King of Navarr, who were then at his Court, and so did the greatest part of the
Barons of the Realm.

He also made his preparations with extreme application and excessive cost,
surpassing all that any of the Kings his Predecessors had done upon the like
occasions; causing to be rigged in several Ports, the fairest Fleet that ever
France had seen, which was able to transport forty thousand men at Arms with
their Horses, and which was furnished with all sorts of Provisions in
prodigious abundance. He had also taken great care, to publish this Crusade
throughout Europe, and had engaged the Kings of Arragon, Majorca, Sicily,
Cyprus and Hungary, the Republics of Venice and Genoa, to join their Arms with
his, that they might all march together under his Conduct against the Sultan.
So that it was thought this mighty Army of Crusades, would consist in three
hundred thousand Combatants, which already made the whole East to tremble, and
filled the whole Earth with the Glory of the name of France and the noise of
such formidable preparations.

But as there is nothing more required to the fixing a mighty Engine and
rendering it immovable, but to stop the secret Springs, which give it that
violent Impression, which draws upon it the Eyes and admiration of the
Spectators, by its prodigious movement; so the War which in the midst of these
transactions, Edward, King of England, declared against Philip, having stopped
this Prince by obliging him to turn his Arms another way, and to defend
himself, all this great Crusade, about which he had taken such care and pains,
became vain and fruitless. And all the forces of the Princes of Europe, being
divided between these two great Enemies, England and France, there remained
none to go into Egypt and Syria to combat against the Enemies of Jesus Christ.
And thus the War, which the English made with France, and which at length drive
them out of it, hindered the War of the Holy Land, which the French had
undertaken to make against the Infidels, from having a conclusion answerable to
its beginning, and the general expectation, that thereby the Infidels should be
chased out of the Inheritance of the Son of God.

Palestine. For the great endeavors, which were afterward made by the Pope's,
Nicholas the fifth, Calixtus the third, and Pius the Second for the Reunion of
all Christians in a Holy War, were not for the Recovery of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem. Matters then were far different, and all the care was how to oppose
the furious Torrent of the Conquests, of the Ottoman Family, Mahomet the Second
after having taken Constantinople, Hungary, Greece and Italy. As for Syria it
was ever abandoned from the time that the Christians, had been chased out of it
by the Sultan of Egypt, after the taking of Ptolemais, and much more after that
Selim, Turks conquered Palestine and Egypt from the Mamalukes. The fear which
there was, that his Grandson Selim the Second, after the Conquest of Cyprus,
should fall into Italy, obliged Pope Pius the fifth, Philip the Second, King of
Spain, Venetians to unite their Forces against such a dreadful Enemy, against
whom the famous Victory of Lepanto, of which so little advantage was made,
signified nothing as to the regaining of Cyprus, or any other of his Conquests
from him. It has been frequently seen since that, and even in our days, that
the French, the Italians, the Poles, the Germans and Hungarians, have united
themselves, against these fierce Ottomans, who think of nothing so much as
raising their Empire still higher upon the ruins of the Christians; but these
Unions have proceeded no further, but to prevent them from pushing on their
Conquests further, rather than for the recovery of what they have gained; and I
know not by what enchantment it happens, that the Turks have ever gained upon
the Christians, and that the Christians, who are much Superior to them in
Courage and Soul, think they do enough if they resist them, when they are
attacked at their own doors, without ever daring to undertake to go directly
against them, to snatch out of their hands, what they have despoiled them of,
or to overturn their Empire. I know there are Writers, who have endeavored to
make such a Design appear not impossible to be executed, according as they have
imagined, and chalked out the ways, which ought to be taken to make it succeed
without much difficulty; which certainly were the most certain way to recover
the Kingdom of Jerusalem. As for my part, who must acknowledge the deficiency
of my Understanding in matters of War and Policy, I shall not undertake to
reason upon that Subject, which is neither any part of my Profession nor
design. It suffices me that God has done me the favor to permit me to finish
an enterprise so difficult as this of writing, at least with great fidelity,
and with all the exactness I have been able, as I think I have done, this
present Work of the History of the Crusades for the deliverance of the Holy
Land.

FINIS.

