THE SPIRIT OF MAN: OR, Some Meditations (by way of Essay) on the Sense of that
Scripture. 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I
pray God, your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be Preserved Blameless unto
the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.By Charles Morton, Minister of the Gospel
at Charlstown in New England.

Mal. 3. 16. Take heed to your Spirit Luke 19. 55. Ye know not what manner of
Spirit you are of. Boston Printed by B. Harris, for Duncan Campbell, at the
Dock-Head, over against the Conduit. 1692.

ERRATA.
PAge 23. line 19. for Casual r. Equally. p. 26. l. 2. after That r. Though p.
50. l. 30. for To. read in. p. 77. l. 29. for The r. They p. 78. l. 24. for
Clears r. cleaves. p. 85. l. 21. for whence r. where.

AS we have all manner of Demonstrations, to assure us, of what E^^hu asserted
when he said, There is a Spirit in man; so we have the Eternal Spirit of God
Himself, by the Pen of His Inspired Solomon, Recommending this Blessed Oracle
of Wisdom unto us, A man of Understanding is of an Excellent Spirit. Indeed, we
have no Understanding till, believing that we have within us, a Spirit
Excellent for the first Author and Nature of it, we Endeavor above all things
to make that Spirit become yet more Excellent, by the Alterations of a New
Birth upon it* The Woeful and Rueful Degeneracy, which has be^allen the Spirit
of Man, by his Fall into Sin, is a matter of the most bleeding Lamentations,
unto every Spirit that in the least measure begins to Awaken out of that
Lamentable Fall. Yea, The whole Creation Groans over the vitiated Spirit of
man, and sighs, How art thou Fallen, O thou Child of the Morning! Accordingly,
when once the Symptoms of a Recovery, from, The madness in our Hearts while we
L^ve, do dawn in the Reflections of our Spirit, upon its own unhappy
Depravations our chief Question and Study then is, What we shall do for the
Salvation of that Spirit from the Distempers ^f it; and we become wonderfully
Thankful unto our God, for His accommodating of Us, with such means of Grace,
as He never bestowed upon the Apostate Spirits, whom He has Reserved in
Darkness under Everlasting Chains. If we duly consider, the Natural Faculties
of that Spirit, which the Father of Spirit^s has Breathed into us, or the
provision which God has made For it, in the Spiritual World, we shall indeed
reckon, that our Spirit is too Excellent a Thing to be neglected; yea, that
there is no Folly like that of the man, who Despises his own Soul. But if we
again consider the Moral Pollutions, which have disordered our Spirit, we may
be soon convinced, That we are in Danger of Dying without Wisdom, whereby the
Excellency that is in us then will go away: And that there had need be some
Essays toward a Revival of the Primi^ive Excellency in our Nobler and Better
Part, in order to our Meetness for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Now,
as the whole work of Sanctification upon the Spirit, is necessary to make it
Excellent, so, there is a notable stroke of that work performed in the
Sanctification of the Humor, which is to be seen in the Temper and Biass of
that Spirit. There is ^ certain Air of our Complexion, which Results from some
Circumstances of the Uni^^ between our Souls and our Bodies; and ^his
Disposition, we ordinarily call, The Spirit of the man. Let This be Sanctified,
and the Man will become one of, The Ex^cellent in the Earth. It would be a
mavelous Renewal o^ the Divine Image in our Spirits, and it would render us
extraordinarily as well Serviceable to others, as Comfortable to our selves, if
that Inclination which our Spirits have, as they are United, and therefore very
much Conformed, unto our Bodies, were Preserved Blameless: and were this
remarkable Article of Sanctification, more considered, we should see perhaps,
^ar more Excellent Spirits, than are now too frequently beheld in those that
wear the Name, that began at Antioch.

To promote this Holiness and Happiness, the Reader is here blessed with the
Worthy Labors, of a Learned, Pious, and now Aged Servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel. He is a person too considerable in his
Generation, to want any of our Commendation; and as for this his Judicious
Treatise, 'twill by its own Pertinency, and Usefulness, abundantly Commend it
self unto every sensible person, that shall peruse it with a just Attention.
All that belongs unto Us, is to follow it with our Prayers, That He who Forms
the Spirit of man within him, would by this Book assist the Readers in
Reforming whatever they may find in their own Spirits calling for that
Reformation; and in Glorifying of God, with the Spirits, which He has Made and
Bought for His own Immortal Glory.

Increase Mather James Allen Samuel Willard John Baily Cotton Mather

The CONTENTS.
TExt Opened PAGE 1 Whole man-what ^ Expositors Differ. 6 The most proper
Interpretation thought by the Author. 9 Spirit out of Man. 9 In Man. 10
Peculiar Genius, (in Text. 14. Scripture Distinctions of Soul and Spirit 16
Constitution of our Spirit. 18 Spirits Hot. 27 Cheerfulness. 28 Activity. 31
Courage. 34 Anger in zeal. 41 ^n Jealousy. 51 Spirits Cold, 54 ^orrowful. 55
^ull. 63 Timorous. 65 Meek. 69 Spirits Moderate. 73 ^^ference, no strained
Notion* 88
THE SPIRIT of MAN. OR, Some Meditations (by way of Essay) on the sense of that
Scripture.
1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
your whole SPIRIT, and SOUL and BODY, be preserved blameless unto the Coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Apostle, having given the Thessalonians, diverse Exhortations in the
preceding Verses, closes all with a profession of Prayer for them; as well
knowing, That all Counsels, or Charges by men, tho^ sent from God himself,
would be of no effect, unle^s God by his Sanctifying (...) do give men Grace to
Improve (...).

He prays, not only that they may be Sanctified, but that they may be wholly
so; And that the ^ulness of the Expression [HOLOTELEIS, wholly perfectly] may
the better appear, He Descends to all the particulars, that are in Man; he
mentions the chief Heads of them, which are either all that is in Man, or To
which All, that belongs to Mere Man, may be Referred. Your whole Spirit, and
Soul, and Body; that they may be Sanctified or filled with Grace; and not only
so, but also preserved blameless therein to the Coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; (that is) preserved to the End.

We shall a little Explain the words:

The very God of peace, (Autos de O^ Theos) or the God of Peace himself: 'twas
a frequent Option, Benediction, Salutation or Valediction, [Peace be to you.]
In the word Peace, all good was comprehended. So, to these same persons* 2
These. 3. 16. Now the Lord of Peace himself, give you peace always, by all
means. Here in the Text it seems to Referr to a Duty, peace with men, v. 13. be
at peace among your selves. And a privilege, peace with God, and in your
Consciences. To both which Sanctification does contribute, in the per^formance
of the before mentioned Dut^^^

[Sanctifie you] HAGIAS Al, make you holy, or separate and consecrate you to
himself, (this is the Notation of the word.) The Definition of the Thing,
Sanctification, is A Renewal of the whole man, whereby we are enabled daily
more and more to Die unto Sin and Live unt^ Righteousness according to Gods
Foreordaination.

[Wholly] HOLOTELE^S, wholly-perfectly (as is before noted) is, To Extend this
work of Grace, to all the parts of Grace, and all the parts of Man. The parts
of Grace, both Habits and Acts; and in both, the perfection of Degrees, and
persistance of Duration. In the parts of Man, that which follows.

[And I pray God your whole Spirit] HOLOCLERON TO PNEUMA. The word HOLOCLERON
signifies properly (Haeres ex ass) a complete Heir, from whom nothing is given
away; or one that has the whole Inheritance. It therefore (I think) does here
signify all that Appertains to Man, expressed by the word Spirit, HUMON TO
PNEUMA. All the Spirit that is in you, or all that may be called your Spirit.
Your; not the Spirit of God in you; for He is not capable of Sanctification,
being already, and always in himself perfectly Holy. TO PNEUMA, The Spirit:
What it is, is the chief matter of our present Enquiry; and therefore of it,
more fully after; only we shall here Note, That it seems to be a more General,
and comprehensive word, in which the two that follow are Included

[And Soul and Body] KI HE PSUCHE KI TO SOMA. The Latin [Et Anima, and Corpus]
I should not scruple to Translate [Both the Soul and the Body,] and if (et and
et) in Latin signify [ Both, and And] why ( KI and KI in Greek, does not as
properly the same, I see no Reason. And then the Text would run thus. I pray
that your whole complete Spirit (as a General) Both Soul and Body (two special
Ingredients thereof, or contributers thereunto) may be prese^ved, etc.

[Preserved] TERETHEIE, may be carefully watched; as those that keep Guard in a
Gar^ison; for this Spirit of a man, is most liable to Assaults by Temptation:
And because men are apt to be Defective in this Spiritual Watch, I pray that
God would take the charge of you, watch over you and keep you safe.

[Blameless] AMEMPTOS, so as Momus (the Carper) shall find no fault in you; so
is the wo^d Rendered, ^hil. 2. 15. and 3. 6. It Is supposed you are, or will be,
wholly Sanctified (according to the first Pra^er in the Text,) but this
notwithstanding your peculiar Spirit is apt to run out, and so be blameable,
unless you are especially protected, guided and preserved.

[To the coming of our Lord.] that is, to the end; Till you come thro^ Grace to
Glory. This needs no farther Explica^ion as to the present Enquiry. The words
thus Explained, we come now to view the parts of the Text, wherein we have.

1. Two Acts. Sanctification and Preservation.

2. The Author of them, God; to whom the Prayer is Directed.

3. The Modification of them; wholly, throughout, continually.

4. The Subject, the whole man, expressed by the Whole Spirit, both Soul and
Body. And this Last it is, with which (at present) we are mostly concerned.

The Whole Man is sometimes expressed by only two words [Soul and Body, or
Spirit and Body] which are the two physical, or constituent parts of Man. SO 1
Cor. 6. 20. Ye are Bought with a price, therefore Glorify God in your Body,
and in your Spirits which are Gods. Also in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these promises,
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit. In both
which places Spirit is the same with Soul; and Flesh in the latter, is the same
with Body in the former. But w^y here the whole man (for 'twas the same to be
preserved that was to be Sanctified) why (I say) he should be here express^d by
three particulars, is a matter wherein Expositors do differ, and I find these
several Interpretations of the place.

1. Some will have Spirit and Soul to be put Exegetically; as if both signi^ied
but one and the same thing; one being added only as Explication of the other;
so Austin.) But (indeed methinks) this here seems a little harsh, because
needless; for Soul and Body, or Spirit and Body (as it is in the two forecited
Scriptures) were Intelligible enough to express the two physical constituents
of a man. Besides, the particle [ Kl. And, or rather Both] seems to connect
Spirit,, And Soul, as two things that have some Distinction between them.

2. Others will have Spirit to signify the Mind and Understanding; and Soul
the Will and Affections (Calvin, Marlorate, and diverse other) from whom I would
not willingly Dissent, and therefore shall not slight their Judgment; yet I
must humbly profess, however clear the Notion was to them, it is not so to me;
for that which they call Soul is as truly Spirit, as the Leading Faculty (the
Intellect.) Yea, I find the Expressions quite Transverse; As if Soul signified
the Intellectual Faculty and Spirit the Volitive) in Mary's Song. Luke 1. 46,
47. My Soul does Magnify the Lord; and my Spirit has Rejoiced in God ^y
Savior. As if she had said; My Soul, (that is, my Mind and Understanding) Does
Magnify (i. e. Has high Thoughts of God, great Estimation of him; which are
Acts of the Intellect, and the only Internal Magnification of him) And my
Spirit, (i. e. my Will and Affections) has Rejoiced (which is their proper
Act.) This to me seems more current, if in this place there be a Distinction
between Soul and Spirit. But I will not Assert it, I rather think there is none
here; only her Inward Joy of heart, being great; her Outward Expressions
thereof in words, are Enlarged; Soul and Spirit in a Pleonasm signifying only
her Inner Man. But if Spirit here do present us with any Distinct Notion, I
should take it to be, a Chearfu^ Frame of Spirit, in which she then was* (...)
then, it will fully fall in with our present Conceptions of the word Spirit in
our Text, as shall be shown anon.

3. Some will have Spirit (in our Text) to signify the Higher Faculties (both
Understanding and Will) the Rational part in man; and Soul, the Inferior
Facul^ies common to man with Bruits and Plants (Sensative, Vigetative, etc.)
This indeed i^ a common Interpretation. But methinks it is harsh to Denominate
Man's Soul from the Infe^iour Powers (contrary to that Logical Rule.
Denomination is from the better part. Nor do I find in Scripture (to my
Remembrance) the word Soul, any where else to have this signification. Nor
(Lastly) are these Lower Faculties capable of other Sanctification then that of
the Body, which is to be but Instrumental to the Soul in Holiness; and
therefore thus to separate Soul from Spirit, is but to confound it with Body in
the business of Sanctification and Preservation here spoken of.

These three forementioned Interpretations I ^ill not Absolutely deny, nor
Contend with their Authors about them; Because they all agree well enough in
the General Scope of the place, which is (be sure) that all, that is In Man be
sancti^yed to God, However any one part be Distingui^hed from the other. Yet I
am apt to think that a more Proper Interpretation may be found, which will give
a more F^ll and (...) sense to the place, then is ^ually a^^ribed to it.

For the Enquiry after this we shall consider to what things the Name of Spirit
i^ given in Scripture besides those before men^ioned: And this I find to be,
to some things Out of Man, and some things In Man.

1 Out of Man the Word (Spirit) is ascribed both to God and Creatures.

1. To God both Essential and Personal.

1. Essential, as in Job. 4. 24 God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
etc. Not that Spirit is an Univocal Genus of God and any of his Creatures; for
then there would be a Common Nature; but there is Infinite Distance between
them: Only because Spirit i^ the Name of the most Noble Created Nature, we
Ascribe it also to God by Anal^gie, for that we have no better Name to give him.

2. Perso^al, the Third in the Blessed Trinity, under the Tide of the H^ly
Ghost, or Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord; of Jesus etc. But ^his is not OUR
Spirit; nor is he to be Sanctified ^r Preserved; and so cannot be here meant.

2. To Angels, both Good and Bad; but Bad Angels cannot be Sanctified; and Good
need no Prayers in this Respect: Nor can they be called OUR Spirits, unless by
Assignation of particular Guardia^ Angels to particular men; which (whatever
were the Opinion of some Jews, and Gentiles of old) I know no ground to
Believe. This of the Spirit Out of Man.

2. In Man, the Spirit is that, which belongs to a man in a proper and natural
sense; and of this kind there seem to be four distinct Significations of the
word. Such as.

1. When taken for the Soul (the forma hominis) Resigned up to God in Death. So
I understand David, Psa. 31. 5. Unto thee, O Lord I commit my Spirit; (however
men deal with my Body;) And this the rather, because Christ, at his Death using
the same words, must needs be so understood. Luke 23. 46. Agreeable to Eccles.
12. 7. The Spirit returns to God who gave it. And in the same sense also, Chapter
11. 5. Thou know not the way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones grow in the
womb. That is, (as I take it) Thou understandest not how the Soul does form the
Body, as an Habitation for it self. It Is the Inward part of man; so the
Exegesis seems very plain, in that Isa. 26. 9. With my Sou^ have I desired thee
in the night; yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early; i. e. with
my inward man I have, and will, apply my self to thee: from whence arises a
Tropical sense of Spirit, namely to signify Sincerity. God is my witness, whom
I Serve in my Spirit in the Gospel, Romans 1. 9.

2 Spirit is taken for the Life, or Union of Soul and Body; or Souls being in
the State of Union. So I understand, Job. 10. 12. thou have granted me Life,
and thy visitation has preserved my Spirit; namely to continue in and with my
Body. And chapter 34. 14. 15 If God gather to himself man's spirit and his breath,
all flesh shall perish to gether, and man shall turn again unto Dust. Thus it is
said of the Damsel. whom our Savior Raised to Life; Her Spirit came again, and
she arose Luk 8. 55. came again (ie) to be again United to her Body. We Read
Ecl. 3. 21. of the Spirit of a man, that goes upwards; and the Spirit of a
beast that goes Downwards, If the Spirit in both parts be understood in the
same sense (as most likely it is); then either Brutes have proper Spirits
(which many are loath to admit;) or the Spirit of man must signify but the
Life, which is all (if not more, then) some will allow to Beasts. Again, Chap.
8. 8. No man has power over the Spirit, to Retain the Spirit in the Day of
Death. i. e. No man is M^ster of his own Life to prolong it. To the same
purpose is that Expression in Hezekiahs Prayer, Isa. 38. 16. O Lord by these
things men Live, and in all these things is the Life of my Spirit, so will thou
Recover me, and make me to Live. He me^ns not by the Life of his Spirit; the
continued Duration of his Ever-living Soul, but the continuance of its Union
with the Body, whereby the Li^e of his person should be prolonged.

The Spirit, in this sense taken, may indeed be Sanctified. The Life may be
Devoted unto God; according to that of the Apostle. Rom 14. 8. Whether we Live,
we Live unto the Lord; or Whither we Dye etc. But this (I think is not the
direct meaning of the Spirit in our Text.

3. Spirit is taken for some special Faculties, or particular Acts of the mind;
such as,

1. Understanding, Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord,
searching all the Inward Parts of the Belly; not in an Anatomical, but Moral
Sense; The Understanding is set up by God in man (as a Candle) to search and
find out by its Exercise, all those Inward Acts and Inclinations which would
othe^wise lie hidden and undiscovered. So that, Isa. 29. 24* They that Erred in
Spirit, shall come to Understanding, and they that Murmured, shall Learn
Doctrine. That is, they that had misapprehensions of Me, and my Ways, shall
come to Understanding (not the Faculty, but) the Rectitude thereof; and they
that Murmured, whose Wills were averse to embrace Truth shall be graciously
Inclined to Learn that which is Right.

2. The Fancy or Imagination is sometimes to be understood by Spirit. Ezekiel. 13.
3. Woe unto the Foolish Prophets, that follow their own Spirit, and have seen
nothing, or that walk after the things which they have not seen; (as in orig.)
which God has not Revealed to them, but they have fabricated to themselves out
of their Evil Hearts and Foolish Fancies or Imaginations.

3. The Spirit is also taken for the Thoughts upon, or Remembering of some
person or thing. Thus the Apostle Expresses his Thinking of the Corinthians I
Cor. 5. 3. I verily as absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have judged
already, as though I were present, concerning him that has done this Deed. He
thought of them and their Affairs; though at a distance from them. So of the
Colossians, Chap. 2. 5. Though I he absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the
Spirit, Ioying and Beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ. He Rejoiced to behold their Graces by the eye of his mind, his
Cogitations of them. And thus much of the Souls Faculties or Acts, for which
sometimes the word Spirit is taken.

4. Spirit is Lastly taken for some Qualifications, or Inclinations of the mind
as United to the Body, and Conformed much thereunto.

This is the product of Nature, Acquisition and Circumstances of Life, all
which concur to form the GENIUS, Temper, or Disposition of man. Each man has
something peculiar to himself in this Respect; as he has in the Features of his
Countenance, Stature, Shape, Mien or Carriage of his Body, whereby he is
Distinguished from any other. So, if we ask, [What Spirit is he of?] we mean,
of what Temper, Inclination or Genius? How Disposed? How Qua^ified? And the
true Answers will be as various, as men; of whom one man is (by Nature,
Acquisition, or both) of a sober, grave Spirit. Another of a Quick, Active,
Cheerful Spirit. Another of a weak, timorous, Careful; Some are Gentiel,
Generous, Courteous, Open Hearted; Others Churlish, Clownish, Surly, Rough,
Close and Reserved, etc. All these Spirit are viciated by Corrupt Nature; and
may by the Spirit of Grace be so Sanctified, as to Render men Serviceable, though
in a different way, and of good acceptance both with God and man.

Now, This I take to be the most proper meaning of the word Spirit Here in the
Text; And then the sense of it is,

[I Pray God you may be wholly Sanctified in every Part and Faculty; every
Power, Natural and Acquired; and being Sanctified may be wholly also preserved;
In General your whole Spirit; All that gives any of you a Distinguishing
Character from other men; more Particularly, your Soul (the forma hominis) the
Inner part; and your Body (the Materia hominis) or Outer part, Both which are
Included in the Spirit, which Results from both: The Faculties of the Soul,
with their Hab^^uations, or Improvements; and the Temperament of the Body,
attended with Outward Circumstances, contributing thereunto.] This I think is
the Apos^les meaning, i^ I rightly understand him.

Having thus l^id down the Notion in General, we shall Endeavor to make it
plain, by opening some particulars. As

1. There is in Scripture such a Distinction between the Soul and Spirit, which
we shall first show by one place in the General, and after by more particularly
in their proper places.

The place in General is that of Hebr. 4. 12, 13. The Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any Two Edged Sword, piercing even to the Dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a Discerner of
the Thoughts, and Intents of the Heart; neither is there any Creature, that is
not manifest in his sight, etc.

This Dividing asunder of S^ul and Spirit; Is it a Philosophical Distinction,
of the Powers and Facul^ies, into Superior and Inferi^ur (as some would have
it) I pray to what purpos^? Is it to show the S^periour, as clear, and
untainted by the Fall; but that the Inferior and Bruital, or sensual part is
^iciated and corrupt, as some of the Heathen Philosophers have con^usedly
suggested? They say indeed that NO^S (the mind) is Divine aurae particula, a
Sacred, and Divine Thing' not inclined to any thing Disallowed by Right Reason;
till it come to be Incarcerated in the Body: and then clogged by a Dull
Material Flesh, and yoked with a couple of other silly Souls (the Sensitive of
Brutes, and the Vegetative of Plants) It bec^me obstru^ted in all virtuous
aspiring; and born down to Sensual and Inferior Acts and Objects. Thus they
Dreamt; and does the Scripture give any Countenance to such Fancies? I think
not.

I rather take it thus. The Apostle ^aving Exhorted them to study and use
Diligence, or Labor (as we read it) to Enter into the Rest before mentioned;
Tacitly implies that this work should be done, with all Sincerity, for that
they had to do herein with a Heart-searching God; This is manifest by the
Energie of his Word, which opens to a man the Secrets of his Soul; for the
word is ^iving or Quick, etc. As if he had said; God, who made man, knows him
altogether, and better understands what is in man, than man does what is in
himself. Man has but Dark Apprehensions of himself, and therein often times
grossly does mistake; B^t God by his Word Searches intimately, and Discovers
fully to him what he else would not take notice of: His Soul and Spirit lie
close together (as do his Joints and Marrow.) But, as the Anatomists Knife lays
open the one Difference; so the piercing Two Edged Sword of the Word, does the
other: That word shows him, How his Soul came pure out of the Hand of God; but
he has added thereto a vicious Spirit, by the perverting of what God did make
upright.

Let not man therefore charge God foolishly, and say (as Adam did concerning
Eve) From the Soul which thou gave me all my faults do arise: No, It is from
that Evil Spirit, which man has to himself Acquired: His Soul indeed has the
powers, but it is his Spirit that gives the Inclinations, which (in a natural
corrupt State) are wholly bent unto Evil. Thus the Malady is opened and
searched by the word, and the Cure is also by the same word prescribed: As here
in the Text; Namely Sanctification.

And thus much for the first particular; That there is in Scripture such a
Distinction, betwixt the Soul and Spirit.

2. That the Constitution of this Spirit or Genius, is an Aggregate or
Resultant from the Connection of diverse things in Man: As his Souls Faculties;
his Bodies Temperament; His Acquired Habits, by Instructions, Examples, or
Customs; And Lastly, The Outward Adjacents, or Circumstances of his present
Life. A little of each of these.

1. The Faculties of the Soul, (as Understanding, Will, Sensitive Appetite or
Passions) are all Ingredients as the Substrate Matter of this Spirit in Man;
But the Modification of them is from the other Causes. Souls in themselves are
all Equal; but the Spirits are vastly Different one from another. And this is
from the particulars that follow, and in a chief manner from

2. The Temperament of the Body, which is (more or less) Different in every
Individual Man. As there are scarce Two Pebbles on the Sea Beach, or Two Chips
hewn from the same wood, exactly figured alike; Nay, As there are hardly Two
Faces, Gestures, or Meenes of Men (which are the outward Indices of their
Inward Constitutions) But do in some things Differ, though some are more alike
than others: Even so it is with their Temperaments, which are a chief
Ingredient into their Spirits, whereof we now speak. That saying of
Philosophers [Manners of the Mind follow the Temperament of the Body] is true
if rightly understood with a due Temper, or (as we say) with a Grain of Salt:
By Manners, we must understand, not the Virtues, or Vices themselves; But the
Genius and Inclination, which leads and Disposes to them. And that is the same
with this our Spirit. Otherwise, skil^ul Physicians (who may perhaps have the
worst Manners) might be accounted the best M^rallists, and they could easily
mend all the world, who cannot mend themselves.

Nor must we understand by this, our Substrate Matter (the Faculties
abovementioned) as if, The Body has an Operative Influence upon the Soul to
Induce (as it were) a new form upon it; for the Soul is the Active part, in
Man, and the Body nothing so. But the thing stands thus.

The Soul, which is a True Spirit (in a Nobler Sense, than that whereof we are
now treating) being, by its Information of the Body, most Intimately conjoined
thereunto; while it is in the State of Conjunction, and Union in Man, Uses the
Parts, Humors, and Members, as its Instruments or Organs, in all its
Operations. Now as a Workman Receives nothing of his strength or skill, from
his Tools wherewith with he works; yet in the Exercise of his Abilities he will
find himself much furthered or hindered in his business, according as his Tool
is either Apt, or Unapt, for his Work. So is it in this Case: The Soul Receives
no power from the Body; But in Exerting its own proper powers, is helped or
hindered by the Bodies good or ill Temperament. Thus an (...) Tempered Brain
makes that Soul Act like a Fool, or Idiot, which had it a Brain Well^ Tempered,
would be both prudent and sagacious. And so also the Temperament of the Heart,
Blood, and Natural Spirits, gives Help* or Impediment to the ^ill and
Affections; even as, The Organs of Sense do, to their proper Senses. Hence that
saying [Anima Ga^bae male habitat] The Brave Soul of Galba had but an Ill
Lodging; He being a brave Spirited Man, but very sickly.

3. Acquired Habits do much Alter the Genius or Spirit, from what it would be,
if men were left to their Pure Naturals. These Habits arise partly, (1) From
Instruction and Rules: so Intellectual and Moral Habits (whether good or evil*
are formed much according to the Information men meet with, especially in their
younger days. Thus (as to Advantage) every part of Philosophy contributes its
share; Logic and Metaphysics, sharpness of Judgment; Mathematics Solidness
and Sagacity; Physics good conjecture at the Reasons of things; Moral
Philosophy and History, Prudence; Rhetoric, Fairness and Confidence of
Address; Poetry, quickness of fancy, and Imagination; Any of these as they are
better studied, do accordingly Enable and Incline the mind of Man.

Didicisse fideliter Arts etc. And so on the Contrary (as to Disadvantage) All
vicious and erroneous Principles, foolish and vain traditions, and such like
evil Rudiments, being Instilled into Youth, do Taint and Darken the Judgment,
Debauch the Will and Affections, and Debase the whole Spirit and Genius of the
Man.

2. From Pattern. Example, and Converse, with People, make deeper imp^ession
then Rules, and have a very great influence in forming the Genius* especially
of Youth, when they are stepping from Boy to Man, and are taking upon them to
choose their own way; then, (if ever) Multum Refert quocum vixeris; it concerns
you to think where you dwell. The force of Example is set forth in that (Prove.
22. 24. 25.) Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go; Lest thou learn his way, and get a snare to thy soul. It Is called
a Snare; though the ill-favored humor be no plausible bait to allure; yet for
that, all Custom has a secret and fascinating Insinuation, whereby, at least,
the Aversation and Abhorrence of Ill things, to which we are enured is very
much abated. So as, not only the Vices themselves under some false name (such
as Gallantry of Spirit, Greatness of Soul, Scorning to take an injury, etc.)
put fair for an approbation, and are contagious; But even the Inclinations to
them, and preparation of Spirit for them, do commonly spread themselves from
one person to another.

And, so also (in some measure, though not casually) may we expect in things of a
better Character. Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with the wise shall be wise,
etc. Which place (I think) does not only intimate Gods usual Blessing upon fit
means, but also discovers those proper means, which in their own Nature are apt
to operate, in a Moral way upon the minds of men: not indeed to give the Truth
of Grace; for then all in Godly Families would be Religious, and Leave no
ground for that complaint, In the Land of uprightness will he deal unjustly.
Isa. 26. 10. And the contrary (too often) do we find by sad experience. Nor are
those ^air Dispositions, which Conversation may work, such Preparations for
Grace, as does oblige God (ex congruo) to give the Truth thereof; but only the
whole is this; If God please to give his Supernatural Grace, to one, that has
fair Natural Disp^sit^^ns; Those Graces will the more ^llu^^riously, appear, to
Render a Man the more Eminen^^y Servi^^all.

And to (...) our daily Experience, and common ob^^^vati^n; that men are much
what the Cus^om and usual practice of the place is, where they live. He that is
bred, or^ much conversant, in the country; gets there a simple plain
heartedness; or perhaps a Rough Rusticity: He that is much in the City, has
more of Civility, Sagacity, and Cunning. One, who lives where News is
frequently Talked, Gets somewhat of a Public Spirit: Amongst good natured
People, a Candid Spirit. Amongst Soldiers, a Bold and Boisterous one; And so
of all other Affections: which may be considered in an Indifferency; Neither
morally Good nor Bad, in themselves; but only as Sanctification or Corruption
makes the Difference.

4. Outward Circumstances do also Exceedingly vary men's spirits, and that in a
shorter space of time, then Habits use to do. Thus Prosperity, Wealth, Honor,
Health, friends etc. do commonly enlarge the mind of a m^n; and make him bold
and brisk: Whereas the contrary Poverty, Disgrace, Sickness, etc. do usually
Contract and Emasculate the Spirit.

If these are of a long continued Series, they do very much toward the forming
of a settled and fixed Genius. But if only Occasionally, or at certain times
they occur; then they vary and Contemperate the Settled Spirit for a season; and
perhaps become a means to Reduce it to a better Mediocrity. Thus one of a Light
and Airy Spirit, and for the most part in all good Circumstances, (may at such
times) be unmanageable by Advice; until perhaps, a particular sore A^^iction,
has somewhat abated of his Gallantry, and opened hi^ Ear to Instruction,
whereby his Spirit may be better Regulated for the futu^e.

And thus much for the Aggregation or Resultance, of this our Spirit, from the
concurrence of diverse things, both within, and without the Man.

3. The next particular in order to the Explaining of our General Notion, shall
be the taking Notice; That all these do some way concur to Constitute and
Represent the Man, Abstracted from Grace and Sin; yet the Internals and
Essentials of Soul and Body, have the principal stroke herein: And then, that
the other matters, that are External to the Essence of man; the Accidental
Inherents, and Adjacents; do but somewhat Modify and Affect the former
constitution, which will still appear in some Degree or other.

Naturam Expellas, furca licet, ipsa recurret.
Drive Nature out with Pitch forks, twill Return,
And act its part, as sure as fire will Burn.
And, because the Souls Primitive facultyes are supposed to be all Equal in
every man; it is the Bodies Temperament, that especially gives the great
Diversity in Men's Spirits; we shall therefore speak of these more Distinctly;
And that not Exactly according to the common four First Qualityes (Hot and Dry,
Cold and Moist) which are said, by their Mixture, to give the four Complexions
(Sanguine, Choleric, Melancholy, and Phlegmatic) of which Physicians do so
often speak. But I shall Treat of them, according to the Actives (Hot, and
Cold,) with a Mean Temper between them; Taking notice of the other By the way,
only as occasion is offered. For it is not Physical composition, or Medical
Di^posi^ion of spi^its, which we have now to do with; But Spirits as they
R^late to Humane and Moral Actions; into which these three (Hot, Cold, and
Mean) h^ve the greatest In^luence. Besides, a^l men will admit of a Hotter, and
a ^ooler Temperament; even t^ose who Rej^ct Elementary Mixtures; and have no
great Regard to the four Comp^^xions. I^ any like better to have it express^d
by Matter, more or less, moveable or move^; They may please themselves. There
is no Di^ference in the Thing, however ^^pressions vary.

I say therefore; some men's Spi^its are Hot, and they do commonly Act war^^*
Others are Cold, and they usually Act Cooly; Others have a Spirit of a fine
Mean between these two Extremes, and their Actions are participant of both
qualifications; viciously, if Unsanctified, and under natural Corruption;
virtuously, if Sanctified, and men's Spirits be^guided, and act^d by the Spirit
of God: All commonly according to their several Capacities: But if at any time
a man be acted contrary to his peculiar Genius, it is by a special hand of the
Good or Evil Spirit upon him; some special Instigation, and Assistance, upon a
particular occasion. And according to this Method we shall Treat of the several
Spirits; first Describing themselves, and then their States, both of
Unregeneracy and Sanctification.

1. The more Hot Spirit Discovers it self in Cheerfulness, Activity, Courage,
and Angry Zeal or Jealousy.

1. Cheerfulness: Heat joined with a convenient Moisture (answerable to the
Sanguine Complexion) Renders a man Cheerful, Vivid, Sprightly, and upon
occasion (with apt Circumstances) Joyous, Refreshed, Merry and Comfortable. It
makes him look Ruddy, and of a Beautiful Countenance (like David in the flower
of his Youth) and pleasant, like the face of all things in the Spring. David
(we may suppose) was of a Natural Cheerful Spirit: His Musical Inclination,
whereby his skill was great, seems to speak so much: for this, and his prudence
in matters (so we Read in the Text, but in the Margin prudent of Speech. 1 Samuel
16. 18.) for these things (I say) He was sent for by Saul; that so his Music
and his prudent Mirth, might Drive away Saul's Evil (Melancholy) Spirit. This
Cheerful Spirit, as it was, in Young David, Natural; so it was in Old Jacob,
upon occasion; when he heard good News of Joseph, and saw the Wagons that were
sent for him, ( Genesis 45. 27.) it is said, The Spirit of Jacob their Father
Revived. Such also were the Refreshed Spirits mentioned, 1 Cor 16. 17, 18. I am
glad of the coming of Fortunatus, for they have Refreshed my Spirit and Yours.
And that of Titus his Joy, (2 Cor. 7. 13. Because his Spirit was Refreshed by
you all.

The meaning of all is: Their Spirits were Cheerful and Vivid, upon these
Comfortable occasions. The Spirit also signifyes Health and strength; as in the
Hunger^starved Egyptian (1. Sam: 30) who being left sick ( v 13) having now
Eaten and Drank, after the three Days fasting; it is said (v 12. His spirit came
again to him; that is, He had now some life in him, and could do something like
himself; who before was as one Dead, with sadness and Desperation; But now
Doubtless, was glad that he was alive.

This Cheerful Spirit, If Unsanctifyed and Corrupt, is grossly abused to Levity,
froth, vanity, and foolish Jesting, which is not convenient: To Lasciviousness
in them, who make Provision for the ^lesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof: To Pride
and Haughtiness, self^conceit and glorying i^ their own strength and Beauty; to
forgetfulness of God feeding themselves without fear; yea, to wax fat and Kick
against their Maker; and Rejoice in their Beastings; But all such Rejoycings
are evil. James 4. 16.

^ut If Sancti^yed, The Joy of their Spirit becomes Spiritual ^oy; I^ like
Marys (Luke 1 46. 47.) My Soul does Magnify the Lord, And my Spirit has
Rejoiced in God my Savior. It Lisposeth them to Thankfulness, and adapts for
Praising and Glorifying of God. It fits men for Cheerful Service to him; which
much commends Religion to the World, who are apt to be frighted from it by
Conceits of nothing but Mortification and Self Denial therein. Cheerful
Christianity adds a Luster to Profession; and convinces men, That they may be
merry and wise.

Now, though this does chiefly arise from the Tes^imony of a Good Conscience, and
the Sealings of the Comforting Spirit of Adoption; yet Subservient thereunto is
this our Natural Spirit, which Renders men more apt outwardly to express it.
David was (as is before noted) of this Sanguine and Cheerful temper; and he did
Eminently Glorify God by his Music and Psalmody; agreeable to the Apostles
Rule James 5. 13. Is any among you merry, Let him sing Psa^ms. This of
Cheerfulness.

2. Activity is another effect of the Hotter Spirit; it shows it self in a
willingness and readiness to be employed; as also sometimes in strong
inclinations and vigorous motions; in a great inquisitiveness and earnest
search after things that are out of common view* This Temper is very natural to
Youth, which is usually fitter for Execution then Deliberation; and because of
this Spirit it is called the Sprightliest time of men's Lives.

This Active Spirit, while Unsanctifyed is (like as in a brisk Monkey) a very
unlucky thing; It renders men Idle Busy-Bodys; Medlers with other Men's Matters;
Grievously Troublesome, both to the Church and World; Restless in themselves;
and suffering none to be quiet by them; this fruitful Soil uncultivated, brings
forth a multitude of Weeds; if set upon mischief, one such will do more then
many others; like the active Element of Fire, where it is not employed in
profitable Service, it works Destruction and Desolation. The Inquisitiveness,
that attends such unsanctified Spi^its, does often make men Seekers in
Religion; never satisfi^d with settled Truths, but Scepticks, Rambling and
Uncomposed Sect arys, tossed about with every wind of Doctrine; or, if they hap
to be Sect-Masters, they will compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. In a word;
They are the nimblest Servants of the Devil, and notablest Instruments he can
find, to make use of, in the world.

But if Sanctified, Then, none so Serviceable to God, or Man. Such Spirits will
make men willing to do Service. (as Exo. 35. 21.) They came every one, whose
Heart stirred him up; and every one, whose Spirit made him willing; and they
brought the Lords Offering to the work of the Tabernacle. It Is not said, [whom
Gods Spirit made willing] Though that is most true, as to the First Cause; But
[whose Spirit made him willing, whose heart stirred him up] That is, his own
Spirit, being Sanctified by the Spirit of God: Here the Second Cause is noted,
being stirred up by the First. And indeed God often Warms and Raises up men's
Spirits for any noble Designs, in which he intends to use them. So in those
(Ezra 1. 1.) The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus, and then Cyrus
communicates of his warmth, to stir up the Spirit of the poor Dispirited Jews.
(v. 3.) Who is there among you of all the People? What? Have you never a Brave
Man among you to undertake this Great and Worthy affair? Upon this Giving^Fire
their Spirits were Enflamed, Then rose up the chief of the Fathers, the Priests
and the Levites, with all them, whose Spirit God had Raised to go up (v. 5.)
Not All the People, but some Chief men: men (its likely) that were of Large
Souls, active and Gallant Spirits in themselves, fitted for Noble designs; but
(alas;) they were so shrunk, and sunk by their long Captivity, that neither In
nate briskness, nor the Encouragement which Cyrus gave them, was sufficient to
Chi^p them up, till God Sanctified their Spirits, and raised them above
themselves to this Pious and Noble undertaking. Two of them are mentioned by
Name (besides others, Hag. 1. 14.) The Lord stirred up the Spirit of
Zerubbabel, the Governor; and Joshua, the High Priest; and the Spirit of all
the Remnant of the People, and they came and did work in the house. Now, was it
the Souls of these men? Or, the men themselves? Methinks it is more Genuine, The
Spirits of those men in the sense we now propose.

This Active Spirit, uses to discover and express it self (as is befere noted)
in a strong Inclination, and vigorous Motion. Elihu speaks of a Spirit in man (
Job 32 8.) which I suppose is the same, to which he has Reference. ( v. 18.) I
am full of matter (or words) and the Spirit within me (or of my Belly)
constrains me (v. 20.) I will speak, that I may be refreshed. Now Elihu was
the youngest of Jobs Friends, as he himself intimates ( v. 6, 7.) and upon that
account, in part, he is more earnest, and copious, then the rest; the Ardour,
and Activity of his Spirit, caused an eager desire in him to express his mind;
which he calls the Constraining of his Spirit. But because there was somewhat
of anger in the case, (besides his Youthful Warmth) we shall have occasion to
reflect upon this instance again; and then show more of this vigorous Motion,
and strong Inclination, under the Head of Zeal, to which we shall referr it.

3. This Hotter Spirit, is a Spirit of Courage and Boldness, to address
Difficultys, and meet with Evil.

This shows it self diverse ways.

1. Sometimes in a wrath for War; which God Stirs up or Abates, as is agreeable
to his own holy purposes. Thus to Impoverish, take, and lead Captive the
Idolatrous Israelites, (1 Chronicles. 5. 26.) The God of Israel, stirred up the
Spirit of Pull, King of Assyria, and Tilgath Pilneser King of Assyria, and he
carried them away. The former took their Goods (2 King. 15. 19.) Menahem gave
Pull a Thousand Talents of Silver (that is an Hundred and Eighty Seven
Thousand, One Hundred pounds) And he turned back, and staid not in the Land.
This was a Vast Sum; But the other came and swept all both Goods, and Persons
too.

On the other hand, He Abates also Men's Courage, and takes down their Spirits.
He shall cut off the Spirit of Princes; He is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth (psalm. 76. 12.) Thus Moses Prophecy of the Dukes of Edom, and Inhabitants
of Canaan (Exodus 15. 16.) Fear and Dread shall ^all upon them, by the greatness
of thine Arm; they shall be as still, as a stone, till thy People pass over, O
Lord. And to the same effect is that Promise, (Ex. 11: 7.) But against any of
the Children of Israel, shall not a Dog move his Tongue. The Genius and Spirit
of a Dog, is (you know) to Bark at Strangers: This is an effect of Heat and
Boldness in that Animal, where it is but a little afraid; but i^ it be greatly
Terrifyed, it will then Run and hide it self in silence: So some Men, that
would in their wicked Inclinations, both Bite and Devour, may be yet so far
over awed by Gods Providence, that they dare not so much as Bark at his People.

2. Sometimes in a stout Resolvedness of Mind, that will take no
discouragement; this is to have a Heart like that of a Lion (2. Sam. 17. 10.)
Now a Lion, when a multitude of Sh^pheards is called forth against him, will
not be afraid of their voice, nor a^ase himself for the noise of them (Isay,
31. 4,)

The contrary hereunto is a Spirit failing (Isa. 19. 3.) The Spirit of Egypt
shall fail (or be emptied) in the midst thereof; it is said in the Precedent ( v
2) I will set Egyptians, against Egyptians, and they shall fight: They shall
spend their Spirits, or Courage among themselves; but shall have no Spi^its
left to defend their Country. So it is said of the Amorites and Canaanites, that
heard of the drying up of Jordan, which they accounted as their Moate and Fence
against Israel, Their heart melted neither wa^ there Spirit in them any more
(Josh. 5^ 1:) So that you see both ways, in the Abundance and in the Defect,
Spirit, Signifies Courage and Resolution.

Now if this Spirit be Unsanctifyed, it is a stoutness in evil: that will be
ready to say, (with Pharaoh) Who is the Lord? It Is Obstinacy and Hardening; Sihon
King of Heshbon would not let us pass; for the Lord had hardened his Spirit, and
made his Heart Obstinate (Deuteronomy. ^. 30.) This may be also the meaning of the
perverse Spirit mingled among the Egyptians, (Isa. 19. 14.) that is, a
quarrelsome and contentious Spirit, among themselves, whereby their Councils
were Divided, and their Affairs Unsettled, as a Drunken Man staggereth in his
Vomit: They had Spirit, or Animosity, enough against one the other; but for
Publik defense, Egypt shall be like unto Women, they shall be afraid and fear
(v 16) And this Discovers one fault more, in this Unsanctifi^^ Spirit. That it
is Unstable: Stout and Su^ly, were* it should be Humble and Meek; Mean and
Poor; where it should be Brave, and Resolute. Such were the Rebellious
Israelites (Ps. 78. 8.) a stubbor^ and rebellious Generation, that set not
their hearts aright, whose Spirit was not Steadfast with God. It follows ( v.
9.) that, how Sturdy soever they were against God; yet against their Enemies
they were very Cowards, or God, in Justice made them so, for their Stubborness
against him. The Children of Ephraim being Armed, and carrying Bows, turned
back in the day of Battle.

But, If Sanctified, it is an Excellent Spirit, and of great use. This was that
other Spirit of Caleb (Numb: 14. 24.) The Spirit of the other Spies was Base
and Cowardly, and caused the heart of the People to melt (Josh. 18. 8.) at
which God was greatly displeased; but Calebs courage was approved, and accepted
of God, though it had not its desired effect upon men; and was Rewarded with
admission into the Land of Promise, when others were excluded.

This Spirit Sanctified, is a Spirit Bound Bent, and Resolved, in the service
of God whatever be the Hazards. And now bohold (says Paul) I go bound in the
Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the (particular) things, that shall befall me
there (Act 20. 22.) saving Bonds and Afflictions (in general) which I expect (
v. 23.) But none of these things move me (v. 24.) Now this Bound Spirit I take
to be, the Apostles Brave Spirit Bound (that is) strongly inclined by the
Spirit of God to this special, and particular, Service, notwithstanding all
these foreseen difficulties, to break through which he was Gallantly Resolved.
And this his Courage is (I think) the same, that he prays might be given to the
Ephesiaus, chap. 3. 16. That he would grant you, according to the Riches of his
Glory to be strengthened with might, by his Spirit, in the Inner Man. This
referrs to ( v. 13) I desire that ye faint not, at my Tribulations for you.
Some men are so Weak Spi^ited, as to faint, when they see another Bleed; or
have a grievous Wound dressed, or the like; But I would not have you to be so
Feeble-Minded; I would have you more Courageous; and for that end, make this
prayer on your behalf; I should rather shrink that feel the trouble; then you,
that only behold it with your eyes.

Such another Brave Spirit was in Nehemiah, when God had raised it up. See a
taste of it ( Neh. 6: 11.) Should such a Man as I Fly? And who is there being
as I am, would go into the Temple to save his Life? I will not go in. This
Gallantry was of the Lord; for (whatever his Naturl Spirit was) His Captive
circumstances had rendered him but weak; as we may Guess by his Timorousness to
speak to the King (though he was in good place about him) He continually fetched
his strength from God; He was fain (by Ejaculation) to pray between a Question
and an Answer (chap. 2. 4.) What is thy Request? So I Prayed -- And I said etc.
He had not Courage to give the King an answer; till he had his Spi^its Revived
by the God of Heaven.

4. This Hotter Spirit is an Angry Spirit is Ardent and Fervent in it sel^;
Eage^ and Vigorous in motion; with a vehemence in Inclinations (all which may
be better Referred to this head, then that of Activity, before mentioned) Its
chief ingredient is Chollerick Constitution though it may be also Habitually
increased, and Morally Fixed in men, by frequent occasions and provocations; as
also by much converse, with peevish and fretful persons this is intimated in
that (Prove. 22. 24. 25,) Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a
furious man thou shall not go; Lest thou Learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
Soul. His anger will, by degrees heat thy Spirit into a Disorder; or, at least
bring it into another frame; then to what thou art naturally inclined.

This Spirit Acts, and shows it self in ZEAL, and IEALOUSY.

1. Zeal, is a Fervor of Spirit, whereby a man does Act (Valide and Valde) All
that comes to his hand, he presently does it with his Might. Here Anger is (Cos
Fortitudinis) the Whetstone of Valor; And though Courage has it^ Strength in it
self, yet it commonly ha^ the beginning, and more often the continuance of its
motion, from this Zeal This is as the Touch-Powder, that catches the first
Fire, and as soon inflames that which has all the force in it. It Is a Natural
Passion, and therefore (in it self) neither Good nor Bad.

But if,

1. Unsanctifyed, it is a Hellish Flame, that burns unmercifully, and does
abundance of Hurt, to ones self and others. It Is KAKOZELIA, a mischievous
vehemence that spoils the comfort of Humane Society; and if it be any way
concerned in Religion, it m^kes Havoc of the Church as is seen in the Bigots
of a false Religi^n. An eminent example of which, was Paul (while he was Saul)
before his Conversion to the true Faith. They shall kill you, and think they do
God good Service (John 16: 2:) In a word, it renders men (like the Chaldeans)
Bitter and Hasty (Habbac. 1. 6.)

2. But if Sanctified, then the Warm-Spi^ited Paul is another Man. He now
re^lects on his former course, as a Mad Hare Brain^d, Wicked Business. See the
Account of it. (Acts 26. 9, 10 11.) I verily thought (His Hot Head mistook his
way, and so ran on furiously in a Perni^ious Error) That I ought (Divilism is
now taken for Duty) to do many things contrary etc. Many (not a few) were
s^itable to his Hot and Active Spi^its; many places (Ierusa^em; every
Synagogue; even to s^range Cities) many Persons (Many of the Saints) Many Ways
did I (shut up in Prison; put to Death; and compelled them to Blaspheme) yea,
when he was but a St^ipling, when he could not hu^ll Mortifying S^^nes, he gave
his voice against them; Held the Garments of those that Stoned Stephen, and was
consenting to his Death All this he acknowledges to be mere madness: being
exceeding mad against them.

But being now Converted, Does his Grace quite extinguish his Fi^ry Nature, and
Spirit? Not at all; only directs, and exerts it, to better purposes. Paul is
the same Zealot; but in other matters. His Active Spirit Labors more
abundantly then they all. (1 Cor. 15. 10.) Zeal he commends, exhorts, and
practices. He commends Zeal in his Epistles, if it be rightly placed. It Is
always good to be Zealous in a good thing, (Gal. 4. 18.) To be Zealous of
Spiritual Gists (1 Cor. 14. 12.) of Good Works. (Titus 2. 14.) He also exhorts
men to be Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord. (Romans 12. 11.) And he Allowed
and Practiced it in himself; of which we have Diverse Instances.

Take a view of his Hot and Earnest Spirit in some particulars. At Athens his
Spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. (Acts
17. 16) 'twas full of Gods, without the True God, and he was angry and vexed to
see it. So in Corinth, at the Jews Infidelity. He was pressed in Spirit, and
Testi^ied that Jesus was the Christ. (chap. 18. 5.) Now when was this? 'Twas
when Silas and Timotheus, were come from Macedonia. He had a good mind to it
before; even, when he was a poor Laboring Sojourner (v. 3.) Even then he
Reasoned and persuaded every Sabbath, ( v. 4) But, now his friends are come, by
them is his Countenance sharpened (Prove. 27. 17.) He had good Metal before,
but now is a Keen Edg put upon it. Whether it were, that they brought him
Contribution, which bettered his Outward Condition, and so Raised his Spirit a
pegg higher: or else that they were to be his Fellow Travelers; and so, being
now Ready to Depart (v. 7.) He was bravely resolved to out with that, which had
so long broyled in his Bosom. Some way or other (whatever it were) it had
relation to their coming, whereby his Spirit was enlarged. He had a Good Spirit
before, but now a Great one His Zeal before was kindled, but now it breaks out.
He cares not now, what they said, or thought of him; he now Ruffles them;
Roundly delivers his Testimony; shakes his Raiment at them; Tells them their
own; and throws the Blood of their Obstinacy upon their own Heads. So much may
Outward Circumstances sometimes Help forward the actings of Grace and Nature,
in a Sanctified Spirit:

It Is manifest he was of a vehement Spirit, and eager in all things. When he
missed his friend, he could not stay at Troas (though he might have done it to
good purpose; for there a Door was opened to him of the Lord (2 Cor^ 2. 12.)
But he had no rest in his Spirit; because he found not Titus his Brother there,
and away he must, into Macedonia after him. ( v. 13.)

Doubtless, the Apostles Removes, were by direction of the Spirit of God; but
yet (oftentimes) they were according to Humane Affection or Spirit, Though
secretly overruled by God for his Holy ends Thus, this Hot Spirited Man was
parted from Barna^as in an anger (Acts 15: 39.) The Contention was so sharp
that they parted; one to Cyprus, and the other to Syria and Cylicia; but both
about the same Evangelical Business.

Another Instance of his Zealous, Sturdy, and Vehement Spirit, was his Carriage
to Peter: 1 withstood him to the face; (Gal. 2: 11) Peter, was Paul's elder
Brother in the Faith; another man (perhaps) in the case, would have handled him
more respectfully; but Paul cannot complement; he must do all things like
himself; he not only Preaches against his blameable Practice and Compliance,
but noses him for it in a public presence. I said unto Peter before them all [
v. 14.] And thus much of Paul's Zealous Spirit.

The next Example shall be Apollos, who was by Nature (it is likely) as well as
Grace, a man Fervent in Spirit; and therefore Spoke and Taught Di^^gently,
according to the Knowledge that he had in the Gospel; which as yet was not very
great, Knowing only John's Baptism; until a Tent-maker and his Wise (Aquila and
Priscilla) had Expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly. He was indeed
a man of a brave Spirit and Excellent Endowments; He was Eloquent, and a great
Textuary, Mighty in the (Old Testament) Scriptures; and so, well furnished for
an Eminent Preacher; But 'twas his Spirit, his Fervent Spirit, Subordinate to
his Grace, that fitted him to Speak Boldly in the Synagogues; and mightily to
Convince the Jews, and that publicly. (Acts 18. 25, etc.) A man of as much
Grace, and more Knowledge, might not have been Able so well to perform this
Service. Zeal for God, which is every man's Duty, will not Comport so well with
every man's Spirit. [Non omnia possumus omnes] All cannot do All. When Father
Paul at Venice was Discoursed by some Helvetian Ministers, concerning the
Reformation, and he had owned to them the chief principles of the Reformed
Religion; though he still continued in the Papal Communion; being demanded by
them why he did not publicly profess his Faith? He is said to have Answered,
[profecto Deest mihi Spiritus Lutheri] Alas! in Truth, I want Luthers Spirit.

The Hearts of those Jews were so Callous and Hard, that they needed to be
warmly fomented. They needed (under the Law) The Bitt^rness and Heat of
Ezekiels (...) (Ezekiel. 3. 14.) So the Spirit Lifted me up, and took me away, and
I went in the Bitterness, in the Heat [Hebr. and Anger] of my Spirit. Gods
Spirit moved him, and then his Angry Spirit was moved; The Spirit of God made
use of a vehement Spirit in the man, to deal sui^^bly with them.

And so [under the Gospel] They needed the Like Spirit. Therefore he sent John
as his Forerunner; that Burning as well as Shining Light, to Imitate the
Prophet (...). He shall go before him in the Spirit of Elias. (^uke 1. 17.) Now
Elias was a H^t-spirited man, and praved down ^ot Fire to Consume the Enemies.
John (like him) Preached Repentance with Severity; Calling them Generation of
Vipers; and Laying the Ax to the Root of the Tree. He was a Rough Man in a
Rough Garment, and handled them Roughly. And indeed this Spirit was proper in
the ( praecursor, the) Forerun^er of Christ, who came to Preach Peace, and Heal
the Wounds of Conscience, which John's Doctrine had made.

Jesus Christ himself, was the Meek and Holy Lamb of God, who Bare all Injuries
with an Inimitable Patience; and yet was not altogether without this warmth of
Spirit upon occasion. The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up; was spoken of
him (Psalm. 69. 9.) And Applied to him [ John 2. 17.] When he whipped the
Buyers, and Sellers out of the Temple; and Overturned the Tables of the
Money Changers; This he did Once, but commonly his sweet Conversation, was much
otherwise. 'Twas Prophesied of him. ( Isa. 42. 2.) And Interpreted of him, (
Mat. 12. 19.) He shall not strive, nor Cry; neither shall any man hear his
Voice in the Streets. Nor does he allow the Hot and Fiery Temper an Ordinary
Indulgence in his Disciples. When James and John, would have had him Call for
Fire from Heaven, on a Village of the Samaritans (Luke 9. 54.) He tells them,
They knew not, what Spirit they were of; (i. e.) either what they ought to be,
if they would be his Disciples: or rather, they might mistake themselves (as
men are too often apt to do) and think, That to be a Sanctified Zeal, which
more appeared, but a Corrupt and Revengeful Fury. These two men were Brethren
(the Sons of Zebedec) whom Christ (who knew their Spirits better, than
themselves) named (according to their Nature) And he Surnamed them Boanerges,
which is, The Sons of Thunder. (Mark 3. 17.) He was not Deceived in them, when
he chose them; But knew how to Sanctify their Rough Spirit, and so make a very
good use thereof: They might make good Thundering Preachers; They might be
fitted for Tough work (as Luther after them was) to Break through such
Difficulties, (...) would have likely Foiled and (...) as good men, but of a
meeker Spir^^ [ Malus Nodus, malus Cuneus] Rugg^^ Wedges are fittest for a
cross-grained pie^ of Service. Fire in men's Spirits (as (...) as among the
Elements) may be necessa^^ sometimes; And Rendered very Servicea^^ if it be well
Governed.

But here is the Difficulty; Many good Christians, by Reason of Natural
Infir^^ty, are not always able to manage a (...) Spirit; nor can always
Distinguish b^^twixt Fire from Heaven, in the strong Motions of Gods Holy
Spirit, which (...) ought to be Cherished; and the Fire, which arises from Hell
in the vehmence of Temptation, Enkindling (...) Reakings and Fumes of their
Corrupte^ Nature; of which the Devil never fa^ to take his Advantage.

Young Elihu (before mentioned) (...) a zealous, warm Spirited man; And (...)
without great Piety (as the Tenor of (...) Discourse does manifest.) Yet when
(...) Spirit constrained him, and his Belly was (...) Wine, which has no vent,
and ready to Bu^^ like New Bottles, (Job 32. 18, 19.) i: e.) When his Passion
was stirred within (...) He Breaks out, not only to Irreverence (...) his Elder
Brethren (v. 9.) Great men are not always wise; neither do the Aged Understand
Judgment; But he also Charges Job (I think) very falsely (chapter 33. 8, 9.) I have
heard the voice of thy words saying, I am clean without Transgression; I am
Innocent, neither is there Iniquity in me. Where (I wonder) does Job so speak?
Surely if he had, God would not have Justified him, as he does ( chapter 42. 7.) Ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is Right, as my Servant Job has. So much
do Hot Spiririted Men, though Good Men, yet often overshoot themselves.

The Rightest Temper of a Sanctified Zeal, was that of Stephens; a mixture of
Meekness, Wisdom and Courage, (Acts 6. 10) They were not ahle to (...) the
Wisdom, and the Spirit, with which he spoke. He spoke with a Spirit, which I
take to be Zeal and Earnestness; and yet with Wisdom, so as no Exception could
be justly taken; and with Meekness too, which (after all their horrid Injuries)
is Testified by his Last and Dying Words; ( chapter 7. 6.) Lord, Lay not this Sin
to their Charge. And thus much of Zeal; near of kin to which is.

2. Jealousy, a passion, to which, some men's Spirits are, more than others,
prone; And whereby men are Inclined to Suspicion, fierce Anger, Hatred, and
Bitterness. It Is called a Spirit of Jealousy coming upon a man, (Numb. 5. 14.)
whether his Wife be Defiled, or not.

This Spirit in Unsanctifyed persons and practices, is an Odious and Bitter
Evil. It Is Declared Hateful to God, and horridly Injurious to man. Hateful to
God, (Mal. 2. 16.) I hate putting away says the Lord.^ Therefore Take Heed to
your Spirit; namely, This Jealous Spirit, that you Entertain it not. And
Injurious to man, as appears in the precedent words ( v. 15.) Take Heed to your
Spirit, Let none deal Treacherously (or Unfaithfully: marg.) Against the Wife
of his Youth. It Is a Treacherous Unfaithfulness, to Entertain groundless
Jealousies: Love is Covenanted in Marriage; and this is quite contrary
thereunto: Love thinks no Ill; Jealousy thinking nothng else. Love covers
Faults; Groundless Jealousy searches to Discover faults, where there are
none. And then the Repetition of the words [ Therefore take Heed to your
Spirit] (v. 15. and again v. 16) is well to be Noted; for it is a Rule, [
Repeated words in Scripture call for special observation.] And as in Marriage,
so in other Relations; it Destroys Friendship; spoils Humane Society, and
mutual Confidence; and sometimes stirs up the most bitter Enmity; for Ieal^usie
is the ^age of a man, That takes no Ransom for Life. (Prove. 6. 34.) This is
the Spirit that Dwells in us, (i. e.) our Corrupted Nature) Lusting to Envy
(James 4. 5)

And yet, ^or All this (...) said of it (nor can enough ^e said) Abs^ract but a
Jealous and Suspicious (...), from Inbred Corruptions; Take it as a pure
Natural Temper; It Is a Basis of Great Prudence, Wisdom and Wariness. Not to
allow of that Rotten principle [ Suspect every man to be Knave, with whom you
have to do] But to take care in avoiding that Cha^acter of a Fool Noted in
(Prove. 14. 15.) The Simple believes every word; But the prudent man Looks
well to his going. Not Uncharitably to Suspect, but prudently to be
Circumspect, is becoming a wise and hon^st man. This pure Natural Cautious
Spirit may be the Subject of Sanctif^cation, and may become God like, and a
Godly Jealousy. God like, when a man so utte^^y Disapproves Sin and (...);
That he Dislikes the very Appearance thereof, and Tendency thereunto. Thou
shall not Bow down, for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God. (Exo. 20. 5.) And
by Sins (however palliated) is provokt to Jealousy. (Deu^. 32. 16. 21.) Every
Likenese of Sin, may Deserve that name, (Ezekiel. 8. 3) The Image of Jealousy,
which provokes to Jealousy. And as God-like, so it is Godly. The Holy Prophet
owned, and professed it. (1 King. 19. 10. 14.) I have been very Jealous for the
Lord God of Hosts. And so did the Holy Apostle. (2 Cor. 11: 2.) I am Jealous
over you with Godly Jealousy; for I have Espoused you to one Husband, etc.
It Is Godly, when the ^ent of Jealousy is only to promote Holiness; when the
Suspicion notes but care and watchfulness; and the Bitterness ascribed to this
Spirit, is but a Hatred of Sin; it may so be of very Excellent Use, especially
in those, who by Gods Order have the Oversight of others.

And thus much of the Hotter Spirit, which is Cheerful, Active, Courageous,
Angry in zeal and Jealousy. We shall now take a view of its Opposite, and so
better Illustrate both, by comparing them together.

2. The Colder Spirits, which are in some men, under the Temperaments of
Phlegm, or Melancholy; The more if Radicated by Habits, or excited and
promoted by Ill Objects, or Outward Circumstances. These are in every point of
the contrary Character, to those Hotter Spirits beforementioned. As

I. Is that Cheerful and Brisk; This is sorrowful and pensive: full of Grief
and Mourning; as if made up of Sighs and Tears. And whether it be from Natural
Temper, or from that concurrence (mentioned) of sad and troublesome
Circumstances; Men's Spirits are hereby Formed and Disposed to Lamentations.
Such was weeping Jeremiah; such was our Blessed Savior in his Humiliation A
man of Sorrows and acquainted, with Grief, as was Prophesied of him, ( Isa. 53.
3.)

Now if this be Unsanctified it Disposes to many Evils; especially, where the
Dogged Melancholy is prevalent therein. It Is an Evil Spirit in it self; and of
Evil Consequences.

I. In it self; probably this was the Evil Spirit from the Lord upon Saul. A
Melancholy Spirit; and perhaps sometimes even unto Fits of Distraction. I take
it so to be; for that it was Alleviated by David's Music (1 Samuel 16. 23.)
Surely David's Harp could not Conjure down Devils; Nor does give any Countenance
to Popish Bell Baptism for the same purpose: No, rather it was a Natural Evil,
an Evil Natural Spirit, sent of God in Judgment; and Helped by Natural Means,
through his Blessing. David played with his hand, so Saul was Refreshed, and was
well; and the Evil Spirit Departed from him. So; by a Natural Means prescribed
by his Doctors ( v. 16.) [ Mus^ca Mentis Medicina Maestae;] was well; It seems
before he was Sick, Distempered, and his Spirit was out of Order. It Is an Evil,
both Natural, Moral, and Judicial. A Natural; (Prove. 17. 22.) A Merry Heart
does Good like a Medicine; but a Broken Spirit Dries the Bones: (i. e.)
Was^eth the Marrow, and Impaireth the Health. And it Tends also to Evil Moral
and Judicial too; as you may observe, in

2. Its Consequences; It Disposes to Sullen Discontent, and peevish
Frowardness; both which are very Ugly, as well as wicked Humors.

Sullen Discontent we may see in proud Haman, who, (whatever his Natural Spirit
was) had a very Jolly one upon the Kings Favor. Haman went forth that Day,
Joyful, and with a Glad Heart. (Esth. 5. 9.) That Day, It seems it was not
always so; (Aspiring Pride, and Sowerness of Spirit, are frequently conjoined;
because of the many obstructions Real, and more apprehended, that cross his
Ambition) But That Day, and upon that particular Occasion, he was very Merry.
This in him was Unsanctifyed, and therefore Unstable and soon Al^ered to the
contrary, by a very slight matter; for after he had Boasted among his Friends
of all his Riches and Glory; yet (says he) All this avails me nothing, s^
long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings Gate. ( v. 13.) What Remedy
now in the Case? His Wife advises him ( v. 14.) Erect a Lo^y Gallows, and get
Mordecai Hanged thereon; and Then go thou in Merrily, with the King unto the
Banquet. No Merriment, no Cure of the Sullens, till Mordecai be Dispatched; He
was in a Desperate Case; his Bones were all Rotten, (for that is the Name of his
Disease ( Prove. 14. 30.) Envy is the Rottenness of the Bones) and it is likely,
he might have Died of Discontent, if he had not (soon after) by the Gibbet.

Another such an Instance of Sullenness was Covetous Ahab, whose Spirit was
sad, because he was Denied Naboth's Vineyard (1 King 21. 5.) which caused him
to Loll on his Bed, turn away his face, and would not eat Bread (like a pou^ing
Child) vexed at heart, that he could not have his Will; proud Iezebe, like
Zeresh, (here is another Wit of the Wi^e) comes in with her Cur^ed Contrivance,
to Dry up Ahabs Tears, by the Shedding of Naboth's Blood. One would have
thought, that these Women (because of the Natural Coldness and Moisture of
their Sex) should have been Authors of milder Counsels; But their Unsanctifyed
Hearts, being filled with Devilish Pride, makes them act contrary to that,
which should be their very Nature; so virulent are Feminine Humors, when
Corruption (on occasion) turns them into Acids. Dismissing these Two, as they
are; you may (if you please) send in Jobs Wife; with her Curse God and Die,
(Job 2. 9.) to make up the Number, All. (Tria sunt omnia.) Note only (by the
way) That Old Wives Prescriptions, are seldom good Remedies, for sad and
melancholy Husbands. And this of Sullen Discontent.

Of the Froward Peevishness, in this Colder and Mournful Spirit, we have a
Notable Instance in the Israelites; who could not hear what was Reasonable, and
might be Comfortable, to them. God by Moses had sent them a very good and
Gracious Word; A Promise of their Deliverance; of being their God, and taking
them to be his People; And Moses spoke so, unto the Children of Israel; But
they hearkened not unto Moses, for Anguish (or Shortness) or Spirit, and for
Cruel Bondage, which was the occasion thereof. ( Exodus 16. 9.) They were in
this Like weeping Rachel, who Refused, and would not be Comforted. (Mat. 2. 18.)

From these Instances (besides frequent Experience,) we may Learn, That the
Consequents of a sad Unsanctifyed Spirit are Deplorable; All manner of Evil,
Natural, Moral and Judicial. Natural and Moral seem to be pointed at in that
Expression (2 Cor. 7. 10.) The sorrow of the world works Death. This may
referr to both; it is both a Sin and a Mischief; as appears by the Antitheta (in
the former part of the verse.) Godly Sorrow works Repentance to Salvation,
not to be Repented of; Therefore (by the Rule of contrari^s) Worldly Sorrow is
Sin, unto Destruction, and to be Repented of by those, who would avoid those
Evils. But more expressly is it Judicial, when God pronounces it as a Curse. Ye
shall Cry for sorro^ of heart, and shall Howl for vexation (or Breaking. marg.)
of Spirit. (Isa. 65. 14) This if Unsanctified.

And yet by Sanctification, a Mournful Spirit may become a Blessing; it may
Adapt, and Incite to many Graces and Duties. In that (2 Cor. 7. 10.) works
Repentance to Salvation, not to be Repented of: You Will have no cause to be
sorry, for a so^rowful Spirit, if your Tears be set to Run in a right Channel.
See more of the Bl^ssed Effects ( v. 11.) Ye Sorrowed after a godly sort;
Behold what Carefulness it wrought in you; what clearing of your selves; yea
what Indignation; yea what Fear; yea what vehement Desire; yea what Zeal; yea
what Revenge. Understand Indignation, Fear and Revenge, to Respect Sin, and not
men.

A Mournsul Spirit Sanctified Disposes to Prayer. Hanna professes to Eli, (who
had misapprehensions of her) I am a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, and have
poured out my Soul before the Lord (1 Samuel 1. 15.) She wept inwardly, as she
mentally pra^ed, and her Prayers and Tears were secretly mingled, and poured
out to her God; she was in Bitterness of Soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and
wept sore (v: 18.) David often to this purpose, (Ps. 77. 2.) In the Day of my
Trouble I sought the Lord. When was that? When my Spirit was overwhe^med (v.
3.) So (Ps. 142. 2, ^.) I poured out my Complaint before him, I showed before
him my Tyouble, when my Spirit was overwhelmed within me. And in the next (Ps.
143. 4.) His Spirit was again Overwhelmed; I stretched forth my hands unto
thee. (v. 6.) That Spirit which was wont to be full Fraught with Harmonious
Praises is now Overset, and another Service is appointed for him; He Sailed
joyfully in pleasant Gales, but Storms find him other work.

The greatest Instance (in mere man) of a sorrowful Spirit, was that of Job, in
the Days of his Trial; His Complaint he Utters freely, and Justi^yeth his so
doing, as of a natural Necessity: His Case was sad; His Spirit was Drunk up,
(chapter 6. 4.) Drunk up (as he expresses it) That he had None Left to bear his
Troubles. The Spirit of a man will bear his Infirmity (Pro. 18 14.) But (alas)
his Bearing Spirit is gone, and nothing but a Broken and Burdened one is Left
in him: In this case, he says, I will not Refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
Anguish of my Spirit; I will complain in the Bitterness of my Soul (chapter 7. 11.)
But his Cpmpl^i^^ i^ To God, and not Of God. As (...) my Complaint to man? And
if (...) why should not my Spirit be (...) (chapter 21. 4.) And yet, we may say of
him in all this, as was testified of him in the beginning, In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly (chapter 1. 22.) Although Satan expected it
from him. ( v. 11. and ch: 25.) which indeed he would have done, had not God
Sanctified his sorrowful Spirit: and preserved it Blameless.

When Nebuchadnezzar Dreamed Dreams, wherewith his Spirit was Troubled. [Dan.
2. 1.] We find this Unsanctified Heathen fret and vex, and require
unreasonable things: The Thing is gone from me I have quite forgot it; yet,
Tell me the Dream, and the Interpretation, or ye shall be cut in pieces, and
your Houses made a Dunghill. (v. 5.) So eager was he to be rid of his Troubled
Spirit. But Daniel through Sanctification was of another Temper in the like case.
(chapter 7. 15.) I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit, in the midst of my Body (or
sheath) and the Visions of my Head troubled me. He then seeks for satisfaction
from God, by Drawing near to his Angel (v. 16.) And though he say; My
Cogitations Troubled me, and my Countenance changed in me. (v. 28:) yet he was
not in haste to be Rid of it; But I kept the matter in my heart; namely, to be
farther Meditated upon, and to wait the Issue: And indeed in all Troublesome
Cases, This is the Guise of a Gracious and Sanctified Spirit.

But of all other Ins^ances, the Great Exemplar the Lord Jesus Christ is most
to be Admired and Imitated in his Holy Mournful Spirit. His Sorrow in
Gethsemane, when he approached near his Passion, is thus set forth. He began to
be sore Amazed, and to be very Heavy; and says, My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful
unto Death. (Mat. 14. 33, 34.) And what does he, but pray? That this Bitter Cup
(as Matthew) or this Hour (of Temptation) as Mark) might pass from him; and
being in an Agony be prayed more earnestly, (Luke 22. 44.) In this wrestling
with God, His Sweat was as it were, great Drops (or Clodders ( of Blood falling
down to the Ground. And yet, notwithstanding all this Earnestness, it was with
the greatest Submission. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. (v. 39.)
And thus much of the Sorrowful Cold Spirit.

2. Is that Hotter Spirit Active and Vigorous: This Colder is dull and weak; a
dull Spirit, or Spirit of Heaviness, as it is called ( Isa. 61. 3.) The Spirit
of a man is the principle of his Activity. It Disposes him Diligently to Teach,
(as is before shown) and Diligently to Learn; to make Diligent Search (as it is
expressed, Psalm. 77. 6.) But this Dull Soul (in it self) is fit for neither.

The Spirit of man, is also the principle of his Vigor, and helps to bear his
Burdens; But this Spirit is (in it self) a Burden. The Spirit of a man will
sustain his Infirmity; ^ut a Wounded Spirit who can Bear? (Prove. 18. 14.) It Is
a weak and ^ainting Spirit; much like that, which was in the Queen of Sheba,
when she saw the Effects of Solomon's Wisdom, she was even astonished, and there
was no more Spirit in her. (1 Kin. 10. 5.

This Unsancti^yed is a pirtiful, base, and Useless Spirit; Incli^ing only to
Sottish Sl^th and Idleness; It Renders unapt to Do, or Receive any good. When
they should Teach, they are Dumb Dogs; and when they should Learn, they have a
Spirit of Sl^mber and of Deep Sleep (Isa. 29. 10.) and so proportionably in any
other worthy Affair.

But if Sanctified, Its slowness makes the surer work; takes time for good
Deliberation; and helps to prevent much Rashness and Precipitance, which
Nimbler Spirits are more liable unto. All Slowness is not Blameable; Some are
Duties; as, Slow to Wrath (Prove. 14. 29.) Slow to speak. (James I. 19.) And
where Slowness of Speech, is an Infirmity; yet this hinders not Gods making use
of such in very Eminent Service, as he did Moses, (Exodus 1. 10.)

And as to the Weakness of this Spirit, It Leads to Dependence on Gods
All Sufficiency; It is often an Effect of great Sorrow, By Sorrow of heart the
Spirit is Broken. (Prove. 15. 13.) And the Cracked or Broken Spirit (as before
noted) is very weak; but Sanctified it is accompanied with Faith. And then it
makes Prayerful, in Applications to God for help. Hear me speedily O Lord, my
Spirit fails; I have no strength of my own to Bear up against the Floods; I
will cry unto thee when my heart (or Spirit) is overwhelmed; Lead me to the
Rock, that is higher than I. (Ps. 61. 2.)

3. Is That Spirit Bold, Resolute and Confident; The Colder one is Timorous,
and humbly yielding. It Is Little in it self; and commonly Less in its own Eyes:
It Designs no great things; nor is fit for any Great Undertaking; But is apt to
shun all things, that appear any way Dangerous.

This, if Unsanctifyed is a Base Pusitanimity; a mean, poor, cowardly and
creeping Spirit: Unfit for Doing and Notable Good; or Suffering and
Considerable Evil. Such will never be Martyrs for, or Confessors of, any
valuable Truth. This Spirit (like Issachar) stoops under the Burden, of every
Imposing and Tirannical Humor, without the least opposition, or Resentment; so
as it will easily let go Christian, or Civil Liberty; And even Tempt the proud
to Trample on their Neck. It gives way, not only for a moment, a short time (in
matters, that will bear it) upon prudent Considerations; But gives up for good
and all (as we use to speak) without any consideration at all: The former is
Good Fencing; the latter is Base Cowardice, which opens a careless Gap, that
not only Suffers, but Invites Trespassers. This Spirit is a Saddled Ass, ready
to be Rid at pleasure; and is most mischievous in a Church, where are
Diotrephian Spirits, and Ruinous to a State, where Tyranny would be playing
pranks. Such are men Born to be Slaves, for whose Unreasonable Yielding, their
Posterity will have cause to Curse them.

As to the performance of Necessary Duties, They always imagine Lions in the
way, and in the least appearance of a Difficulty, they are ready to fancy
Insuperables, and thereby Inhance Discouragements; so that they Tremble, though
it be, but at the shaking of a Lea^, (Lev. 26. 36.) I will send a faintness
into their hearts, and the sound of a shaking Leaf shall Chase them; and they
shall flee, as fleeing from a Sword; and they shall fall, when none pursues.
To Fear, where no Fear is, is not only a Judicial Misery, but it is also too
often a Sin, Derived from Unbelief, as against frequent Commands; Fear not,
neither be Dismayed: Fear not their Fear, be not afraid of their Faces, etc.
And a Sin (it seems) of the worst Character, as Ushering in the Bedroul of
Abominable Wickedness, in that Denunciation (Rev. 21. 18.) But the Fearful, and
Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake that
Burns. This Spirit it self is not a Sin, so far as it Depends on Natural
Causes; It Is no Evil for a Woman to be Less Courageous, then a man; or to be
more afraid upon apparent Danger; But when Fear is Habituated, or Acted by
Unbelief; for ^hen it Impeaches Gods Glorious Attri^utes; his Mercy, Truth, and
All-sufflciency

But if this Little, Low, and Timorous Spirit be Sanctified, it is Exercised in
a Gracious Humility, which Aspires not to things too high (Ps. 131. 1.) A
Contrite Spirit, Sanctified, is no Base and Contemptible Spirit. It Is Preferred
and Esteemed by Wise men, Directed by the Holy Spirit of God, who teaches men
to put a due value, upon the good of Things, and Persons. Better it is to be of
an Humble Spirit with the Lowly, then to Divide the Spoil with the Proud.
(Prove. 6. 19.) He shall be far from Contempt: A man's pride shall bring him Low;
but Honor shall uphold the Humble in Spirit (Prove. 29. 23.) Humility is a
Lovely Grace amongst men; it avoids Quarrels, which Pride and Haughtiness of
Spirit commonly makes: It gives no Offense, and Removes the Offenses that are
Taken. Yielding pacifyeth great Offenses. (Eccl. 10. 5.) And as it is Acceptable
to men, so it is well pleasing unto God. A Broken and a Contrite Spirit O God
thou will not Despise, (Psa. 51. 17.) Not Despise is a MEIOSIS, yea he Favors
and Approves. The Lord is nigh to them. -- and Saves such, as be of ^
^^^trite Spirit. (Ps. 34. 18.) This Favor (...) the more Illustrates by
setting (...) own Excellencies. The Great and (...) God Regards the Little and
Low Spirit; This is more than once shown by the Prophet Isaiah. For thus says
the High and Lofty One, who Inhabiteth Eternity; I Dwell in the High and Holy
Place, and with him also, that is of an Humble and Contrite Spirit; to Revive
the Spirit of the Humble, and to Revive the Heart of the Contrite Ones (Isa.
57. 15, 16.) And (chapter 66. 2.) Heaven and Earth has mine Hand made; But to this
man will I Look, even to him that is poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and
Trembles at my word. It Is not that poor, mean, Spirit, that Trembles at the
Shaking of a Leaf; or sinfully fears man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils;
but he that fears the Lord and Trembles at his Word. Such an one shall not
only be Countenanced, and Comforted, by God here; but bountifully, and
graciously, be Rewarded hereafter; it is the first of the Beatitudes (Mat. 5.
3.) Blessed are the poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Is that Hotter Spirit an Angry Spirit, fermenting in Zeal and Jealousy:
This colder is meek and wholly Inclined to peace: It Is Sheepish, Lamblike, and
Inoffensive; no great Doer, and a quiet Sufferer: It Is patient and silent in
bearing Injuries, and easily overlooks Faults: It Is apt to think well of all,
and in general, all its motions are calm and soft.

This quiet, calm Te^per, if Unsanctified, has its spring, only in Bodily
Temperament, and Worldly Wisdom; and then Undecently bears oftimes, what it
ought to shake off, with Indignation. It Is indeed Inclined to good Offices, but
still with Earthly Design. It does good, to Receive good, Looking for something
again contrary to our Saviors Rule. ( Luke 6. 45.) It Is not the Subject of
Anger, because it would not be the Object thereof; always accompanied with
self-secking; and its greatest Design is to pass quietly through the World. It Is
utterly Indisposed for holy Zeal, so as never to contend earnestly for the
Faith. Nor will it plead Gods Cause, when Wickedness is Rampant, nor Labor to
Restrain or Rebuke Ungodliness. This Gallio-like Spirit cares for none of these
things. (Acts 18. 17.) But wholly Leaves men to their own Course, without any
Religious Control. This was Elies Sin, for which both he and his Family were
severely Dealt with; God was Angry with him, because he was not Angry ^or God.
It Is a Listless Frame for Affectionate Duty; Dead Hearted to and in, Heavenly
Service; A Professor of such a Spirit is but a Cold Christian, and will have
but a cold Entertainment when he comes to seek his Reward. A true Christian
should be always furnished with a Spirit, though not always Use it: There is a
time for necessary Anger. And we should Use our warmth of Spirit, or forbear
it, as occasion Requires. What will you? Shall I come unto you with a Rod; or
in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness? (1 Cor. 4. 21.)

This Unsanctified softness of Spirit, Though it be thus Useless and Blamcable;
yet this must be acknowledged of it: That of all the Worldly Spirits it is one
of the best; and as it does no good, so it does Least Harm and Mischief. It may
Render a man a quiet and untroublesome Neighbor, and tolerable Member, of the
Common^wealth; But still a sapless and fruitless Branch in the Church,; and is
far short of true Christianity, whatever it professes.

But if the Meek Spirit be a Sanctified one; Oh! How Excellent, How Lovely and
Desirable is it? How much does it conduce to Brethrens Living together in
Unity? How many Brawls and Factions would it prevent? It then (when Sanctified)
has another principal Rise and End then was suggested by Nature and
Circumstances. It then Arises from Conformity to the Great Exemplar (Isa. 53.
7.) Who was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter: and as a Sheep before the
Shearers is Dumb, so opened not he his Mouth VVh^n he was Reviled, he Reviled
not again; when he Suffered, be Threatened not; but committed himself to him,
who Judges Righteously. (1 Pet. 2. 23.)

Again, this is a fit Spirit to Deal with Sinners. Restore such an one in the
Spirit of Meekness. (Gal. 6. 1.) It Is that which is peaceable with men, and
pleasing to God; and therefore is Honorable, as an Ornament. The Ornament of a
meek and quiet Spirit; which in the sight of God is of great price. (1 Pet. 3.
4.) Surely God knows the true value of Things, who has put all Worth and
Dignity into them. This is a proper Gospel Spirit, very much for its Honor,
and promoting its Interest in the World: It ofttimes holds the Hands and stops
the Mouths of its Adversaries. That Rebuke of our Savior to those Sons of
Thunder, (James and John) when they would have Fire from Heaven upon the
Samaritan Village. (Luke 9. 55.) Intimates the True and Genuine Gospel. Spirit;
Ye know not what manner of Spirit you are of: You are not Spirited as you
should be: The Spirit you have is a Chollerick, Revengeful Spirit, and you know
it not: Or, you know not what Spirit, you should be of, as my Disciples: The
Spirit of Elias (under which you would cover your passions) Has done its
Preparatory work in John Baptist; But now the Evangelical-Spirit hence forward;
is quite another thing; It Is full of meekness, sweetness, and gentleness of
mind; which by your present talk, you seem little to understand; You (as my
Disciples) do profess to be of the Gospel Spirit; But alas, you have it not;
You know not what Spirit you are of!

And thus much of the two Opposite Spirits, the Hot and the Cold. We come now
to the Mean, between them both; which of all the Natural Spirits is the most
Curious, Desirable, and best Manageable, to every good purpose. Therefore

3. Some men are of a more Temperate Spirit, which is Cool in Respect of the
Heats; and Warm, in Respect of the Chills of Spirit, in the former two
Extremes. All the Conveniences; of those it has, without their
Inconveniences; This is the Well-balanced Spirit, that moves Evenly, Smoothly,
and Firmly; The Vessel of due proportion, betwixt Hull, and Sail, which usually
well Arrives at its intended Port. It Is the faelix Temperies of the
Philosophers, that naturally Disposes to, and Adapts for, General Virtue. It Is
best enabled to Use its own Abilities; and manage its own powers, whether
Intellectual or Volitive to the best Advantage.

1. Intellectual by a moderation, and order of Thoughts; of a sufficient Heat
to Excite them, and yet of Coolness enough to Govern them, and their Effects,
which otherwise might be Exorbitant. It Is not the Dull Soul, that thinks not
Intensely of any thing; Nor the Fantastic Air, that Huddles, and is
precipitant in all things. But it is such a well composed Spirit, as indeed
Quickens a man to Act, and yet Renders him Sober, and Deliberate, in all his
Actions. Hence arises Wisdom and Prudence in Matters, and a firm Judgment, that
will not suffer it self to be Biassed or Disordered by any unruly Passions; But
Governs them by Reason; and brings and keeps them in their due Subordaination.

Whence follows

2. The Volitive Powers are well used, and ordered by such a Moderate Spirit;
The Will is Benign, and the Passions Regular. The Will, and all the powers
under its Commands are Disposed to Subjection unto Right Reason. Hence This
Spirit is apt to be well governed In the man; that has it; And thereby Renders
him more fit to Govern amongst other men in the world; from both which it may
be Denominated A Spirit of Government. Of this brave Spirit was Titus
Vespasian, who from thence was called ( Humani Generis Deliciae) The Delights
of Mankind. Faithfulness, Candor, Beneficence, and all other things that are
Excellent (so far as Nature can go) have their Derivation from this Spirit;
because it is not so liable to the Infirmity of Unruly Passions, which is the
Natural Cause of all the contrary Vices.

Yet if this Rare and Excellent Spirit, which is so very good in it self be
Unsanctify'd and Corrupt; It Is all as Bad, if not worse, then the Rest.
Corruption of the best is worst. For

1. Its Wisdom and Prudence, if Unsanctifyed, is (at best) but Worldly Wisdom,
and Employed wholly to serve Worldly Interests: But it seldom stops there; for
it commonly proceeds in a way of Enmity against God and Goodness; And becomes
too often a Devilish Policy. If the Enemies of the Church be men of this
Spirit, they are most Dangerous: It Is the men of this Temper, that are the
Achitophels for Mischievous Counsels.

The Hot Spirited Huffs, and Hectors, may have as great an Enmity, which they
often show in a storming rage; But their vehement Passions do oft-times Deprive
them, of a discreet consideration, whereby they overshoot themselves, and miss
their Designs. The Smooth-bootes that look Demure, who can think and contrive,
and are not in overgreat Haste; The Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing; (in a word)
The close and undiscerned Hypocrites (who by means of this Moderate Spirit, may
more easily so be.) These are the Dangerous Enemies; These under their seeming
Virtues, have advantage to act their secret Vices. Lions by Roaring, may
Terri^ie the Sheep into their Safefolds, while the sly Foxes (by surprise) do
Devour the Flock.

As to the Spirit of Judgment, and Government Unsanctified; it is that which
makes Nets and Snares, and perverteth Jugdment in the Gate. It Is not the
Bawling Solicitor, so much as the subtle Judge, that Frames Mischief by a
Law, (Psa. 94. 20) and cover it over by a plausible pretense. Not the Clamarous
Multitude, so much as the Cunning Highpriests, that do violence to the Law,
and pollute the Sanctuary. (Zeph. 3. 4.) It Is they, that say, We have a Law,
and by our Law he ought to Die. (Ioh. 19. 7.) Thus they Turn Judgment into
Hemlock, and make the Ordinance of God Minister to their Lusts and Passions.

2. Its calmness of Will, and moderation of Affections, with those seeming
Ver^ues, that attend it, all are nothing so, as they do appear, but are Evil,
and Subservient thereunto. Evenness of Mind Unsanctified Renders a man but a
Gallio, caring for none of these things; Not concerned about the Greatest
Interests of their own, or others Souls: This is that Odious Lukewarmness which
God will Spue out of his mouth. (Rev. 3. 16.)

Again, Benignity, Generosity, and Candor of Spirit, if Unsanctified, is, (as
Mr. Fuller calls it) The Bad-good-nature, which is commonly, and most Abused by
Parasitical Hang-byes. Such men are Led by a Thread (not like Ariadne's Clew,
out of, But) into continual Dangers. The Gallantly follow Trappanning, and
Deceitful Guides, to do Mischief; like the men, that followed Absa^om in their
simplicity, and they knew not any thing of his Designs. (2 Samuel 15. 11.) These
are often Imposed upon; and made Tools, and Implements, in mischievous and
ungodly projects, for want of Gracious Wisdom. On the same account of
Bad^good-nature, they are apt to spare and favor, even Wickedness in men; and
Indulge them in their corrupt ways. They are apt to be prodigally Bountiful, to
such as they should rather frown away. (Prove. 29. 23.) The North Wind Drives
away Rain; and so does an Angry Countenance a Backbiting Tongue.

Lastly, as to the Fidelity and Stedfastness of this Natural Spirit, if
Unsanctifyed, it fits men to keep the Devils Counsel; He Hears Cursing, and
bewrays it not. (Pro. 29. 24.) A Thief may trust him with his Stolen Goods.
Alas he is mislead by false names and notions of things, and ^he Clea^^^
Immoveably to them: As for Instance; An Oath, to which he will stick, though it
be but a Bond of Iniquity, (contrary to the very nature of an Oath)

Truth and Trust he so looks upon, under the Name of Moral Virtues, That he
forgets the Christian Duty of not being Parta^er in other men's Sins. So also,
in Friendship, which (through his Candor) he often strikes with the Enemies of
God; He then thinks himself obliged to be faithful in all things to these his
friends; Tho indeed true Friendship is only in Virtue; and other Friendship
neither ought to be Begun, or Continued: Should thou Help the Ungodly, and
Love them, that Hate the Lord? Therefore is Wrath upon thee from the Lord. (2
Cor. 19. 2.)

These Firm Spirited, are the unhappy men, who being once Ill-engaged, are hard
to be Reclaimed: They will persist, though against the very Edge, and prickles of
Cons^ience, and Convictions: They scorn to forsake their Colors, though it be to
come under Christ's Banner: There is no hope to persuade; no; For I have Loved
Strangers, and (I Will never be a base Changling or Turn^coat) After them will I
go. (Jer. 2. 25.)

Thus this Noble Spirit is abused; Thus its Silver is become Dross; and those
seeming Virtues, which use to Glitter therein, are no more than (as Austin
calls the Heathen Morals) Splendida peccata; mere Gloworms and Fire flies to
the sight of a Moon-Ey'd World.

But if Sanctified, if Light and Heat be put into them by the Baptism of Fire,
How do the Excellencies of this Spirit Excel themselves? This Governable Spirit
is under a Twofold Government; That of our own, and that of God too. This
Fortified Spirit has a Double Guard; That of our Discretion, and that of Gods
Grace. Let us take a view of this Spirit, as Regulated by, and Set forth in,
the Scripture.

1. It Is a Temperate Spirit; not Cold or Lukewarm, but Governably Cool. In
(Prove. 17. 27.) we have (in this Respect) its Character, and its Commendation.
He that has Knowledge, spares his words; and a man of Understanding is of an
Excellent or (as in the Margin) a Cool Spirit. By Knowledge and Understanding
in Scripture (and frequently in this particular Book) is meant Gracious Wisdom,
and Sanctified Knowledge: It Is this that truly Tempers the Spirit to be
excellently Cool; and enables it to Govern it self and its Astions; yea; and
that Unruly Little Member, the Tongue, which in Hot, and Gunpowder Spirited
men is oft-times Inflamed and Set on Fire of Hell. (James 3. 5, 6.) It Is a
Spirit of Government, both Passively and Actively.

1. Passively (or fit to be Governed) which gives Commendation to the man that
has it, beyond the Triumphs of a Conqueror. He that Rules his Spirit is
better, than he that Takes a City. (Prove. 16. 32.)

Fortior est, qui se; quam qui fortissima vincit.
That Is the brave man, that Rules his Spirit; he
Has the brave Spirit, where 'twill Rules be.
The Cold Spirit is too slow and heavy* ^o follow the Dictates of Regulated
Reason, unto any considerable Effect. The Hot Spirit over-runs it, and (of the
Two) is the most Ungovernable. The Hasty and Disordered Spirit is chi^fly
Denominated Unruly, which often Exposes a man to Dangers, as an Unfortify'd
City. ( Prove. 25. 28.) He that has no Rule over his (Royled and Ruffled)
Spirit, is like a City, that is Broken down, and has no Walls. The Moderate
Spirit sets Discretion in the Government of his Affairs; But the Hasty Spirit
(not taking time to consider, what is to be done upon the present Emergence)
Exalts Folly (Prove. 14. 20.) To the same Effect is that Comparison; The
patient in Spirit is better, than the proud in Spirit (Eccl. 7. 8.) which is
Explained and Applied, in that Caution. ( v. 9.) ^e not Hasty in the Spirit, to
be Angry; for (proud) Anger Rests in the Bosom of Fools.

The Moderate Spirit is well compact* and firm, which keeps Foll^ from Breaking
in, or out; But the Immoderate both Admits, and Discovers Folly, in all its
Actions; And most easily and commonly in the Tongue. A perverse Tongue is (i.
e.) Betokens and Declares) a Breach (or Disorder) in the Spirit. (Prove. 1^. 4.)

This Cool and Temperate Spirit Inclines to Wisdom, observed in Daniel, by the
Babilonia^s, who Re^ommend him for it to Nebuchadnezzar, (Dan. 5. 12.) An
Excellent Spirit, and Knowledge and Understanding, was found in him^to Dissolv^
Doubts (or Untie Knots.) And for this he was Advanced; Because an Excellent
Spirit was in him (chapter 6. 3.) Now here we must Remember, that in Scripture
phrase, the Excellent Spirit, is in the Margin Read, the Cool Spirit, (as is
before noted.) It seems Daniel was a man of Temper, even in their Observation,
who could not Discern his Grace; 'Twas his Prudence, and not his Piety, that
they took notice of; And though ( chapter 4. 8, 9.) The Spirit of the Holy Gods was
by those Heathens acknowledged to be in him; yet, it was not his Sanctification
by the Spirit of the (...) God, which they meant; But (according to their
manner) whatever Trans^^nded the common course of men, they (...) wont to
Diesy. Daniel had indeed ^^traordinary Assistance from God for Re^^^ling
Secrets; But this Help was above (...) Cognizance; they only observed such
Excellency of his Spirit, as manifest^^ it self in his Covers amongst them; for
which also The King thought to set him ove^ the whole Realm. (chapter 6. 3.)

That phrase in ( Job 20. 3.) The Spirit of my Understanding causes me to
Answer. Signi^^es not (I think) his Understanding Faculty; but rather, That
Moderation and Government* of his Spirit, whereby he was enabled (without
Disturbance) to go on in Discourse of the Matters that were before them; as if
Zophar had said, I have heard the check of my Reproach; But it does not so
Disturb the order of my Thoughts, that I cannot have my Wits about me; No, no,
I know well enough, what to say; I have still an Understanding; Because a
Well-governed Spirit, that is not Hurried by provocation; I can Rule my own
Spirit, though not your Tongue; and therefore I can Answer what is meet: The
Spirit, that accompanies another man's Understanding, might (perhaps) silence
him from any prudent Reply, but the Spirit of my Understanding, (or, that
Spirit which accompanies it) causes me to Answer. And thus it is a passive
Spirit of G^vernment, or, a Spirit to be Governed.

2. It is also a Spirit of Government, Active; or it is most fit to Rule in the
world. So thought Darius, when he thought to set Daniel over the whole Realm.
When Moses prayed for a Successor to Lead the people into the Land of Promise (
Numb. 27. 16.) He does it in these very suitable words, Let the Lord, The God
of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a man over the Congregation; The Answer to
this prayer is ( v. 18.) Take thee Joshua the Son of Nun, in whom is the
Spirit, namely, which thou Desire: He has Excellent Qualifications, as a man;
But Lay thine Hand upon him, as a Consecrating Act to the work, and I will
follow it with a special Blessing; He shall have from me somewhat above Mere
Man; He has a Brave Sptrit already; But I will give him farther Additions in
and by she. Laying on of Hands. This is mentioned, (Deuteronomy. 34. 9.) Joshua was
full of the Spirit of Wisdom; for Moses had Laid his Hands upon him; and they
hearkened to him* It gave him Authority, as well as Qualificatious; He was
before a choice Vessel, and now a Chosen Vessel (the like as was said of Paul.)
Not that God needs any Excellencies of men; yet because it is his good pleasure,
to Deal with men after a humane manner, he commonly (in Providence) suits, and
singles out, persons, apt for the work, to which he does Design them. When God
promised to show Mercy to the Remnant of Israel; it is said, (Isa. 28. 5, 6.) In
that Day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a Crown of Glory, and for ^ Diadem of
Beauty, to the Residue of his People; and for a Spirit of Judgment to him that
sits in Judgment; and for Strength to them, that Turn the Battle to the
Gate; whe^^e the word [ for] signifies either, as much as, or Instead of, and
then it Imports, that a Spirit of Judgment is fit for Judges; as Strength and
Courage is for Soldiers: or else it signifies the same with that (chapter 1. 26.)
I will Restore thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
that is by Raising up either in Providential Dispensations, or special
Qualifications, men, that should b^ Repairers of their Breaches, and Restorers
of paths to dwell in; (chapter 58. 12.) from all which it appears, that this
Moderate Spirit is not only apt to be Governed; but also it is fit to Rule and
Govern in the World; because of the Wisdom and Discretion, that is used to
accompany it; especi^lly when it is Sanctified and Overruled by God.

As to that General Virtue, in respect to the Will, or Volitive Faculty, to
which it is Adapted, as the Philosophers ( faelix temperies) happy temperament;
by Sanctification, these Moral Virtues become True Graces. In Heathens, where
is no Sanctification, yet, if God Excites their Spirits, they become eminently
Serviceable. So Cyrus, who was of a Generous Noble Temper in himself; yet how
much did he act above himself, when God stirred up his Spirit (2 Cor. 36. 22.)
The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia; upon which he Issues
forth a Noble Proclamation. ( v. 23.) It was Cyrus his Spirit, though stirred by
God, and Inclined to this special Service.

But where Sanctification Renews the whole man; and gives New Principles and
Ends in all their Actions; The whole Nature of their Laudible Achievements is
also changed; so that, their Natural Spirit of Candor becomes the Character of
a Blessed man, in whose Spirit there is no Guile. (Psalm. 32. 2.) Their Fidelity
comes from that Faithful Spirit, which (on just occasion) Concealeth the
matter, and is commended for it. (Prove. 11. 13.) Their Moderation of Affections
is also from a principle, that, not only Restrains (as Heathen Morals do) but
Mortifyes the Affections and Lusts. (Gal. 5. 24. and Col. 3. 5) Their Firmness
is farther fortifyed by Might in the Inner-man; (Ephesians. 3. 16.) whereby they are
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord. (1 Cor. 15.
18.) for, if their well-considered Reasons do fix their purposes; Much more
will their well-grounded Faith establish them. In a word; its own Nature is
Lovely; But Grace super-induced renders it most Exemplary, Amiable, and Useful
in the World.

And thus, we have done with the Diversity of Spirits that are in men. The Hot,
the Cold, and the Moderate; How they Differ in Themselves, and how they are
farther Differenced by Natural Corruption, or Sanctifying Grace.

We shall now Reflect upon what has been said; and with some few practical
Inferences conclude the present Discourse.

INFERENCE 1.
And by considering well the many Scriptures, that have been alleged, we may
fairly see, That it is no strained Notion, which is the Design of this present
Treatise. It must indeed be acknowledged, that in many of those Scriptures, the
word [ Spirit] may be taken in some of the common Senses put upon it. As for
Instance; it may be taken for the Soul in general; and in some, for the Inward
Part, as an Expression of Sincerity: But to take it for the Higher Faculties of
Intellect and Will (as the Rational part, contradistinct from the Soul, or from
the Liver; This, though it be the most common and approved Interpretation of this
Text; I must confess I do not see sufficient Reason to allow it. I do not find
(to my Understanding) the word so taken in any other Scripture: And therefore I
take it to be, but a strained Sense, and thought of, only for this particular
place, because of some Difficulty, that appeared therein.

It Is true indeed, there is one Scripture usually alleged ( Heb. 4. 12.)
wherein Soul and Spirit are Distinguished one from the other: of which place
Dr. Smith in his Portraiture of Old Age has Discoursed, and Labored to
Evince, That Spirit, there signifies the Superior Faculties of man; And Soul,
the Inferior. This Discourse of the Doctor's was Considered in a former
Draught on this Subject; which now, because that Ingenious Gen^leman is some
Years since gone to his Rest, I think fit to omit, only he, that has Leisure
may compare what is there said, with what we have said of the same Scripture in
the beginning of this Discourse, and then judge as he sees meet. And as for the
many other places quoted, wherein Man's Spirit is mentioned. (on which I now
Desire you to Reflect) I suppose you will judge with me: That they may (for the
most part) be very genuinely understood in our sense; and that the
Interpretation of those Scriptures will, according to our proposed sense, be
very Current.

2. We may also hence In^err;
That it is Unjust and Unchristian to Cen^^re and Cond^mn men for their Humane
Spirits: To blame the Diversity of them, is to quarrel Gods Work of Creation,
or Providence. Why have thou made me (or him) thus (Romans 9. 20.) for Natural
Temper, and Modification of it, by Outward Circumstan^es is more Dependent on
his Will, then our Industry.

We should rather observe how all this variety of Spiri^s may be made Eminently
Servi^^^ble; for that every Spirit has its particular Natural Excellency; Though
all have not that, wherein thou (perhaps) may peculinly Excel. One Servant of
God is Cheerful, and Sings at his work; Another goes sadly and carefully about
it, for fear of miscarriage; yet both may be good, and Faithful Servants, and
neither shall Lose his Reward, but Enter into his Masters Joy. Surely the
Manifold Wisdom of God would not be so well made known by the Church in many
Respects; (as Ephesians. 3. 10.) Nor the Manifold Grace of God. (1 Pet. 4. 10.) If
every man (having Diversity of Gifts) Did not so Minister, even as he has
Received the Gift. In the (1 Cor. 12.) is a Large Discourse of Diversities of
Gifts (v. 4.) Administrations, (v. 5.) Operations, (v. 6.) All by the same
Spirit; and all Tending to the same holy Ends, Gods Glory, and the Churches
good. The following verses set forth the Church under the Parable of a Humane
Body; wherein every Member has its peculiar Ability and Use; so as the Eye
cannot say to the Hands, or the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you; ( v.
21.) But all are Servicea^le in their place and kind. This (he says) he wrote,
that there should be no Schism; But the Members should have the same care or
regard, one for another. (v. 25.) If this were well considered, and a
Charitable Estimate made, of every man's several Spirit or Genius; it would much
advance Love, Unity, and Mutual Honor, among Christians; Remove that
Censorious, Offensive, and Froward Temper in many, that does so much Disturb
Peace and Tranquillity, both in Church and State; and incline every man to think
and say, if I Excel any man in some things, He may Excel me in many more.

USE 3.
We may hence also Learn, who can Reform, and (being Reformed) preserve the
Spirit of man; even he, and only he, that Formed it; That Stretches out the
Heavens, and Lays the Foundation of the Eart^ and F^rmeth the Spirit of man
within hi^ (Zech. 12. 1.) This may indeed be u^derstood of the Soul, as one of
the En^^nent Works of God, and so is here Rec^^oned among them. The like may
(...) said of that, Father of Spirits. (Heb. 1^ 9.) And that (in Isa. 57. 16.)
The Spi^^^ should fail before me, and the Souls which have made; Spirit and
Souls may be taken as put Exeg^tically; yet, if you conside^ what follow, (in
that Zach. 12. 2.) I (...) make Jerusalem a Cup of Trembling, to (...) the
People round about, when they shall be (...) the Fire. (v. 3.) A Burdensome
Stone (...) all the people, gathered together against (...) And (v. 4.) Smite
every Horse with Ast^nishment, and his Rider with madness. (...) (I say)
considered, seems more to favo^^our Sense. As it the Prophet had sai^^ The
Malignant Spirit of Wicked Men (...) set against Gods People; But the For^^er
of Spirits can quickly confound the^ can dash and break them, be they as (...)
as the Horse Rushing into the Battle; (...) can soon fill them with
Astonishme^^ and promises so to do.

Now if he can thus Overruled the Sp^^rits of the Wicked; He can as well
Reg^^late the Spirits of his Elect; Casting (...) Imaginations and every high
thing, that Exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into
Cap^ivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. (2 Cor. 10 5.) Thus the
High Spirits (who are like Hills) are pulled down. And the mean, Low Spirits
(like to Valleys) are lifted up; yea, the Crooked and Rough Spirits, shall
become as a straight and plain place, to prepare the way of the Lord, and make
his paths straight. (Isa. 40. 4.)

This Sense is agreeable to the Covena^^ made with Christ for his People, (
Isa. 42 5) where Gods. Titles are much like those in Zechary; Who Created the
Heavens, and Spread forth the Earth; H^ that gives Breath unto the People upon
it (There Is their Natural Life) And Spirit to them that walk therein. (This I
take to be their Moral Life, or Conversation among men, to which the Spirit, we
now speak of, does very much conduce) He gives the Spirit, Temper, or
Inclination not only as a Gift of Nature, but as an Eminent Gift of Sanctifying
Grace, whereby they walk Uprightly in the Earth.

INFERENCE 4.
Hence also will naturally follow (...) Exhortation of the Apostle, (Ephesians. 4.
23.) Be ye Renewed in the Spirit of your min^s. This means not, that you should
have New Powers, or Faculties Natural (whither Superior or Inferior) But new
Inclinations, new Dispositions; The Spirit of the mind, cannot be here new
Intellec^s, or new Wills (which some would ha^^ to be the Spirit of Man) But
new Lig^^ in the Understanding, new Bent in the Will; This is to have new
Spirits of the mind, by Sanctification.

In the Old man, they were Corru^^, according to Lusts (v. 22) But in the New
Man ( v. 24.) after (or according to) God, they are Created anew (...)
Righteousness, and True Holiness. This ^^ho^tation [ Be ye Renewed] Does no^
Suppose in man a power of Self-Renov^tion; or Require of man, that which must
be done by God, if ever done; But it Requires, that man should do* what in him
Lies, to Regulate, and O^der his Spirit or Inclination: It Require^ our
Endeavor (to the best of our A^^lities or Means) to Reform our Spirits, where
they are apt to be Exuberant; and bring our Reasons to Act, in Subordaination
to God in the Renovation of them. And after all; because our Endeavors in
themselves (in this matter of Governing our peculiar Spirits) we see by daily
sad Experience, they Do, and will miserably fall short of Effect, Therefore to
Invocate Divine Assistance, and Influence, That the work may be Accomplished;
(as we shall again touch in the End.)

Of these Endeavors in Subordaination to Gods Working a Chief one is,

1. To Discover and Know our own Spirits (GNOTHI SEAUSON) Know thy Self, was (I
think, in This Respect) meant by the Ancient Morallist. In This Respect also
(as to the General) was that Caution of the Prophet; ( Mal. 2. 16.) Take heed
to your Spirit; Though it was there Applied to a particular Case. And our
Saviors Rebuke to his Disciples. Ye know not, what manner of Spirit, you are
of, (Luke 9. 55.) Referrs to the same matter; namely, That men should be well
acquainted with their own Spirits, and Inclinations; so will they be better
Enabled, To Resist Sin, and Address to Duty, in which two, consist^ That
Renovation of their Spirits, to which they are Exhorted.

1. To Resist Sin; That you may kee^ your s^lves (like David) from your
Ini^quity. (Psalm. 18. 23.) Know and Beway^ your Infirmity; That particular
Breach i^ your Spirit; (Prove. 15. 4.) where the Devil can most easily make his
Assaults and Entrance. In the Spiritual Warfare of the So^l, Corruption in
General is a Treacherou^ Party, within the Garrison; But the mos^ Active and
Dangero^s Traitors of that Party; are (as it were) by Name Particularly
Discovered, and brought forth, by a due study of our Own Spirits. The Blameless
in the Text Notes, where the Blameable is usually to be found.

2. To Address to Duty, That we may be more Eminently Serviceable to God and
Men in our Generation. Then are men most Servic^able when their Spirits are
suited to their business; and therefore a fit Choice of Callings in General,
may much Depend on the Knowledge of our Spirits.

When Other men make a Choice for an Affayr if they act prudently, they view
(...) Spirits of their Candidates. So the Apostle ordered the Primitive
Christians (...) ^o. ( Acts 6. 3.) Look you out among (...) seven men of honest
Report, full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom, whom we may Appoint over this
Business. Every Believer was not qualified for the Service. Every Godly
Minister was not so fit to be sent to the Phillippians, as Timotheus; (...)
whom it is said, I have no man like minded who will naturally care for your
(...) (Phil. 2. 20.)

Now as the Electors, do Regularly ^ind men's Spirits, so much more should (...)
Elected, in their Acceptance of Employments, to which they are Chosen. The
(...) of this Care makes many to vent^^^ on Depths beyond their Stature;
Burdens beyond their Strength: Like the Ridiculous Aspiring of the Bramble (in
^^thams Parable, Judge. 9. 15.) to be King of the whole Forest; Come (says the
silly Shrub) and put your Trust in my Shadow.

Some are Imposed upon, by Others Hypocritical Flattery; And they again Impose
upon themselves, by their carel^^s Self-conceit. Some are over-valued by the
Esteem, that the partial Love of their Friends do put upon them: Passions are
violent, and commonly Over-lash: Love thinks all Excellent, and Hate thinks
nothing good. A man's Own Prudence, should rather guide him than Others
Mistaking Affections. And truly, in those things wherein others may be greatly
Deceived; A man, who is well Acquainted with his Own Spirit, may rightly, and
easily Inform himself.

This is not said, that men should only Contemplate their Own Infirmities; for
then no Humble, Honest Man would ever be Employed; All such would be ready to
Answer with Moses upon a Great, and Illustrious Call; I am not Eloquent; I am
slow of Speech; I pray thee send by the hand of him, whom thou will (or marg:
should) send. (Exodus 4. 10) Or with Holy, Humble Jeremiah (chapter 1. 6.) Ah Lord
-- I cannot speak, for I am a Child.

But the meaning is; every man (prudently allowing graynes for Humane
Infirmity) Does, or may (by the Study of his Own Spirit) know, what in some
^^asure, he is good for; and should ac^^^dingly apply himself to business. As
(...) is true (on the one hand) what is con^^^^ed in that old Proverbial Rithm.

^emo adeo est Tusus, quinullos Serviat Usus.
(...) is so good for nothing, but may be used in something
And it is as true (on the other hand) (...) omnia possum^s omnes. We are not
all (...) for every thing. Invita Minerva, a (...) Genius will never do Noble^^
ploits.

And thus much of Knowing our Spirits.

^. But when we know them, and (...) Labour^d to Govern them according (...)
our best Discretion and Ability; (...) then finding an Insufficiency in (...)
selves, well to manage those Head^^^ong, and Impetuous things: we shall (...)
cause (besides our own Endeavors, (...) our own Spirits) Humbly, Earnest (...)
and continually to crave Assistance (...) on High; That God by his ^^^ctifying
Grace would do that for (...) which our Natural Power will never be able to
Compass for our selves. Not to Expel our Natures; but to Order and Govern our
Natural Dispositions and Inclinations, as may be most for His Glory and
Service; and so for our own Comfort and Advantage. We should Incessantly Pray
for our selves, the same which the Apostle here does for the Thessalonians.
That we may be wholly Sanctified, and that our whole Spirit, both Soul and
Body, may be preserve^ Blameless to the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I have done; and shall conclude this Discourse, with that frequent Benediction
of the same Apostle: As to Timothy, (2 Epist. 4. 22.) The Lord Jesus Christ be
with your Spirit. Which is the same in Sense with that to the Galatians, (chapter
6. 18.) and Philemon, (v. 25.) The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
Spirit. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement
(...) little Treatises formerly Published by this Author.
^. THe Little Peacemaker, Discovering Foolish Pride the Makebate; from (...)
13. 10. Only by Pride comes Con^^^ion; but with the well-advised is Wis^^^.

^. The Way of Good Men, for Wise (...) to walk in; from Prove. 2. 20. That
(...) may walk in the way of good men, (...) keep the paths of the Righteous.

^. Debts Discharge, being some Consi^^^ations on Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing
(...) man, but to Love one another.

^ The Gaming Humor Considered and ^^proved, or, The Passion-Pleasure,
Ex^^sing Money to Hazard, by Play, Lot, (...) Wager. Exami^ed.

There are also two little things in English Meeter.
The one, Meditations on the History Recorded in the First Fourteen Chapters of
Exodus.

The other, The Ark, its Loss and Recovery; being like Meditations on the
beginning of 1 Samuel,


