THE GAMING-HUMOR Considered, and Reproved. OR, The Passion-Pleasure, and
Exposing MONEY to hazard BY PLAY, LOT, or WAGER, Examined.

By a Well-wisher to Mankind.

Opus est bona fama apud homines, bona Conscientia apud Deum.

Aug. Saturnalia potius Celebrantes, quam Christi natales.

Gul. Fulco. Non facile adducar licitum consentire, quod tot parturit Illicita.

Bern. Neque enim Ludus erit, ubi Census volvitur in Tabula, and Ludus fit de
periculo, and de ludo periculum.

Ambr. Lusori cupido semper gravis exitus Instat.

Basil. Si quis habet nummos veniens, exibit Inanis.

Vital. -- Simplex ne furor, Costertia centum perdere, and horrenti Tunicam non
Reddere servo?

Juv. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry.
1684.

THE GAMING-HUMOR Considered, and Reproved.
AMong the many pernicious Vices of the Times wherein we live, the Gaming Humor
is not of the lowest Rank; and it is of the more danger to be entertained,
because it pretends to something of Reason for its Warrant, or at least has the
common custom and the example of some great or good men to excuse it.

The pleasures of which men are capable in this life, may be ranked into
natural and animal; the animal again are distributed according to the faculties
of the soul inferior or superior: the inferior are of sense, motion and
appetite; the superior are of Will, Intellect, and Conscience (of all which we
may have opportunity perhaps hereafter to discourse more at large). That which
concerns us at present is, to enquire into which of these Classes the plea^^re
of Gaming may be referred? The Gamesters would have it rational, and of the
superior order; because Dogs, Horses, and other Brute (which have some kind of
participation with men in sensual pleasures, yet) have no share in this; for
that they can neither attain the Arts of Gaming, nor know the value of the
stakes. But this notwithstanding, it is indeed most properly belonging to the
Sensitive appetite; for that it is a Passion Pleasure, and all the concern that
Reason has about it, is, that (by perverting the order of nature) humane skill
and art seated in the Intellect, are made to drudg under the service of
irregular passions, as I hope will plainly appear in this our present Discourse.

The Gaming Humor may be Defined, An inordinate affection after Gain and Sport,
by Play, Lot, or Wager.

1. I call it an affection (or passion) in a complicated sense, as
comprehending all the passions of the concupiscible appetite, carried forth
after all the kinds of Temporal Good [ pleasure, profit and honour], and
drawing after them all the passions of the Irascible appetite, which are
oft-times thereby vehemently excited; besides an engagement sometimes of those
proper passion, which are peculiar to the rational nature; so that there are
three sorts of passions concerned therein.

1. Those of the concupiscible appetite, or such as have good for their proper
object (for so I think most reasonable to distribute the appetites); These are
Love, Joy, Desire, Hope, Despair; and these are immediately and primarily
concerned in this matter.

2. Those of the Irascible, whose object is Evil, as Hatred, Grief, Shunning,
Fear, Boldness, Anger.

3. Those that are proper passions to man only (at least some of them), as
Envy, Indignation, Self-conceit, Triumph, Shame, Revenge, Discontent, Vexation,
etc.

Now, to illustrate this matter, I shall show how most of these passions are
excited and exercised herein. As, suppose a man has a great love for money or
sport, this rouses desire, which with hope carries out his endeavors; herein,
if he succeeds, he has joy; but if not, and his hope also fails, through some
cross circumstances, then enters despair; and this would put an end to the
business, but that from some other circumstances considered, hope begins to
revive again, which makes him hold on the Game. Thus far the apprehension of
gain, and advantage to be gotten, does operate.

But because there is loss and hazard, as well as gain before him, therefore
the other passions take their turns. And first, a man hates to be beaten, to
lose, to be disappointed of his hope; whereupon he fears what will be the
issue; upon this he is very careful to shun and avoid the Danger. If,
notwithstanding all his caution, the Game goes against him, he is grieved more
or less, according to the value played for, or the engagement of his mind in
the business. If any real or sancied un-fair play be supposed; or if any
stander by has contributed to the advantage of the opposite party, or spoken in
the play, or done, or offered any thing obstructive to him, presently anger is
enflamed; and when this has boiled up the Spirits to a convenient height then
enters boldness, then have at all, and a pound, as soon as a penny, is put to
the hazard.

The proper humane passions are intermingled with the other, according to the
various success of the Game; for if he thrives in it, then with his Joy is
mingled self-conceit, and self-approbation in his Skill, or good fortune (as he
calls it), and therewith a kind of Triumph over his vanquished Adversary; these
are in their own nature, tickling and pleasing passions.

But if he succeeds ill, then with his grief is mingled envy at the others
prosperity, discontent at his own ill suck, indignation and scorn, yet mingled
with shame, that he should be beaten by such a bungler (for so self-conceit
will esteem of the opposite party). Hereupon boldness and revenge shake hands,
and if the least hope give countenance, the Game is held on with pertinacy; but
if still comes loss upon loss, then no small vexation arises in the mind: And
yet for all this (lest the Trade should fail), hope encourages revenge to be a^
him again on the next convenient opportunity.

Thus the Gaming humor continues when the present Game is over; for to Gaming,
revenge is so natural a pabulum, that from hence arises that Gaming phrase,
[Let us play set and revenge] that is, only two Games, that (if it so happens)
they may be quits one of the other.

And thus much for the Genus [an affection]; which word if you like not, as too
narrow for such an huddle of passions, as are shown to be comprehended in
Gaming, you may (if you please) word the definition thus, [a disorderly
passionate pursuit of gain and sport, by play, lot or wager], the inordinacy of
it will appear better, when we have farther explained the remaining parts of
the definition.

2. It Is a pursuit of gain; namely, of the stake which is put to the hazard.
This staking of something valuable, is by the Civilians and Casuists, called
contractus ludi (the contract of the play), which is farther thus explained,
Quo ludentes inter se convenient, ut victori aliquid tribuatur a victo (whereby
the Players agree, that the Conquered shall pay something to the Conqueror);
this something may be money, or moneys-worth; and that, either the whole to be
given to the Conqueror for his own use or to be expended in something which may
be for the common use of both; or lastly put to any other use, by the consent
of both the parties. In the first, the Victor only is profited; in the second
case the Victor has but half; and in the third he has no advantage at all, only
the loser is punished in this, as he is in the other two. This last does least
(though somewhat) nourish the Gaming humor; the second does more; but the first
(the whole profit) does most of all; for the advantage hoped for, is that which
incites the right Gamester to play, which otherwise he would often no more do,
than either work or study.

3. It Is a pursuit of sport or pleasure; for, besides the gain (which some seem
only to propose), there is a recreation and delight which men do take therein;
this pleasure is a passion-pleasure (as is before noted) which may appear in
the foregoing explication of the word [Affection], where you may observe, how
the several passions do every one act its part; and then by their great
variety, sudden shifting, and vivid exercise, they afford this pleasure; for
hereby the humors and spirits are put into a various motion, whence arise
warmth in the blood, and steams to the Brain, which are matter for fancy to
work upon. Here also fancy puts in for a share in the sport; this busy faculty
loves to be employed, and here is work enough for i^; for before it can have
well formed one imagination of good or evil, presently is offered an occasion
for another, and and perhaps the quite contrary to what it was in shaping;
this, though it would be an unpleasant confusion to the rational thoughts, is yet
agreeable enough to this hopping and desultorious faculty. Fancy thus busied,
does again influence and more excite the passions, and so there is a kind of
circular agitation among those lower faculties of the Soul, whereby the
pleasure is continued. And yet lest the passions should want a sufficient
engagement, the stake or wager is added and deposited, commonly in open view,
that it may affect the more; or in a third hand for assurance; because, though
men are forward enough to venture their money, when they have hope to swell
their bubble, yet they will be as backward to pay it when their hope is dashed,
and the Gaming bubble is broken by the loss. This stake, by those who love the
sport more than the gain, is in a very moderate measure, and is so continued to
the end of the play; but by those who aim more at the gain than the recreation,
the stake is often gradually heightened (according to the increase of
passions,) to as much as can be obtained from the fellow-Players; and so it is
with the Wagers of the Gaming by-slanders.

These two [ sport and gain] may be called the ends of Gaming: If sport take
the chief place in the design of men, if may (with other due circumstances,) be
allowed the innocent name of Play; but if the gain be chiefly proposed, then
it is not Play but Gaming which denominates the Gamester in the most common and
scandalous acceptance of the word.

4. The means of obtaining these ends, are mentioned to be three play, lot and
wager.

1. Play is some exercise of body, or mind, or both in a mixture; the mind is
more exercised with Chess, Draughts, etc. The body more in Leaping, Running,
Ringing, etc. The mixture of both is, when skill is required and used in the
exercise of the body, as in shooting with Gun or Bow, Bowls, Nine-pins, etc.
wherein exactness of Collimation, (or aim) agility of body and sagacity of mind
are required together; and these in their own nature seem to be of the best
Character, because in the same expense (of Time or Money), they are of a double
use, namely to serve the Bodies health, and the Minds recreation, diversion or
improvement.

Hither to may be reserred such sports as are procured by the exercise of
others (either men or beasts) and the pleasure is to the Spectators, many of
whom do thereupon take the occasion to be the Betting Gamesters, such as
Sword-playing, Wrestling, Racing by Horse or Foot, the Spanish Torio or Bull
game, Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Cock matches, etc Of all which we may say,

1. The exercise of skill or strength in man, or the sagacity, courage,
celerity, or any other excellencies in brutes, is pleasant and innocent to
behold, and may administer occasion to admire and praise Gods Wisdom and Bounty
in the Creation.

2. But the hazard of man's life or health, the teazing and tormenting of brute
Creatures to make a sport thereof; to delight in those Antipathies, which are a
part of that vanity under which the creature groans, and whereto it was made
subject by man's original sin; this is an unchristian and unnatural cruelty, and
no branch of man's prerogative or title to the Works of God, who has granted him
the use of all, but not the abuse of any. This is too near a kin to some of the
Pagans Theater cruelties, or that woeful sport at Helkath Hazzurim, 2 Samuel 2.14.
Where the young m^n 12. on a side, arose to play before Abner and Joab, they
caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellows
side, so they fell down together.

3. Therefore if those Exercises were so ordered, that there were no
probability of hurt to ensue; as if the races be very short, and upon safe
ground; if the combatant with the Bull have a safe retreat: If Cocks spur with
Huffles, and Fencers play with Foils (that commonly do no harm) these and
suchlike spectacles may be well allowed for honest recreation.

4. Yet all, or any of these (however lawful or laudable in their own Nature)
when they serve the Gaming Humor, and are expensive of Time and Money, beyond
due Decorum, they cease to be honest or necessary Recreation, and become the
Vicious Gaming. And thus much of the first means Play.

2. The Second Means of Sport and Gain is Lot, which is defined, A Casual Event
purposely applied to the Decision of some doubt or question. In which the Genus
or matter is casual Event; the form or difference is the Applicat^on to a
question; so that a rub in the Green, a slip of the foot, or jog of the hand,
which may have some influence, on the Issue of the Game, are casualties, but
not Lots, because they are not applied of purpose to have that Influence. Every
Lot is a Casual, but every Casual is not a Lot.

The Division of Lots has divided the learned; I hardly find two that agree in
the same. That which I take for the present shall be this, Lot (in the use of
men) is either serious or lusory. Serious are either sacred or civil. Sacred
were such as by Gods appointment and special institution were made a sign of
his Will to direct his People of old in some dissicult cases. These have been
Consultory or Divinatory. Consultory, to know what is to be done, as in the
choice of Matthias; Divinatory, of what has been done, as in the finding out of
Achan. They have been very rare, and therefore are called extraordinary, and
are not to be meddled with, but by special Warrant; and therefore the Heathens
of old, and such as imitate them now a days in such practices, as call in Gods
special Providence to attend their Will and Pleasure, are greatly to be
condemned as guilty of abominable Prophanations, and bold Temptations of the
most High God. The serious civil Lot is called divisory, which seems in some
cases to be allowed, in Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord: and chap. 18.18. The lot causes
contentions to cease, and parts between the mighty. I say in some cases and
not all; not in trivial matters, not where man's Wisdom can end the business
without it; the only regular use of it seems to be, when men have used their
utmost consideration to reduce matters as far as they can to an equality, and
yet by reason of the infirmity of human Passions, they cannot give all parties
full satisfaction. Then (if men will agree thereto) may strife be ended, or
prevented by appeal to Providence in the Lot. The remaining difference here is
indeed but small, and yet is not Trivial, because the consequence of the strife
continuing, may be great. This being an appeal to a special and distinguishing
Providence, must be accompanied with invocation of God, more or less solemn
(but always sincere) according to the weight of the matter, and consequence of
the strife.

Now comes the lusory Lot (for the understanding of which has been the
foregoing discourse of Lots in their general nature and distribution) It Is the
Lot used for sport or gain in play; and this either simply, or mixed; simply is,
when the issue of the game is wholly put upon the Lot as in Dice, Cross and
Pile, drawing Cuts, Huckle bone, etc. Mixed is, when there is something of Art
added to the chance, as in Cards and Tables. In the simple, the Question to be
decided, is [who shall have the stake?] without more to do. This is accounted
the vilest and most pernicious sort of gaming, there being barely the Game
aimed at, and almost no exercise of Body or Mind therein; yea so far is it from
the use of art or skill, that the least art therein alters the nature of the
game by taking away the Lot, and is by the Gamesters themselves accounted a
cheat. In the mixed Lot is another Question, namely [ in what state or Condition
shall the player be, that he may show his skill?] I may add also a preparatory
Lot, but not so much concerned in the Games; and the questions are [ who shall
be together? or who shall begin the play? etc.] These two latter kinds, tho
they are not so much blamed as the former, and are allowed by some grave
Casuists, yet are also rejected by the most of sober people, and best Authors,
which I am acquainted with, who by no means will allow a lusorious Lot, and
that so sacred a thing (as they account it) should be made a sport of.

I know such as plead for a possible lawful use of Lots in play, say, that
there is no such sacredness in it; that the too common abuse, and not the bare
use of a lusory Lot, is blameable; that the nature of it is of those
indifferencies, which Christian Liberty allows us to apply to any use they may
be fit for; That there is indeed a common providence in them (as in all other
things) but no special providence is appealed to; that the casualty of Lot is
fittest for matters of no moment; that such mere casualties may receive power
to decide controversies, or answer questions by the consent of men; that the
common use in all Ages and Nations shows it agreeable to the Light of Nature,
etc.

On the other hand, the opposers of a lusory Lot say, That the very Nature of a
Lot (and not only the abusive Circumstances) forbids it to be made lusory; that
sacredness cannot be separated from it, but by profanation; that it is as an
Oath, a kind of prayer, and as that invocates Gods attesting Presence, so Lot
does his deciding Providence. The mere casualty in man's application, answering
the words of an Oath in man's pronunciation; these two, Lot and Oath, are not
sanctified by applying them to a holy use (as Bread, Wine, and Water are in the
Sacraments) but being holy in their own Nature, they are profaned, when not
solemnly used. Christian Liberty allows the use of Creatures, according to what
they are made apt for; but appeals to God, or any other holy thing, were never
made apt for play; no not the common acts whereby means of Communion with God
are expressed; What an abomination would it be to any Christian man, to see a
Pulpit, a Communion Table, a Font exposed on a stage, the Gestures and Actions
of Worship aped by the Players, a Dog fed or baptized after the manner of
Sacramental Administration, tho never a word tending to Religion were spoken? A
man indeed may recreate himself with Bread, or Wine, he may play with water,
wood or stone, but not in that manner, as any of them are made apt means for
Communion with God. Now in a Lot the mere casualty applied for decision of a
question is used after the same manner that God has directed men to appeal to
him by, as in that Prove. 18.18. for ending or preventing strife; so for choice
of an Apostle, setiling the order of the Priests service, setting out the tenth
Lamb, etc.

That place which most plainly sets forth the very nature of a Lot in general,
will best clear the point before us: It Is the aformentioned, Pro. 26.33. The
lot is cast into the lap, There Is man's part appealing by disposing the thing to
mere Contingence, and applying it to a question; But the whole disposing (or
Judgment) thereof is of the Lord; there is Gods part; it is spoken of Lot in the
common nature thereof, abstracting from sacred, which were by Gods appointment,
and civil, which being serious, are in some cases by him permitted, and
certainly (to my apprehension) absolutely denying Lusory. Thus Lot is apt to a
holy use in its own nature, and so not a matter of Indifference. But on the
other hand, the mere casualty is not apt to decide of it self, without appeal
to some higher power. Oh yes, (say some) by the consent of men. But remember,
the serious Lots before mentioned have the consent of men, yet this consent
adds nothing to the nature of Lot, only the use thereof, the determination is
expected from another power, after the consent is past; and it is a strange
thing to conceive, how men acting by determinate judgment should refer their
matters to a thing that is wholly indeterminate, and has no Judgment at all;
men can indeed put signification on the things casually happening, as they
please, when they are happened, (as to say, a Sise shall win, and the Deuce shall
loose.) But to give the chance power to determine, which shall be, is neither
in the power of man to give, nor the mere chance receive. As for the appeal to
providence, (which some deny) and the common, but not special providence, that
they say is in it, The very nature of the Lot in its application to a question
seems sufficiently to evince, that there is a special respect to providence,
and that a more special one, than that whereby I lift up my hand. I do not say,
that God always exercises a special providence in every Lot, for he is not at
every Child, or foolish man's beck; as he does not attest in sinful Oaths, so he
does not decide in sinful Lots; Nor do I say, that Players do always in their
Lots distinctly respect or eye, such a providence, no more than profane
Swearers think of God, whose name they mention; But I say, the nature of the
thing it self (like an Oath), respects the special presence of God, what ever
men are thinking. That a Lot is most fit for trivial matters is most false, for
then, when God has appointed a Lot for decision of great, and weighty matters,
he has not chosen the fittest means to make known his will by, but such as were
fitter for Boys play; which who will dare to say? The instances commonly
alleged, the order of the Priest's service, the setting out the tenth Lamb,
the civil Lot in matters of no great value, or where man's prudence has brought
the difference to as small as may be; these (as was said before), are no great
matters in themselves, yet the consequence of the contest, that might remain
about them, might be very great both as to sin and trouble. As to the light of
nature pleaded, from the common use of all Ages and Nations, etc. I believe,
upon due search it will be found to be from the corrupt Bias, and darkness of
nature, rather than the light thereof. Children play at cross and pile, head
and point, etc. and delight in it, before they have gotten any evil habits; But
may not these be evil dispositions, which (if Parents look not timely to it)
will prove such habits, as they will have cause to mourn for? They may learn that,
while they are Boys, which may undo them, when they are men. Pagans play with
Lots, they do so in a most barbarous manner. The Indians it is said, will at
Hucklebone lose all they have, and when their Goods are gone, they will venture
their Wives and Children; and a grave author says of the Ancient Germans, they
would Dice away themselves for slaves; and is this by the light of nature? No,
no, there is something else more manifest by the light of nature; Namely, that
the Lot has in it (...), something Divine. For the Pagans have always thought
some Numen or Deity, did direct their chance; this they called Fortune, and
placed it in Heaven; and do not our common Gamsters follow them herein? Do not
they say when they play at Hazards, Ple try my fortune? So, I had bad fortune,
or no luck, the fortune of the Die was against me, the Cards are against me,
and put my hand out, etc. What, is it the painted Paper, or pointed Cube? No
surely, it is the director of the chance, which they tacitly acknowledge; and
what must this be? Either God, or good Angel or Devil. If God, then the cause
is yielded; if good Angels, it is yielded also, for they act only by Gods
Commission; but indeed we read not, that they were ever appointed to such
Ministry; If the Devil (as it is most likely) by Gods Permission; this they will
be ashamed to own, and therefore the former they cannot deny. And thus much to
show, that lusory lot is evil in it self.

I thought not to enter so far into this controversy, being more concerned
with the end [gain] than with the mean [Lot.] It Is the gain that chiefly
pollutes the sport, what ever be the mean. However, since an unwarrantable
means, to an ungodly end, is sometimes joined in Gaming, and this renders it
the more ugly, and therefore the rather to be avoided; and since my design is
to beat down the Gaming-Humor, whereof lusory Lot is the greatest nourisher, I
must take leave to say yet a little more thereto.

And first consider, no sports are so apt to be abused as Lot-Games, and that
several ways. One is, that Men often break out into cursing and execrations of
Gods Providence under the name of ill Luck. Another is, outrageous quarrels
with men, for that being often crossed in their Expectation, their Passions are
more vehemently stirred. Another, that they know not when to end; because, when
they are worsted, they have no more reason to despair of better success even to
the last, than they had at first; whereas in other Games, when men see
themselves mastered by another better skill, they will cease; but here is no
end, till they come to the end of their stock; and hence it is, that when men
once enter into them, they are usually besotted, and even fascinated with them,
until they are ruined by them. Consider again, that lusory Lots being (at the
best that can be pretended) but indifferent, they ought to be forborne, rather
than give offense; now this they commonly do, both to good and bad, to the one
of grief, to the other of stumbling and hardening. Hence it is, that the
generality of such as fear and reverence God, and warily consider their own
actions, do at least prudently, if not piously abstain wholly from, and avoid
them. Nor is it a matter of small consideration to those, who value their
repute, that a man's credit is commonly blasted by a frequent use of Lot-sports;
for they are so eminently employed in Gaming, that the contemptible name of
Gamsters and Gaming houses, do ordinarily take their Denomination from them.
Lastly, seeing it is so disputable a point, and by the goodness of God there are
unquestionable Recreations enough; Why should men meddle with that, which has
(at least) the appearance of evil? Diversions there are enough in
unquestionable ways. I can say in in truth, I have not played with any Lot, (to
the best of my remembrace) above this thirty Years, and yet never wanted an
hours Recreation, when I had leisure and list thereunto. That it has the
appearance of evil, is manifest by the many Laws, Canonical, Civil, and
Municipal, that are against it. You see before it is disputable amongst the
learned, and therefore may well be doubtful to others; and then the Rule is, in
doubtfuls men ought to desist. Some perhaps may make this an excuse to persist,
and say Mr. Gattaker, whom you will acknowledge a learned and pious man, writ for
the lawfulness of the lusory Lot; he knew as well what was right, as you, it is
not therefore as bad as you would make it, and by consequence we may safely use
it.

I answer, It Is not safe practicing upon another man's knowledge, unless your
self be well informed and satisfied by his Reasons. I might oppose to Mr. G.
Mr. Fenner, Mr. Travers, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Easty, Peter Martyr,
Bahingtons, Balmford, Anesius, Voetius and others; who writ both before and
after Mr. G. some against the pure Lot, some against the mixed also. I might
also say, Mr. G. was a Young man, when he write his Book of Lots, Librorum
primitias as he calls it in his Dedication; and had he foreknown the Answers,
Replies, and Rejoynders, this part of it would have occasioned, it is probable
he would have passed it over, and (if my memory fail me not) I have heard, that
himself has declared as much to some intimately acquainted with him. But I
shall rather (still owning the worth and repute of Mr. G.) refer ye to him, in
other things, if his credit be so great with you, and seeing you appeal to Mr.
G. to him shall you go.

Mr. G. professes, he never intended to animate Gamsters, by what he writ about
Lots. He lays down Rules for those, and all other Recreations, which I am sure
our common Gamsters do little regard; as in his Book of Lots. P. 236. and
onwards, he says, They must always be used soberly, seasonably, ingeniously,
inoffensively, prudently, and religiously, on all which heads he enlarges; I
shall only give you some brief Notes thereof.

1. By soberly, he means moderately in the measure and manner; the measure is
of time and expense; of time he says, some men spend day and might in gaming;
especially, at the usual solemnity of our Savior's Nativity, carrying
themselves ( p. 238) in that lewd and dissolute manner, that if a stranger
should come among them, not knowing what Religion they were of, he would rather
guess them to be worshippers of Bacchus, (the revelling and drunken God,) or of
Saturn (the rifling and gaming God,) than the servants of Jesus Christ, the
preacher and practiser of sobriety and temperance; play must be but as sauce,
not meat. As to money, that nothing be hazarded, but what may well be spared.
And as to manner, without all vehemence or passion. Sports must be used
sportingly.

2. Seasonably, not when we should be about necessary duty, for the good of our
selves, or families; or about the worship of God, as on the Sabbath days,
(which, he says, Papists commonly do.) It should be only that time, which we
have free from serious, and religious affairs.

3. Ingenuously, freely and liberally, not with any greedy desire of Lucre;
play must be for pleasure, not profit. Recreation is no trade or course of life
to live by; it is to prey upon, not to play with, if we design gain from any
man: It Is to alter the nature of things, to make a Trade and Traffic of
disport and pastime, to make the Lusory a serious, yea a sad Lot (as it often
falls out.) See the example of him that hanged himself in Trinity College
Hall, where he had lost his money at Game the night before (in Travers on Ps.
111.) Ita hae Nugae seria ducunt in Mala. Hor.

4. Inoffensively. If (as the Apostle) in eating and drinking (matters of more
necessity) much rather should we in Play. Men ought not therein to offend
Superiors, Magistrate, Minister, Parent, Master; nor equals, to grieve or cause
to fall. It Is unlawful to play needlessly before or with such men as hold these
games unlawful and are likely to be offended. We ought warily to keep our
credit good with men, as our conscience clear to God.

5. Prudently, In respect to our selves, avoiding such Games as either may be,
or we have found to be occasions of sin to us; as what is apt to stir our own,
or another passions with whom we play.

6. Religiously and Reverently, not texcluding Gods Presence in our Play; but
not daring to call in Gods Providence to help our Play, as some profanely do.
These are Mr. G. his Rules; nor is he alone in these sentiments, for he quotes
for confirmation of them, King James, Bishop King, Fenner, Easty, and other
good Authors. Yea, in the point of Offense he cites many Scriptures, and from
them all draws this pathetical Exhortaon. Therefore where thou find thy
liberty does, or may in likelihood offend, there for thine own sake, for thy
Brothers sake, for his weakness sake, for Christ thy saviors sake, forbear;
hold thy says within thy self, keep thy knowledge to thy self, and say with the
Apostle, If cards or tables offend my brother, I will never play at them, while
the world stands, that I may not offend him.

Now what say you to Mr. T. G.? Will you yield your selves to be directed, as
well as claim to be allowed by him? Else never plead his Authority for your
practice.

He concludes his Discourse of those Lusory Lots with this Remarkable Passage
(p. 266.) I could wish in this case, as the Apostle does in some other, That
every one were affected in this point as my self; That albeit in Judgment they
be rightly informed of their lawfulness, yet in godly discretion they would
rather abandon them, and forbear the use, considering the too too common, and
ordinary abuse of them; and that many it may be, among whom they live, may
remain unresolved and unsatisfied in the lawfulness of them. Thus far this
Learned and Pious man; with these his last mentioned words I shall also
conclude this part; only with this remark, That hereby we may clearly see, that
Mr. Gataker handled this matter as a Theoretical School point, and not as a
practical Direction of Life; seeing he would neither do it himself, nor have
any others. And so much for the second mean of Gaming. Lot.

3. The last mean mentioned of Sport and Gain in Gaming is Wager: It Is called
contractus sponsionis, a Contract of promising; and is commonly used, when
there is some contest about the Truth of a Proposition, concerning something
that is, or is not in being already; or will, or will not be hereafter; both
parties agreeing, that he who holds the truth, shall have a reward, and the
other that asserted the falsehood, shall be mulcted.

The thing in it self is not absolutely unlawful or unjust: and may sometimes
be of use, to repress a foolish confidence. Also, where the engagement is only
on one hand, whereby a man obliges himself to do a thing under a penalty; for
here it may be of use, to stir up a laudable industry; provided such
obligation, wager, or agreement, be not to any matter that is sinful, (as who
shall Drink most; who shall play a Lascivious prank, or offer an injurious
abuse, etc.) provided also that it be not to the notable loss or hazard of any
man, unless it does conduce to a greater public good, (which cautions are
seldom observed in common Wagers), for in such cases the Wager becomes sinful,
and is to be altogether avoided.

Of this evil nature are the Betts commonly annexed to Gaming, and growing into
the very nature thereof: This laying of Betts is either by some of the Players
themselves, or by some standers by. If a player wagers, it is a sign that he is
rather a Gamester than a player, for that he is willing to have more put to the
Hazard, than some of the Fellow Players who are more discreet and moderate,
will adventure in the stake: but if the Betters be bystanders, they are, be
sure, more deeply tinged with Gaming; for that their winning and losing is
mostly abstracted from the Sport, which they seem not so much to value, so they
may but put money to the Hazard.

Both are bad, but this latter the worst of the two; as having Gain for its
main end, the chief essential of a vicious Gamester. In a word, whether in
play, or out of play, he that is much addicted on all occasions, to be Betting
and laying Wagers, is either already a Gamester, or fairly inclined thereunto;
and the action it self in general, may well pass under the character which was
once given it by a witty man. [Wagers are fools Arguments.]

Out of these two Lot and Wager, results (as a compound) the Gaming Lottery,
about which (says Mr G. p. 124.) The Civil Lawyers, and others are divided;
this and such like, Mr. Perkins of Witycraft, brings within the compass of
unlawful Games, as indeed (says Mr. G.) the most of them are little better;
used mostly to help and relieve either base spend thrifts, or beggarly
Bankrupts. Amesius (in his cases,) says of them, Eo modo possint forsan
Institui ut essent licita; They might perhaps be ordered so, as to be lawful;
as if there be need of contribution to some pious use, and to avoid
Inconveniences it were permitted to the Lot, who should contribute; mean
while, those that cast the Lot, must not do it illiberally, it must be without
desire to gain, only design to contribute to the use. But (says he) as they
are commonly used, they are unlawful, being composed with fallacy and deceit
for private gain, and yielding occasion for many evils. In this former sense of
Amesius, it is probable, Magistrates do sometimes grant Licenses for them; it is
not to be supposed they ever intended to have the people cheated, or to have
them nourished up in a Gaming humor. Those that sue for Licenses under specious
pretenses, (of planting a Colony, relieving Indigents, etc.) may perhaps use
plausible suggestions; as, That there is a loose sort of Gamesters, from whom
never any thing will be drawn for a good use, or public service, unless they
be met in their own way, and something suitable to their humor be proposed.
Now, whether they deal sincerely or no, I know not; but this is manifest, That
Royal Bounty and Charity is often abused to the peoples Damage. Such an
instance is in Brief gatherers, I mean those who make a Trade of it: The design
in the Grantee is noble and great, but the sordid abuse of it is sometimes
egregious. I once lived near a man who made it his business to purchase Briefs,
and then go about the Country to gather them; he was a notable Thief, for which
he came at last to the Gallows; however in the mean time, before he was fully
discovered, his Briefs were his Protection to struck the Country, and view
advantages for his Robberies. We that live at the lower end of the World, and
feel the Inconvenience of these things, may I hope without offense, humbly
crave leave to represent our Grievances, not without good hope of a redress.
Mean while, if people would consider, That men's very procuring of a License,
imports a profit to themselves, they might easily infer 'twould be a loss to
others (of which Sir, you may, if you please, make one; if not, pray stand
aside, and make Room for those that will). And having this fair warning before
hand, Si populus decipi vult, decipiatur. The thing which I disapprove is this
(not meddling with any thing that has public allowance, which I understand
not.) it is a Wager upon a Lot at very great odds; a crafty device, whereby
silly people have their eyes dazzled with the shining of slight Plate, gilt
Looking glasses, and such other Toys; and by these Baits fairly set forth
before them, have their fancies and hopes filled with Golden Mountains; and so
are incited to throw away some small parcels of their money, in expectation of
far greater advantage; in the mean while, he that keeps the Lottery, is almost
sure to become the Gainer; for the Odds of the Wager may perhaps be Twenty to
One, when there is scarce Four to One difference. As for instance; Suppose one
shilling be put to the Hazard, and the premium or prizes, (one with another) be
valued at four shillings; here the Lotterer wages his four shillings to your
one shilling that you shall not win. On the other hand, suppose there are
twenty blanks to one significant; then the Adventurer (as he is called,) wages
twenty to one that he shall win.

The Composition of these two Wagers makes one, that is 20, to 4, (or 5, to 1,)
when indeed there is no difference in the knowledge of either, (what ever be in
the confidence) unto which of the two the Lotguiding spirit for the present
will be most courteous; only be sure upon the square, it is 5, to 1, that the
one gains, and the other loses. Whether those be the exact proportions of such
Lotteries, I know not, neither care to know; being without it well enough
assured, that they are contrived to be safe on the Lotterers part, and
hazardous on the others; or else, surely the Lotterers would not follow the
trade. And this methink should sufficiently warn men, that they meddle not with
this sort of gaming.

Another Lot and wager Game is rifling, when a thing is bought with a common
stock, and then exposed for the Lot to decide, who shall have it, as, suppose
five men buy a thing for five shillings, and each man pay one shilling. Here
the Wager is 1 to 4, that he shall have it; and 4 to 1, that he shall not. The
balance in this hangs equal as to the adventure; only the desire of gain by
play, and trifling with the Lot, bring it under the vicious gaming.

Ensurance, buying a Fishers draught, and some other ways of Trading, when men
proceed in them more upon bold adventure, and trying fortune or chance, than
prudent consideration of all circumstances, are little different from a
gaming-Wager, and therefore to be avoided by prudent, and considering men.

And thus much for the Explication of the Gaming-Humor, which chiefly consists
in hazarding to Lose, with desires and hope to Gain. We shall now endeavor to
show the Inordinacy thereof. In order thereunto we shall lay down some things
to be granted, and some things to be denied.

To be Granted are.
1. That it is lawful for a man to use his money, or moneys-worth, for procuring
his Recreation; because Recreation in Time, Place, and Measure, with other due
circumstances, may be as necessary or convenient for him, as Food and Raiment,
and may be as honestly sought after. Now what has a man Money, or any good
thing for, but to use either in kind, if the nature of the thing be such; or
with its value to procure any other good thing, if it be Honest, Convenient, or
Necessary?

2. It may be also granted, that the use of Money for the end mentioned,
Recreation; may be either Expense for the convenient Utensils of play; or a
moderate Depositnm (or stake) sometimes, where the party does need to be
quickened, or more engaged herein. As suppose the party that needs Exercise, be
Aged. Melancholy, too Thoughtful, or Involved in business; such are not apt to
be so much concerned in their play, as is convenient for them. It Is not
therefore always, or absolutely sinful, to play with the hazard or expense of
money.



Yet on the other hand it must be denied,
1. That playing for money is ever lawful; that is, to make the Gain the end of
the Play. It perverts the order and nature of things so to do; it destroys the
necessary Distinction between Work and Play; it crosses the Ordination of God,
discovered in Scripture, who every where (that I can observe) assigns profit to
be the product and fruit of Labor. In all labor there is profit, Prove. 14.23.
He gathers by labor, Chapter 13.11. The hand of the diligent makes rich, Chapter
10.24. Let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he
may have, etc. Ephesians. 4.28. and many more places of this kind might be alleged.

2. I deny that any man can play for gain in faith, and therefore not without
sin; The former proposition is manifest, because faith must have a Promise for
it is foundation; But play has no promise of profit, nor increase, that I know
of; all are given to labor, and industry (as is before n^ted.) For a man to
eat and drink, and make his Soul enjoy the good of his labor (not play) this
also. I saw, that it was from the hand of God. Eccles. 2.24. But from whose
hand the gamster th^ves, let him enquire; perhaps upon due search he will find,
that the hand of Satan is in all this. To cherish his corrupt inclinations, to
debauch his conscience from the fear and awe of God, and to make him
Atheistical and Heathenish, in admiring Fortune as the giver of his good.



The latter proposition is as manifest from Romans 14 23. Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin. A general proposition applicable to all cases, and not to be
restrained to the particulars of Meats, and the worship of God there mentioned:
For, whatsoever a man does, in what kind soever, he must take care, and make
conscience therein, so as being in the way of his duty, he may have ground to
believe, that what he does is well pleasing to God, and that he may therein
expect his blessing: This only is to do a thing in faith. And thus a man, after
a tiresom industry, may recreate himself, or play in faith, expecting Gods
blessing thereon, for attaining its proper end. But in the way of Gaming, and
the gains thereof, a Curse rather than a blessing may be expected, if I rightly
understand that place, Pro. 13.11. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be
diminished; but he that gathers by labor, shall increase. If any thing
deserves the name of Vanity, I think Gaming does; when men from it do
unwarrantably expect a profit.

3. It Is denied, that young ones (of all others) have any need, power,
authority, or the least show of convenience, to warrant them in putting Money,
or Moneys worth, to hazard in their play but many and manifest motives to the
contrary. For,

1. The vehemence and activity of their passions are commonly too great of
themselves, so as they need not the stake or Wager to excite them. Indeed the
dull Souls beforementioned, the over-worn with business, and toomuch involved
in it, may sometimes (as is before noted) use this hazard, to avocate their
minds: But youth needs no avocation from business; it is work enough for them to
keep their minds thereunto.

2. Young ones under age have not that propriety in Money, as to Lay it out, or
put it to hazard, otherwise than as they are directed. Men give their Children
Money, as God gives all good things to men; not to lose his own propriety
therein; it is his Corn, his Wine, his Wool, etc. both after, as well as before
he bestows them on us; he gives them not, that men should spend them as they
list; but according to rule, and so as they must be accountable for them. So
prudent Parents, or Guardians, put Money into the hands of youth, perhaps to
try and discover their inclinations, But never by express order, or any
reasonable presumptive concession, to spend it in any evil course, to learn
thereby to Game, and play it away; and where this is done without such
permission, it is a kind of Robbing Father and Mother, contrary to Pro. 28.24.
The reason is, because herein they embezle the parents propriety without their
consent. And so there is injustice in the case.

3. Again, Youth has not the discretion to consider the value of Money. They
neither can Earn it themselves, nor consider with what difficulty others do.
That may be gotten by hard labor, and sollicitous care, which they unadvisedly
spend, and carelessly put to hazard. It Is a great incongruity, that play should
wast what industry has wrought for. They neither know what Money costs, nor what
it can procure. They consider not, how useful, and helpful that Money might be
to others that are indigent persons, who can hardly eat Bread by the sweat of
their brows; so that hereupon grows a contempt of the poor, and a hardness of
heart toward those that are in distress. Tell a young Gallant in the fluster
of his Gaming, how sad it is with the now persecuted French Protestants, that
have fled for their Religion and lives, and lost their estates; how unable they
are to set upon any employment for want of stocks to begin with.

Tell him farther, that so much as is sometimes staked or betted at once, at
least so much as is more commonly won and lost at a sitting, would set up one
or more of such distressed Families in an honest employment, which might afford
them a comfortable maintenance; bid him consider Gods Poor; bid him think of
his own Country laborers, their great pains for a poor maintenance, their
sorry Cottage, mean habits, penniless purses, and hard fare; and yet that they
provide for him the fattest Dainties, and the finest of the Wheat to feed on;
That the contemptible Clown is of the same Clay with himself, and that there is
no difference betwixt them, but that which Gods holy Providence has made, etc.
Tell him these or such like things that might move him to Compassion, and what
will his Answer be, but Tush, what care I; let them go as they are; I have
other employment for my money? etc. This ugly hard-heartedness is bad in all,
but worse in those who setenderness of nature, and Genteile Education should
render them more compassionate.

4. Youth is in the way of forming habits which will influence all their future
Lives; Boys play, is men's earnest; small matters may begin what greater may
unhappily end. As a young Thief may begin with stealing Farthings, and after by
Degrees grow on to the greatest outrage; so the young Gamester may covet,
lurch, Quarrel about a small stake; may lavish, hector, and adventure in pence,
till at last by this means the gaming humor be rooted in him, and then Crowns,
Angels, Pounds, (when they come to hand) are no more valued; yea, their whole
Estates, how great soever, are of no more consideration than the Childrens
Hop-stones. If the Lads cannot, I hope the Parents will consider how they
indulge Pins and Points, to lead the way, that Lands and Tenements may not
follow after.

Add to this, that Gaming in Youth spoils their Temper for Con^erse; 'twill
render them so peevish, cross, quarresiom, deceitful, and such other untoward
Dispositions will it beget, that no man with comfort can have to do with them;
for (as is before noted) Gaming does naturally conduce to exalt all the
passions above the due Decorum; a thing that is very uncouth for Society.

5. Youth does little consider the value of their time, because they are apt to
promise themselves a long life yet to come, whereas, alas! one future moment is
more than they can reasonably pretend to: Now as all play and sport is a
pastime, and is apt to beguile us by its pleasure; so none comes nigh to Gaming
in this respect. Some exercises which men call play, are very tedious wasters
of Time; Chess has an ill Character for this, (besides that it is rather a
tiresom study, than a cheerful sport) worse are Lot games (as is before noted).
But worst of all is any Play whatsoever, when Gaming for money is exercised
therein. Play for money does always draw on Game after Game, even to
unseasonable hours of the night, as well as most hours of the day. The Winner
cares not how long he plays while his hand is in, and the others stock shall
bear his charges, The Loser also (still hoping for better luck) is loath to give
over, and go away by the loss.

6. And lastly (not to mention more) Youth is in greatest danger of had Company
and Acquaintance; and where can they have worse than the Gaming Humor leads to?
At Gaming Places you may meet those who will rather pad than want for a stock
to game with; hence the many Robberies near Gaming, Revelling and idle times,
which all men hear of, and some do feel to their loss; yea, it is hardly seen,
that there is a vicious Person in any kind whatsoever, but he has this
commonly added to the Rest, that he is a Gamester. In those very bad men, it is
the usual Method of Insinuation, to invite to play a game, and pass an hour.
Dice, Cards, and Tables, in Gaming-Ordinaries are at hand, and custom has made
it familiar to play with any, tho never seen before. Here the Acquaintance
begins; and where it will end, God knows; but the foolish young man does not
consider it. And thus much of youngsters gaming.

4. It is denied, That young or old may put their money to hazard by play with
offense. Here I must refer you back to what is said of the lusory ^lot in this
respect, and what Mr. G. says of play in the General. Only I shall now add,
that great occasion of Offense is given by Money-Gaming, both in old and young.

When Elder Persons, who should have more discretion; when Magistrates, or
Ministers, or other exemplary Persons, shall upon public Bowling-Greens be
seen and observed, betting, staking and wagering, beyond the measure needful
and before allowed; Oh, how does it encourage their inferiors to be engaging in
the like unwarrantable practice? How often do young ones when they are rebuked,
alledg for excuse the example of graver Persons? Thus comes the offense of
stumbling to weaker Persons, who may hereby fall (perhaps) to their Ruin.
Hereupon follows the offense of grief; especially to Parents, Masters,
Guardians and Tutors, that such evil example should thus be given, and their
Charge be thereby misled. Thus at home; and as for people abroad, they
generally look upon young persons with expectation how they will prove, when if
they find them inclined to gaming, they presently entertain bad thoughts of
them; so early is their repute blasted in the bud, and their good name is gone
ere they have any great name in the world.

5. It Is denied, That any should play for more than what they are ready and
willing, so often to impart to others necessities; else it may be charged on
their consciences, that they mind more their own pleasure, than the Afflictions
of Joseph (Amos 6.6.) for that they were ready to expend much more that way
than this. King James in his (...) advises his Son, to play only for
recreation, and resolve to hazard the loss of all that ye play; for that cause
play no more than you care to cast among pages.

If any, having a plentiful Estate, should alledg, They can well spare what
they adventure at Play; I say, It were most Prudent and Pious to stoop the brim
of their overflowing-Cup toward that side as may be some way serviceable to
both God and Man; as might give Drink to the thirsty Soul; That their abundance
might be a supply to the others want, according to the counsel of the Holy
Ghost (2 Cor. 8.14.) and consequently glorify God (as Chap. 9.11.) being
enriched to all bountifulness, which causes through the Relieved, thanksgiving
to God. But, alas! It is a matter of sad consideration, That they who spend
most on their Lusts, and (particularly) are most large in their Gaming, are
generally most penurious when a due object of Charity is presented. I say, [a
due object,] for they may be lavish enough in a prodigal humor, upon Parasites,
and lend Rascals that hang about them; when both their Hearts and Hands are
shut fast, where God calls for their Munificence.

Now, to dissuade from this wicked impertinence, I shall conclude the present
Discourse, with proposing to Consideration what may be gathered from the
abovesaid particulars concerning the inordinacy of Affections that is
ingredient to the Gaming-humor.

It Is a thing compounded of contradictions and absurdities; prodigality and
covetousness do here kiss each other; Lavishness in the Adventure, yet sordid
Greediness in the hopes of Gain. It Is notable Sagacity, yet great Idleness;
much Art, and much Folly; Ars iners, may be better applied to it, than to any
thing that I do know. But true Art is long, and Life is short; Time is
precious, and Money may be put to better use.

Therefore I would advise all, that will take counsel, That they put and keep
every thing in its right channel. Let Play be Play, and Work be Work; either
Play for recreation only, in order to business (its proper end) or let it
alone; for otherwise it is good for nothing, but to waste Time. Let business
only aim at Gain; so is the order of Nature and Gods Ordination (as is before
Noted). To let Play encroach upon the end of Labor, is to cast a scorn upon
that threat of God, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou
return unto the ground, (Genesis 3.19.) Tho you see many extravagant in the
Gaming-vanity, yet follow not a multitude to do evil, (Exodus 23.2.) Are those
many, of the better sort of Men? Are they the best Moralists you know? Is it
the common practice of the generality of those that fear God, and consider
their ways? Think of the way of good men commended to our imitation, ( Prove.
2.20.) yea, rather think of the greatest and best example, our Blessed Savior,
who was wont to put Money to better uses. We read of Money procured by a
Miracle to pay Tribute to avoid offense, tho nothing was due; But our
Gamesters, by abuse of their Money, care not if they offend either God or man:
These drive a Trade which pays neither Tax nor Toll, Excise nor Custom, and is
no way useful to either King or Country. Our Savior had in his Society a Bag
kept to Relieve the Poor, and buy Necessaries: And after him, his Disciples
were willing to impart what they had to the Poor, that begged Alms; silver and
gold have I none, (else would I give it thee) but such as I have, give I unto
thee, (Act. 3.6.) What would a Gamester say? Silver I have by heaps, and Gold
by handfuls, but not one Mite for the Temple-Treasury. Our Lord's stock was
small in this World; but there is not the least hint, that either he, or his,
used Gaming to increase it. When Tully prosecuted Cataline and his Accomplices,
he charge them with Gaming, Aleatores, adulteri, impuri, impudicique omnes:
And when he would spit fire in Anthonies face, he lays to his charge, That he
was a Dicer himself, and his House a common receptacle of such. So certainly
the Pharisees, who from Christ's innocent sociableness, and moderate
refreshment, took occasion to reproach him as a wine-bibber and a glutton,
would doubtless have called him Gamster too, if the least pretense could have
been had to fasten it upon him. Now he that says he abides in him, ought to
walk even as he walked, (1 John 2.6.) ought to act like him, in what he is
imitable; and forbear, like him, every thing that is evil, or has the
appearance thereof. This is another kind of Argument than that weak one, [we
read not that he laughed, ergo we must not:] which I could fully clear; but that
I love not to write long Books, and Gamsters care as little to read them. In a
word: think of the great Account we must render of all our Talents
(particularly of Time and Money) to the Sovereign Lord and Judge of all. Will it
not sound well then to say, I often wanted time for secret Prayer, and as often
found time for Gaming, even from Noon to midnight? My worldly business have
frequently hindered my Devotions; but I ordered it so, they should never
interrupt my Sports. Such a Day I denied Pence to thy distressed Saints; and
the same Day among Rufflers adventured Shillings or Pounds to satisfy the
Gaming-humor.

But if these glorious considerations do dazzle your Bat-like Eyes, so as (I
fear) you cannot look toward them; do but look a while on Temporary things,
and see the folly of this project to Thrive by. Cannot the Gamsters observe,
That the God of this World has a running Cash, a Gaming-stock in motion? And
how he Balances gain and loss only to uphold the Trade? Many have Sold their
Inheritances, ( one foolish sinner destroys much good, Eccl. 9.18.) But who
ever Purchased an Estate by Gaming? The subtle Fiend is like the Butler's-
Box, whoever loses, he wins: he gets men's Estates to be added to his stock; he
gets men's Time; and (which is worst) he gets better hold of men's Souls, and
wrests out of them all manner of Conscience that should any way deter them from
the vilest wickedness. Have you never heard (what was before noted), That
Robbings and Burglaries are most frequent toward the time of Bacchanals and
Saturnals, when Gaming Widgeons and Wood-cocks come most in season? And why is
it, but that the Bullies may be furnished with a Trading-stock, in hope of
considerable Gains? But, alas! after the time is over, they must to their old
Padding-Trade again, even to repair their Losses.

Well: but you will say, Then surely some do get, and give over Gaming to
prevent their Loss again; some Purchase Estates, and so draw out of the Devils
stock (as you will have it called,) or else, that Stock would exceed all
Bounds: The greatest part of the Sale money of so many Estates, and the Prey of
so many Rohberies, running still into it; besides a considerable sum by
Apprentices cheating their Masters; and other by-ways: Surely it must
excessively increase, and even transcend a Kings Revenue.

I Answer,

It would so indeed, had not the Great Master thereof some other Outlets for
what is superfluous; What the Gaming-House leaves, the Tap-House, Tavern, and
Whore-House receives: for Gamesters seldom want other expensive Vices. And
(according to that saying of some) what is gotten over the Devils back, is
commonly spent under his belly: And therefore, tho the incomes be great, yet
the outgoings being answerable thereto, the Gaming-stock is no farther
increased, than Satan sees fit to carry on the business.

But perhaps our dull-ey'd Gamester cannot see Reason in this neither. What
shall I say farther? If you cannot behold either God or Devil, will you please
a while to turn your Eye upon Men, and consider, how low your Reputation runs
with them, tho your Gains by Gaming are very great. In all other ways of
getting Riches, men's Credit increases, as their Estates do; but here it is quite
otherwise: for let a Gamster get this Day a Thousand Pounds, yet no Prudent man
(that knows it) will trust him for a Groat; for ere the next Morrow, it is as
probable he may be as many Pounds worse than nothing. But, alas! too often a
Credit is gotten before this vile humor is discovered, whereby many an honest
man goes Mourning by the loss: Hence grievous complaints of some, That they
cannot carry on their honest Trades, for that their Money is gotten into
Hucksters hands: Such, upon inquest, perhaps may find out their Debtors in
Alsatia, a Prison, a Sanctuary under Protection; but they shall find their
Money, I know not where, nor when. One Story I have Reason to remember, of a
young man that carried himself very Civilly, and made a fair Profession of
serious Religion; he thereby got Friends, and by their Credit, a Stock to set
up a gainful Trade: But he proved after, a secret Gamster, (for any hole will
suit a Deed of Darkness:) and that Civil Gunpowder (as one calls it) suddenly
blew up the Man, and his House, and left all his Friends in the lurch; I my
self Paid about 200 l. of his Debts, which I had never done, had my Prudent
Father beforehand discerned the least appearance of the Gaming-humor. Game is
a Gulf that swallows All, and is never satisfied: Whoring and Drunkenness may
have their fill; but Gaming never: It may well be reckoned among the
Horse-leech Daughters, that cry, Give, give; and say not, It is enough.

I know men pretend to be able to govern themselves: But how shall that be?
Shall it be by Grace? I fear there are but few gracious Gamsters: Besides, if
any be guided by Grace, it is according to the Rule of Gods Word: but that is
against them, if the Scriptures beforementioned be pertinently applied; No,
no, such Scriptures they consider not, or cast behind their backs: Now if they
throw by their Rule, no wonder if they draw crooked Lines. If men do but enter
into Gaming-ground, they go out of Gods Camp, and from under his Protection;
they enter into Satan's Tents: and it is not to be expected, but he should
unreasonably and unmercifully drive them. So that Grace will not help them; and
they must stand on their own Legs.

How then? Shall it be by Reason? Alas! the Gamster is no man of Reason, but a
mere Bundle of Passions: and where the Passions are Masters of the Pit, Reason
can make no Play; unbridled Passions run away with Reason. When these immorally
mad men, have in the course of the Game, their Passions sufficiently heated and
excited, then have at all; the Manor of R. against B. Castle; or what not?
King James is said to have told one Greenfield (for so, or like it, did his
name sound) when he observed him to Play very high. That if he proceeded at
that Rate, he would soon Play away All his Green Fields; which accordingly he
did: And after his Two or three thousand pound per annum was gone, if he could
by sending about his man with Letters to his Kindred, and former Acquaintance,
procure by borrowing (as he called it) any small scraps of Money, away they
went presently after the rest, at the Gaming-House. Now where was this man's
Reason all the while? Why did not his Reason rule his exorbitant Humor? Alas!
because it could not. Such a man as is fully imbued, and impregnated with the
Gaming-Humor; as he had no Reason to begin or continue the Trade, so no reason
will persuade him to give it over: And therefore I shall now say no more unto
him.

But to those that are not yet quite spoiled, I shall offer two or three words
of advice. You see the Oddness and Extravagancy of the Gaming-Humour; have you
a mind to leave it? Then first beg the Grace of God to enable you to subdue the
vehemence of your passions; to compose and settle your mind from vanity; to
shun (as a pest) all evil company, and to give you a wise Consideration of your
Time and Talents, for which you must render an account. This done, let Reason
work, and you may perhaps need to exercise prudence in leaving it off by
degrees; because all hasty attempts to break a Custom, do usually prove
ineffectual; nothing is more ordinary among the rank Gamsters, than when they
have greatly lost, to Swear and Vow they will never touch a Card or Die more,
and perhaps bind themselves under a Curse if they do it; and yet the very next
day forget all this, and fall to the trade again, as if they had never resolved
on the contrary. If therefore your habit be too strong for a present discharge
(I speak as to Men, and in a Moral way, for in Divinity this gradual proceeding
will scarce hold good, for that true Repentance imports a present and total
breaking off an evil Course. But in a Moral way, I say,) you may for some
stated Time play for something to be spent in commone, or to make a
common-stock, that may be for the use of both: hereby half the Stake is gone.
Then after that you may Play for what shall be given to the Poor: So, tho
something be lost to quicken the Play (if there be need) yet nothing will be
won to nourish the Game. And at last I hope you will come to Play for nothing,
but only Recreation, to fit you for better and more serious Employment.

So will the use and comfort of Play remain when the Sport is ended: So no
Estates will be endangered or wasted, nor too much Time spent: no Credit
cracked: no Repute lost, nor Conscience Seared, or Wounded; But Play will
attain its natural and proper end; namely, To prepare for further Work, and
Business.

FINIS.

