MOTIVES TO Godly Mourning and Rejoicing; OR, Christ Jesus HIS KIND INVITATION
TO Sinners to Repent.

PSALM CVI. 4, 5. Remember me, O Lord, according to the favor that thou
bear unto thy People: O visit me with thy Salvation!

That I may see the Good of thy Chosen, that I may rejoice in the Gladness of
thy Nation, that I may glory with thine Inheritance.

PSALM. LI. 10, 11, 12, 13. Create in me a clean Heart, O Lord, and renew a
right Spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me by thy free Spirit:

Then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto
thee.

London, Printed for the Author. School.

TO THE Reverend, Pious, and Faithful Minister of Christ, Mr. John Shower.
Reverend Sir,
I Beg your Patronage to this new Brood, which I found in England, though (as I
suppose) its original Father brought it to light in another Land: I found it
clothed in Latin Apparel, and I have put an English Coat upon it; and I hope
that thereby it may be kindly received by many that are in England, who have a
savor of the things of God; as for others, that know not God, I doubt whether
they will cast their Eyes upon it: But if any that are such, take a fancy to
look upon it, God grant it may do them good, and that they may be thereby drawn
to the Love of Christ Jesus, being allured by his sweet Entisements and
Invitations. It was sweet to me in the Original, and I hope it may be so to
others in the Translation. I hope you will not be offended that I have made a
Dedication of this Book to you without your Consent; for if I had requested you
to give your Consent to accept of a Dedication, I doubt whether you would have
given it; but having dedicated it to you unawares, I hope you cannot be angry
for my giving you that, which, before it was given, you had no occasion to
refuse. What success it may have, I am uncertain; but I suffer it to range and
seek its fortune in the World, as the Levit of Bethlem-judah did, who wandered
up and down to see if he could find a place, and at length was kindly
entertained by Micah, and afterward was made a Father and a Priest to a Family
and Tribe of Israel. But if any desire to know why I made this Dedication to
you; there were many Causes why I should do so: One of which is, The great
Kindness that you have showed to my self: Job said, the Blessing of him that
was almost ready to perish came upon me; and I made the Widow's Heart to sing.
What Misery was I in, through Poverty and Necessity, when your Kindness, and
Charity, and Liberality, did afford me such seasonable Relief, that it
resembled upon many accounts a Resurrection from the dead? Therefore I gladly
embrace this Opportunity of giving a public Testimony of my Thankfulness, that
has a long time lain hid in my Heart, and is now triumphantly glad to show it
self in the Light of the Day, and the Sight of the Sun. Moreover, your Name
being in the Frontispiece of this Book, I hope it may allure many that have sat
under the shadow of your Ministry, to pay some Deference of respect to it, and
not to grudge the charge of Buying it, nor the labor of Viewing it.

Sir, your Name is famous in England; for in the Success of your Ministry you
have surpassed many others of your Brethren, that are elder than you. You are
like young Elihu, that in Wisdom excelled the Friends of Job, that were aged
and gray headed Men, much elder than Job's Father: And in external Honors God
has exalted you above many of your Brethren; so that your Name is as young
David's was, much set by, before he was exalted to the Throne and Dignity of a
King.

Sir, what I have said to you, I have not said in Flattery, but in the
Sincerity of my Heart; and therefore I hope these external Testimonies of the
Thankfulness that was a long time hid within my Heart, cannot offend you.

The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

I am Your hearty Friend and Servant, and Brother in Christ, W. H.

To the READER.
I Am a Man that has passed through many Calamities in the days of the Years,
that I have lived in the World. My Mother brought me forth in Scotland, half a
Year after Cromwell had passed through Scotland with Fire and Sword; and it is
likely my Mother was at that time, by reason of those bloody and cruel Wars,
affrighted with many Amazements when I was in her Womb; and, I suppose, that
has occasioned, that I have been frequently subject to sudden Astonishments
and Consternations, and Panick Fears, from my Childhood. When I was under
Sixteen Years I flourished with outward Prosperity, and almost constantly
delighted my self with the abundance of Peace; being beloved and honored of
all that knew me far and near: Which occasioned me to be puffed up in my
Spirit; till Affliction of several Kinds sent of God for my Good, had brought
down that Vanity of my Mind. When I was fourteen or fifteen Years of age, I
frequented a School at Rotterdam; where I greatly profited in variety of
Learning, and attained to a great insight of the Poetical Faculty: After I had
been at that School, I was a while at Leyden; where I studied Logic and
Metaphysick, though at that time also I labored diligently in prying into the
Mysteries of Poesy. After I had been a while at Leyden, I went into Scotland;
where I studied Philosophy at Edinburgh, and received the Degree of Master of
Arts. And at that time also I diligently studied and exercised Poesy, and made
a Poem on Job, which has been well approved by many learned Men: I made all
that Poem, before I was twenty Years old; for my Spirit was then much
strengthened by general respect, that was showed to me by many of those with
whom I conversed, and by the Kindness of my Brother in law, that married one of
my Sisters: He was a Man eminent both in Wisdom and Piety, and maintained me
above a Year on his own Cast; and was then kinder to me, than was my own
Father, out of whose Bowels I proceeded. After I was eighteen Years of Age I
went to my Father's House, who was then, and had been a long time, a Minister
in Rotterdam; and the space of two or three Years I lived on my Father's
Charges, and at that time I was greatly afflicted in my Spirit, partly through
my Father's Churlishness and Unkindness, and partly through inward Griefs and
Discontents of Mind, that I suffered through some great and grievous
Afflictions that befell me: At that time I was much in Prayer; I was often
fervently calling upon my God with Weeping and Supplication; and though then I
did not discern, that God took any notice of the Prayers I made to him in those
great Afflictions, yet since that time I have had clear Evidences, that I did
not call upon God in vain. After my Father had, upon his Cost maintained me two
or three Years, I traveled into England; where I suffered Poverty several
Years, and did often eat Bread of Affliction, and drank Water of Affliction:
Yet in that time I had some sweet Intervals of Divine Consolation, when I had
Opportunities occasionally to preach in the days of King Charles the Second:
For it was a great Joy to me at that time, that I had Opportunities to serve
Christ Jesus, though I suffered sometimes Persecution. But one of the things
that greatly allayed my Sorrows and Discontents, was the Comfort and Divine
Consolation, I received by having heard sometimes occasionally that great
Minister of Christ, Thomas Cole, who died a while since: For in hearing him
preach, at sometimes such Beams of Divine Light did shine forth upon my Soul,
such glorious Manifestations of the Love of God did over-shadow me, that it
made many Miseries, that I then and since have endured, to become light and
easy: For in the strength of those Discoveries of the Love of God in Christ
Jesus, I have walked many days in the Light of God's Countenance. But because I
have been guilty of some Infirmities through violent Temptations, wherewith God
has suffered Satan to assault me; some, if they are not of a charitable
Spirit, may think these things are Hypocritical Dreams, und Chimerical
Imaginations; but I know him, whom I have believed: But these things I have
publicly declared, that none of those that fear God may be ashamed for my
sake. If you ask the cause why I have given this Book the title of Motives to
Godly Mourning and Rejoicing: This is one Cause thereof, because Godly Sorrow
is the Seed of Godly Joy and Rejoicing, as the Saints have often found by their
Experience, to whose Experience I may appeal. Another Cause is this, Because I
desire that wicked Wretches, who have lived without God in the World, be
convinced, that if they will heartily apply themselves to Godliness, they will
find that Joy and Pleasure in the Ways of God, not only in the World to come,
but also in this World, which will greatly surpass all the Joys and Pleasures
that they have found in the Ways of Sin, and in their Estrangement from God.
Verily I wonder, wretched Sinner, that has lived in Enmity to God, how thou
can eat or drink, or sleep in Peace, when the Sword of Vengeance hangs over
thy Head, and there is but a step between thee and Hell, and everlasting fire.
But after thou have returned to God by repentance, and sheltered thy self by
Faith under the Wings of Christ Jesus, then thou may have just cause of
Rejoicing: I have therefore published this Book to awaken thee, and stir thee
up to Repentance, and to fly to Christ, the Refuge of Sinners, that thou may
have much Joy and Peace in believing in this World, and enter into everlasting
Joys and Felicity in the perfect Enjoyment of God and Christ in the World to
come.

MOTIVES to Godly Mourning and Rejoicing; or, CHRIST JESUS his Kind Invitation
to Sinners to Repent.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Grief of Jesus Christ, lamenting the Stubbornness of a
Sinner.
I THE Only begotten Son of God, the Power and Wisdom of God, do cry in the
Streets, and lift up my Voice in the midst of the People; for I have nourished
and brought up the Sons of Men, but they have despised me. O Man! I have
written the sweet Law of my New Testament in thy inward parts, and have planted
it in the midst of thy Heart. And yet thou have had no desire to my immaculate
Law, which converts the Souls of Sinners; neither have thou regarded the
saithful Testimony of my Eternal Love. Thou have went far away from me, with
the Transgressour Adam thy Father; and thou have hid thy self from Me, thy most
gracious God and Savior, when I walked in the Garden in the cool of the Day.
What means this, thou estranged Son? Whither flyest thou from the Face of thy
most merciful God and Redeemer? Am I a cruel Lord, because thou flyest speedily
away from me, and seek to find a better Master? Consider what thou do, and
how far thou go from thy own Salvation; for without cause thou hate thy
most precious Remedy and Liberty. Thy unhappy Soul is become as a Widow; which,
if thou would close with Divine Grace, might remain faithful to the Covenant
of her Espousals, and enjoy the Privileges of my most Sweet Love. And yet she
has abhorred me her most faithful Lover, and her Enemies have been enriched
with her Spoils. How is the Gold of my ancient Love become dim, the
bright-shining Color of a good Conversation is changed, the Stones of my
Temple and Sanctuary are scattered upon the top of every Street: Thou did not
delight in the Habitation of my City Jerusalem, which I have loved, and thou
have been reckoned among the Citizens, which my Soul hates. Woe to the Soul,
that departs from me! for the Terrors of Death will set themselves in array
against it, and the Pains of Hell will take hold of it. The Lion's Whelps will
rage against it, and roar after it, that they may snatch it, and take it for
Meat thrown to them by God. For since thou did set up the Darkness of Sin
instead of the Light of my Grace, and there came upon thee a most dismal night
of my Anger, all the Beasts of the Insernal Wood pass by, and make haste with
open Mouth to devour thy Apostate Soul. Therefore, at least from this time,
call unto me, and say, Thou art my God and my Guide; and now I will no more fly
from thee. O most gracious God! I have wandered, being a Vagabond, like Cain,
out of thy sight; and I have served other Gods, in whom I have no Salvation nor
Deliverance. Behold, I return unto thee from a grievous Bondage: I seek for thy
most lovely Light from the Darkness and Shadow of Death, which has terrified
me. I know of a truth, being convinced by Experience, that there is no good
thing out of thee, the Son of the most amiable, and most high God, to whom I
consecrate my inward Parts.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Sweetness of Jesus Christ calling a Sinner to
Repentance.
I Wish, my Son, that thou would prize my Friendship, which is better than
Gold, and that thou would hearken with the Ears of a contrite and humble
Heart unto my still Voice, whereunto the Rocks are moved. O Ephraim! I as a
nursing Father take care of thee, and my great and most faithful Mercy strives
with the Hardness of thy stony Heart. Thou according to thy Hardness, and
impenitent Heart, resistest my Spirit, which is sweeter than the Honey; and I
according to the Riches of infinite Goodness, endeavor to mollify thy inward
parts with my secret and innumerable Inspirations. Thou flyest from me, who am
pursuing thee not for Hatred, but for design of thy Salvation: And I meet thee
flying away as it were by lying in wait, that I may embrace thee with stretched
forth Arms, and may overcome thy Cruelty with my Infinite Mercy. For which
cause the Heavens and the Earth wonder at the Clemency and Sweetness of their
Creator, who watches so carefully over a most unthankful Sinner, who is not
willing to take my sweet Yoke upon him. How long shall thy hard Heart kick
against the Prick of my most strong Love? Will thou always resist the
unconceivable Love of thy God? I could have damned thee by my Justice, because
thou did wickedly, and brakest my Yoke, and said, I will not serve: And yet
I suffered thee in much Patience, and desire of thy Eternal Life, if perhaps
thou would turn unto me, and be reconciled to my most merciful Father. Why
then do thou tarry, most beloved Son? Why delayest thou from day to day to
return unto my most sweet Peace and Love? Suffer me, my Son, suffer me to
dissolve thy Ice with the hot burning Fire of my Love, and to renew thy
Deformed Soul, according to the Pattern of the only begotten Son of God. O
Offspring of Adam, how long shall I suffer you! O wonderful thing, hidden from
the Wise and the Prudent of the World, who have shut their Ears least they
should hear my Heart-warning Speech! I the Son of the most High, stand at thy
door and knock, desiring to enter in, and fill thy House with unspeakable good
things; and yet it seems grievous to thee to give Entertainment to God thy
Redeemer and Friend. Verily if thou should once knock at the Gate of my
House, I would hasten to open to thee at the first Knock, as I opened to David
my Servant when he groaned at the Rebuke of Nathan my Prophet. Therefore, my
dearly beloved Son, let my Counsel please thee; and with seasonable Repentance
return unto me, thy peaceable King; and I will love thee as a most
tenderhearted Mother, and will embrace thee, and nourish thy Infancy with my
most pleasant Milk.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Goodness of God, and his Readiness to forgive.
WHither flyest thou, dearly beloved Son, who have grievously offended me? Have
I been a barren Wilderness unto thee, because thou say in thy Heart, I have
departed, and I will no more return unto thee. Will a Virgin forget her Attire,
or a Bride her Nuptial Ornament? Why then has thy Soul, which I have espoused
unto my self with the price of my Blood, forsaken me, and forgotten me days
without number? I am Goodness it self, which with its Sweetness, feeds all
Creatures, than which nothing more lovely can be conceived; and yet through thy
great Folly thou seek Good out of me. My Son, consider my Goodness,
wherewith Rocks are softened, and be thou mollified: Neither believe the false
Prophets, who foretell false Joys besides me. Verily, if I am the chief Good, of
necessity whatsoever thou seek out of me, is not good for thee, though thou
alone should possess all the Kingdoms of the World, and all things desirable
unto carnal Eyes. It is commonly said, Good is that which all design; and yet
thou being led aside by a great Error, art enticed with the pleasure of things
that have the false appearance of Goodness; but the true eternal and
unchangeable Good, thou foolishly forsakest. O that thou were wise, and had
Understanding to consider thy Latter-end! O Son, follow not strange Gods! for
surely they will turn thy Heart away from true Wisdom: Thou shall look for
Light and not see it, neither shall thou behold the Dawning of the Day. Let my
pure Law cleave unto thy inward Parts, and hearken unto the whispering Voice of
my Secret Teaching, and the Catholic Faith, with which I have enlightened thee.
Behold, thou believe with a sincere Faith, that I am Infinite Goodness,
Beauty, and Wisdom, with which only the Heart of Man can be satisfied: Whither
then hastnest thou, whilst thou offendest me, but unto Infinite Wickedness,
Filthiness, and Folly, with which thy Soul will be defiled? Is it not greater
Wisdom to adhere unto me, and to be illuminated and satisfied with the Breasts
of my Consolation, than to be so Hunger-starved as not to have a full Meal of
the Husks of Swine in the midst of my Vagabond, and Fugitive Enemies? Return, O
prodigal Son, unto thy rest, and I will embrace thee, when thou returnest from
a far Country; and I will say unto my Servant as soon as I see thee, Bring
hither speedily the best Robe, put a Ring upon his Hand, and Shoes upon his
Feet: For my Bowels will yern upon my dearly beloved Son, whom I have begotten;
and I will rejoice at thy Conversion as he that finds much Spoil. For I
delight in showing Mercy; and by reason of the Greatness of my Goodness, my
Soul melts at the Groans of Repenting Sinners, and at the Misery and Sighing
of the Poor. Son, remember how tenderhearted I am; whereby thou may learn
how great is the Multitude of my Goodness and Sweetness. Read my holy
Scriptures, and thou will wonder at my Readiness to show Mercy, and to forgive
Sinners, and to comfort the Afflicted: Whereby thou will understand that I am a
good Lord, and wilt fear to depart from me, as Death uses to be feared. I
never lifted up my Spear against the Man that was willing to serve my most
gracious Father, though he had sinned most grievously. Once David groaned;
saying, I have sinned; and immediately, I put away his Sin. The Publican, who
had greatly offended me, accused himself with a few Sighs; and presently he
went down to his House justified and joyful in Heart. The wicked Servant owed
me Ten thousand Talents; who falling down craved Mercy of me, and I sent him
away free, and forgave him all the debt. The Woman that was taken in Adultery
stood in fear, and was instantly accused in my sight. And I answering her very
sweetly, delivered her from Condemnation. I showed a loving Countenance to
Magdalen the Sinner, and presently forgave her; so that the Pharisee, who had
invited me, wondered. The Thief that was crucified with me, melted my Heart with
one word, and immediately was made Partaker of my Kingdom. Wherefore then is
not my Goodness, which is evidenced by so many Proofs, acceptable to the Sons
of Adam, but they seek strange Consolations? Shun, O my Son, the Societies of
Sinners, and by True Repentance seek my Face.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Wisdom of God, from which a Man by Sinning departs.
O How foolishly have thou departed from me, my Son, with Adam thy Father, who
endeavored by the forbidden Tree to become like God, knowing Good and Evil!
This is not the way of my Wisdom, which savours very sweetly to the Palate of
the Heart. I Wisdom, who have proceeded from the Mouth of the most High, am a
most beautiful Light, who do illuminate with everlasting Brightness the Minds
of little ones, who willingly commit themselves to my Discipline. But those
that are puffed up, and presumptuous, I cast away from my Presence, that they
may sit in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, and may not know how to discern
between their left Hand and their Right. Woe unto Sinners, whom their own
Wickedness has blinded, lest they should behold me the Sun of Righteousness,
and Master of Wisdom; under whose Instruction they might learn in a moment the
Secrets of Heaven, and might become more learned, than if they knew how to
number the Stars of Heaven, and the Sand that lies on the Seashore. Verily,
though a Sinner, who departs from me, knew all manner of Learning that is
taught in the Universities of the World, he would yet know nothing; because he
knows not, in whom are all the Treasures of the Wisdom of God. And though he
should speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, he would be esteemed as an
Infant in my Heavenly City, because he knows not the Word of God, who makes the
Tongues of Infants eloquent. Seeing then these things are so, what meanest
thou, my Son, to bewilder thy self in the various Sciences of Men, in which
there is no Salvation, or Satisfaction? Thou being now wearied, return unto me
the Fountain of Wisdom, which is sweeter than Honey, and I will give thee to
drink, and thy Bowels shall be enlarged. Thy Understanding can rest in me only,
therefore labor not in vain in seeking lying Masters, whom I have not taught.
Fly out of the midst of Babylon, and shun the innumerable Anxieties, with which
thy Heart is distracted; and I will lead thee into the Wilderness, and nourish
thee, and teach thee my Goodness Discipline, and Knowledge; so that thou shall
understand more than the Ancients, and excel all the Magicians of Pharaoh, and
Soothsayers of the Chaldeans. Take away the Filth of thy Mind, dearly beloved
Son, and be thou clean, that with pure Eyes thou may behold my most clear
Light. And I will give unto thee to know my Mysteries, and to be inflamed with
the Love of eternal Wisdom, which delights pure Hearts with unspeakable Joys:
Take a taste of my Sweetness, and thy Eyes shall be opened to behold my
Mysteries, which are more desirable than Gold and precious Stones, and sweeter
than Honey, and the Honeycomb. And thy broken Bones shall rejoice, which I will
fill with most pure Delights, which I have prepared for Penitents, who return
from a strange Land unto the lovely City of Jerusalem, where they treasure up
their Riches.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Peace of God, which is lost by Sin.
I A peaceable King, who am magnified above all the Kings of the whole Earth; I
do make my Friends Partakers of the Peace, which passes all Understanding. For
when a Man is in the State of Grace, I dwell in him, as in the Nuptial
Bedchamber, where all things are at Peace; and therein is tasted the most
sweet Peace of the Children of God, and therein is heard the most sweet Harmony
of the Parts of Man, conspiring into one consent of my Law; which that Man well
understood, who said: O God, I will sing unto thee a new Song, on a Psaltery of
ten Strings will I sing Praise to thee. This Peace is more precious than Gold,
and more desirable than all the Honors, Riches, and Comforts of the World:
Which if the Men of this World should taste, they would immediately despise all
Earthly Loves, and breath after me. Thou therefore, my Son, consider what thou
did, when thou departedst from me. Thou did reject my Peace, and it was
removed far from thee; and innumerable Enemies rose up against thy Soul, who
sleep not, and suffer thee not to rest. Thou thoughtest that thou should
have and possess Peace, if thou should satisfy thy Appetite, and its vain
Desires, living after the manner of the Heathen, who know not me; and yet thou
foundest no Peace, but Solicitudes, Anxieties, Pangs of Conscience, Horrors and
Fears of my Judgment; as Cain, who having departed from my Presence, was afraid
lest every one that found him should slay him. That has befaln thee, my Son,
which of old befell the People of Israel, which made not a good use of the
Habitation of my City Jerusalem: For Judah was removed because of Affliction
and great Bondage, which she fell into by Sinning: She dwelt among the Heathen,
and sound no rest. O how grievously does the Sinner err, who casts away from
himself the Peace of the Children of God, and involves himself in infinite
doubts! O how unhappily lives the wicked Man, who flies, when none pursues,
carrying with himself the Damnation of Death, which he has procured! How long
shall I cry and invite thee, unthankful Son, unto the Banquet of my Dainties,
where thy inward Parts shall enjoy Peace, and rejoice in the Society of my
Peace and Love? Return now, my Son, unto thy Rest, which I have purchased for
thee by the Sorrows of Death, and let it please thee to have one Heart and one
Soul with me. Let us now make a Covenant of most faithful Agreement, which may
have no end. I spare thee dearly beloved Friend; neither do I remember the
Fault wherewith thou have offended me: Give me thy Heart that we may enter into
a Covenant of Friendship in my Blood, which I have shed for thee. Break now the
Bonds of thy Neck, O captive Son, and breath after my Liberty; for as for me, I
will be thy most faithful Helper in times of need, in Tribulation and in Want.
I have written thee in the midst of my Heart, and will never forget thee. Only
I require that thou return unto me, and for the future make good use of my most
sweet Fellowship; and I will cause Righteousness, and abundance of Peace to
arise in thee, which shall endure as long as the Sun and Moon. Behold, my Side
opened, and my Hands pierced through with Nails; join the Side of thy Heart
unto my Side, and thy Hands unto my Hands, and return at length unto the most
precious Peace of thy Redeemer and Friend.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Protection of God, from which a Man by Sinning
departs.
I The Preserver of Men, take a care of my Servants, as a Nurse that nourishes
her little Infant; for he that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. I
keep my dearly beloved Friends as the Apple of my Eye, neither do I suffer the
Rod of the Wicked to rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, lest they being
afflicted above measure, should stretch forth their Hands to Iniquity. From the
beginning of the World it has not been heard, that any Mother did so
affectionately love, and keep her only Son, as I, who am more than a Mother
toward my righteous ones, and I love their Souls as my most pleasant Brides.
They that serve me need not be afraid of the Cold of Winter; for all the
Servants of my House are clothed with double Clothing, for they have a good
Lord. Wherefore then, my Son, have thou departed from me, and exposed thy self
to Dangers and Robbers, who lie in wait for thee, saying; God has forsaken him
for his Sins, persecute and take him, because there is none to deliver him? Who
shall defend thee from the many Calves, and the sat Bulls, that have beset thee
round, if thou art not in my keeping? All the Beasts of the Wood will hasten to
thy Destruction, unless they perceive, that I am thy Keeper. Without the Sword
shall bereave thee, and Terror within; thou shall be a Vagabond, and a Fugitive
upon the Earth. Have thou not considered how Malefactors are afraid, who have
offended Earthly Kings? Verily they rest no where, but are afrighted at every
noise, as at the Shadow of Death, considering lest the Officers of the King
being offended, should suddenly fall upon them: Therefore how much more will
the fear of Death terrify thee, if thou be without my Protection, and be
delivered as the Servant of Sin unto thy Persecutors? It is a wonder how mad
Sinners are, who have delivered their Souls into the hands of their Enemies,
not considering that they want my Strength. Return therefore, dearly beloved
Son, unto me thy Keeper, and I who have broken the Heads of the Dragons, will
defend thee. I will lead thee through a Desert Land, through the waste-houling
Wilderness if thou continuest in my fear. I will trouble the Princes of Edom,
and Trembling shall take hold on the mighty Men of Moab, whilst thou passest
through the way of Life under my Protection. Return with all thy Heart unto me
thy Keeper, and Guide, not seeking the weak Helps of the World, and its
Followers: And I only will be thy Guide, and I will be unto thee as the Eagle,
teaching her young ones to fly, and fluttering over them, and thou shall know
by experience that one day in my Courts and Protection, is better than a
thousand elsewhere: And in the time of distress I will deliver thee, because
thou have set thy Heart on me, guarding it with a most firm Persuasion of my
Goodness and Mercy.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Loss of Divine Grace, which the Sinner falls into.
ALL the Treasures of the World compared with my Divine Grace, are Dust and
Ashes, and are accounted as things of no value. For so great is the Height, the
Dignity, and the Beauty of my Grace, that it stirs up great Admiration in the
Minds of them, that rightly conceive thereof. Whereby it comes to pass, that my
Servants having their Eyes enlightened, are moved with inward Grief and
Compassion for their Neighbors, when they fall into any dangerous Sin. Which
if thou, my Son, should well consider of, thou woulded suddenly return unto
me, being moved with the Greatness of the Calamity, which thou have fallen into
by Sinning. Thy Soul was my most pleasant Bride, in Clothing of Gold, and in
Raiment of diverse Colors, whose Beauty the Sun and Moon did admire. So great
was its Grace, whilst it remained faithful to the Covenant of its Espousals,
that it wonderfully delighted my Eyes. The Daughter of Jerusalem was adorned
with Jewels beautiful as a Dove, shining very brightly, and endued with a very
lovely Comeliness. She was conform to her Pattern, in comparison of whom the
Morning Stars do not shine. She was greatly enriched with the true Riches of my
Virtues, which neither Rust nor Moth can corrupt. But from the Daughter of Sion
all her Beauty was departed, when she had sinned, and she fell from so great
Felicity into so extreme Calamity, that the Heavens were astonished at this
Change. For, my Son, so great is the Filthiness and Shamesulness of Sin, which
thou have committed, that thou art become a Leper; searful to look upon because
of thy intolerable Rottenness, and Meat for Worms that are crawling out upon
thee. What is this? How is the Pleasantness of my Paradise vanished, and the
fruitful Land turned into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them that dwell
therein? How has thy Soul departed from me, contrary to the Covenant of thine
Espousals, and has been defiled with many Lovers, who have corrupted her.
Return therefore, my Son, unto my Grace and Friendship, and unto the Light of
my Countenance; neither be so foolish as to desire to live any longer in so
great Misery and Want. Put on the precious and white Wedding Garment, that thou
may be acceptable to me, and sit down at the Great Supper, with my dearly
beloved Elect. I counsel thee to buy of me, without Silver, the Royal Apparel,
that thou may walk through the Street of the Holy City, clothed in Purple
amongst the famous Sons of Sion, who are clothed with the fine Gold of my Love.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Communion of Saints, which a Man loses by Sinning.
WOE to him that is alone, for if he fall, he has none to help him up. But
blessed is the Man who enjoys the Communion of all that fear and love Me, and
keep my most pleasant Commandments. Verily he that is united unto me by Grace,
continues also united unto all my Members, who live the Heavenly Life of my
Grace, than which nothing more lovely is found in the Land of the Living. My
Angels and Holy Men, joined to me by Grace, are most faithful Friends of all
Men that love me. And then, my Son, when thou did the things that please me,
thou had these Consolations and Privileges of the Righteous, which are more
precious than all Gold. Thou wast joined to my Saints, whose Names are written
in the Book of Life; and all their Goods belonged unto thee, being my living
Member. And I the Head of the Church, my Spouse, did influence thee with lively
Motions of my Love, wherewith I move the Hearts of them that love me, and seek
my Face. For my Spirit pressed thee forward, and stirred thee up, and inslamed
thee with ardent Desire of the eternal Enjoyments, wherewith my wearied
Soldiers coming from the Earth, are satisfied. But now thy Visage through Sin,
is become black as a Coal, and thou lie down in Destruction, which thou have
procured to thy self, being deprived of the Society of the Saints, which is the
utmost Calamity. What friends will thou find, my Son, if my Friends favor thee
not? What Society will profit thee, whilst thou want the Society of Angels
and Saints? Who will comfort thee in Distress, if thou dwell with Scorpions,
and art not at Agreement with Heaven? Return, my Son, return unto the
Fellowship of the Citizens of Jerusalem my City, and to the Feasts that are
celebrated with the Communion of most pleasant Love; that thou may live
happily the remainder of thy mortal Life, and afterward may pass unto the
Communion of the Church triumphant, where there will be most sweet Peace, and a
full and perfect Union. Depart from the Tabernacles of the Wicked, who love not
thee, nor themselves; for he that loves Iniquity, hates his own Soul. It will
be much more profitable and delightful to thee, my Son, to associate thy self
with my living Members, and chosen Vessels, that thou may learn Wisdom in
the School of my Meekness, and may grow up with the Nourishment of Men come
to years, that grow up to the measure of Love, which is higher than Heaven. The
World passes away, and the Lust thereof; but the Union of my Love will never
pass away, but will join with Me, my most beloved Servants, for whom I have
appointed a Kingdom that they may eat and drink at my Table in the Banquet of
the Dainties of my Paradise.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Inconstancy, which a Sinner falls into.
JErusalem has sinned a great Sin; therefore she became unstable, and could
find no Rest: A Fool changes as the Moon. Wherefore seeing every Sinner is a
Fool, he suffers the Punishment of his own Transgression; never continuing in
the same state, but changing his Purpose every hour. He has departed from his
Firmness and Constancy, which he had in Me, his God and Keeper, who change not.
And therefore he wanders in Uncertainty, not knowing whither to go, and finding
no Rest for the sole of his Foot. All his Persecutors over-take him between the
straits; and he desiring to escape free, changes places perpetually, until his
own Evils take him in Destruction, while he is flying away. Woe to the Soul,
that has departed from Me! He will sind Torments every where, and day and
night Sleep will depart from his Eyes. To day the Sinner seeks Friends, to
morrow he shuns them, because they are unfaithful. To day he is bent upon
Games, to morrow he laments; because by living riotously he has consumed his
Substance. To day he seeks the Honors of the World, to morrow he shuns them,
being marked with Infamy for his Sins. What then art thou minding, my Son, who
sit upon the Wheel of the World, which is always turning? How is it, that
thou do not return unto Me, who am thy Safety, Virtue, and Constancy? Have
thou not learned by daily Experience, that the Thoughts of Mortal Men are
fearful, and their Fore-casts uncertain, which proceed without Order unto the
end? Know assuredly, my Son, that without my Mercy thou art the dry Stuble, and
a Leaf driven with the East Wind, which can no where find Rest. Sometimes thou will be joyful, and anon sorrowful; to morrow thou will lament for thy
Infirmity, and the next day thou will be terrified with the fear of Death.
Sometimes the care of Temporal things, sometimes Ambition, sometimes Thirst,
sometimes Hunger will torment thee; unless thou repent, and cast thy care on
Me, and offer thy self wholly unto Me on the Altar of thy Heart. If thou shall
seek Me with all thy Heart, nothing shall trouble thee; neither Death nor Life,
nor the World, nor Hell, nor any other Creature visible or invisible. For by
the Testimony of thy Conscience thou shall be as the Lion, that is strongest
among Beasts, and turns not away for any. I will confirm thee who wast
subject to the Inconstancy of Adam thy Father, and I will strengthen thee with
my most mighty Hand. I will make thee a Pillar of Iron, and a Wall of Brass,
against all the Enemies of thy Soul. They shall fight against thee, but they
shall not prevail against thee, because I will change thee, being a Penitent,
into another Man, and make thee Partaker of my Grace and Valor.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Remorse of Conscience, wherewith a Sinner is tormented.
MY Son, unless thou return to Me with all thy Heart, thy Wickedness will
correct thee, and thy Backsliding will reprove thee; for by what things any Man
sins, by the same he shall be punished. It is a just Judgment, that the Sinner
who has forsaken Me his God, should feel within himself Remorse of Conscience
and Anguish, arising from the fear of Death and Hell. It is a just Judgment,
that amongst the forbidden Joys of the World, wherewith he seeks to be
delighted contrary to my Law, he should be pierced with the sting of a Heart
groaning and foreseeing its own Damnation. The Terrors of Death fight against a
Sinner, though he seeks for Joys; neither can a wicked Man have Peace, who is
reproved by his own Conscience, from which he cannot fly. This Remorse rises
out of Sin, as a Worm out of Timber, and shows that I am a just Judge, and that
the Sinner is a Betrayer, who sold me for a small price. Meditate on these
things, my Son, and see that it is an evil and bitter thing that thou have
forsaken Me thy Lord and Benesactor, and that my Fear was not before thee: Do
thou not see that all things fall out unhappily to thee, whilst thou flyest
from me? and that with Anxiety of Mind thou drinkest the troubled Waters of the
Egyptians; whereas by my Grace thou may return into the dearly beloved City
of Jerusalem, and drink of the pure Water of Jordan, where thou may wash,
and be made whiter than Snow. Wherefore then resistest thou the Impulses of my
Love, calling and inviting thee to my Friendship? Cast away from thee, my Son,
the five Yokes of Oxen, which thou have foolishly bought, and take willingly
upon thee my one and most sweet Yoke, where thou shall not be wearied with the
Prickings of Conscience, but shall find rest to thy wearied Soul. Seek the
Heavenly Tranquillity, and the Peace which passes all Understanding, and rest
from that Anxiety wherewith thou art vexed. Call unto me, and I will answer
thee with my Divine Inspirations, which will beget true Joys, and compose thy
troubled Spirit. I will comfort thee, and speak inwardly to thy Heart, if thou
return unto me, and praise me with Uprightness of Heart, when thou have
obtained Liberty and Rest, and other most precious Privileges of the Children
of God. Despise now the Counsels of the Men of the World, who torment thy
Heart, and follow my one and most healthful Counsel; and thou shall see how I
scatter all the Plots of thy Enemies; and create in thee a new Spirit, whereby
thy Age may be renewed as the Eagles, that thou may enjoy my most lovely
Peace and Security.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Hardness of Heart, which a Sinner falls into.
I Am righteous, and I love Righteousness, and my Countenance beholds the
Upright. The Sinner has rejected me, and resisted my innumerable Inspirations,
whereby I endeavored to mollify his Heart. And therefore I reject him, and
withhold my Rain that it drops not upon him. I invited Pharaoh by outward
Signs, which I wrought by the hand of Moses my Servant, and by inward
Inspirations, which he unhappy Sinner felt: But when he resisted my great
Mercy, I suffered his Heart to be hardened, more than the Flintstone, and the
hardest Rocks, until he persecuted Israel my People, and was drowned, as Lead
in the mighty Waters. I anointed Saul King of Israel, when he was little in his
own Eyes, and followed me like a Boy of one Year old: But, after he began and
continued to resist my many Motions and Inspirations, I threw him away, so that
he fell upon his own Sword, and died fearfully. I handled unhappy Judas my
Disciple, as a loving and faithful Man; but after that he resisted my sweet
Words and Inspirations, and hardened his Heart against me, I sent him away; so
that he becoming like a Devil, hanged himself, and burst asunder in the midst,
and all his Bowels gushed out. What then do thou expect, my Son, who have
sinned, and departed from Me? Wherefore do thou continue in the State of
Damnation, hardening thy Heart, lest it should be overcome with my infinite
Sweetness and Patience? Shall I for ever knock at the Gate of thy House, that
thy Wildness may be tamed? Return, O Son, unto thy right Wits; neither cast thy
self into extreme Danger, so as to make thy Wound uncureable. Have thou not
heard that it will be ill with a hard Heart at last; and that a Sinner is held
with the Cords of his Sins? Beware, my Son, of this great Evil, and consider
what I require of thee. When a Sinner comes into the depth of Sins, he
despises it; but before he despises it, he is touched and moved with the
inward Inspirations of my Goodness; but afterward by degrees he waxes cold,
and has less sense of my Impulses, until his stony Heart becoming unsensible,
he regards not my Admonitions; but as an untamed Horse, he runs through the
Meadows of the World, hastening to eternal Fire. Woe to thee, unless thou return
speedily to Me! Remember thy Salvation and my Glory, which I have prepared for
those, who repenting in sincerity wash their Garments in my Blood. Use now the
Remedies of Mercy, lest thou be hardened, and delivered up to a reprobate sense.
If thou shall hearken to me, I wilt melt the Ice of thy Heart, and my Wind
shall blow, and the Waters of Compunction shall flow; with which thy Fllth
shall be washed away. Embrace this wholesome Counsel of thy Redeemer, who is
ready to spare thee, and to amend thy Condition: If thou return to me, I will
imprint a sense of Contrition and Love in thy inward Parts, and thou shall
rejoice in the Renovation of thy Heart, as Conquerors rejoice in taking of the
Prey, and thou shall celebrate thy Regeneration; and being made whole, thou
shall sing of my invincible Mercies, that are sweeter than the Honey.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Desperation, which a Sinner sometimes falls into.
Consider, my Son, that there is no other name under Heaven, by which thou must
be saved, but mine. Be not deceived in putting thy Trust in the King of Egypt,
who is a broken Reed; upon which, if any Man leans, it will pierce through his
Hand. I have overcome the World, Death, and Hell; and therefore he that offends
Me, and seeks Refuge in the Favor and Delights of Men, who are not Partakers
of my Victory, falls into Dejection of Mind, which is a very bitter Punishment.
He wants my Grace, which begets the hope of eternal good things; and seeing
that he does nothing suitable to the hope of eternal Life, he is broken and
weakened, so that he falls into a most grievous Desperation, which resembles
the State of the Damned: This is the fruit of Ambition, which seeks the Honors
of Men, that are written in the Earth. This is the fruit of Covetousness, which
with an unsatiable desire lays up Treasure in the Earth. This is the fruit of
Luxury, which is drunk with the Pleasures of the Flesh, and cares not for the
most pure Joys of my Spirit. This is the fruit of Anger, which makes the feet
of Men swift to shed Blood; and cares not for being reckoned amongst my meek
Servants, who shall possess the Land of the Living. Moreover, this is the fruit
of all Sins, when Wickedness increases, and the Soul abhors Good, by which Men
come to eternal Life. What do thou then, my Son? Why lie thou in the
lamenble State of Enmity to Me, which brings forth the fruit of Desperation,
hastening Death and Damnation? How is it that thou do not pity thy own Soul,
which languishes for want of Strength? Consider thy Dissoluteness and Madness,
which makes thee run into Hellfire, and to take no care of eternal Salvation,
as if thou had no hope. Thou do foolishly, my Son, in despairing, and not
considering that I am omnipotent, and can in a moment deliver thee from the
horrible Pit, and the miry Clay: Cast away from thee the Filth and Weights of
Sin, which bow thy Back, and drive thee to Despair; and breath after Me, the
Author of thy Hope and Redemption, and thou shall be delivered from the
grievous Bondage wherewith thou art oppressed, and thou shall be sweetly
refreshed with the Breathings of my Spirit. Return to me by timely Repentance,
which begets a Godly Sorrow, and also rejoices the Soul that is renewed in Me,
and receives from Me the Pledge of the eternal Inheritance. So thou shall hope,
and thy troubled Soul sailing through the great Sea, shall be kept safe by
casting the Anchor of a most firm hope, which I have purchased for thee by my
most precious Blood, and unconceiveable Love.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning Unbelief, which a Sinner is in danger to fall into.
I The Son of the most high God, am the Light of the World; and with just
Judgment punish a Sinner who hates me, with inward Darkness, wherewith the
Understanding is darkened: Which Evil is so grievous and formidable, that
sometimes an unhappy Sinner by multiplying his Faults departs so far from true
Light, that he falls into Unbelief. He has departed from Me, and loved Earthly
good things more than Me: Whereby it come to pass that his Will being depraved,
so corrupts the true Judgment of the Understanding, that at length he loses the
Catholic Faith. So thou may see, my Son, what has happened unto many
Sinners; who when they had first believed in me, by aggravating the Sins of
Covetousness, Pride, Gluttony, or Luxury, have erred from the Faith, and
pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. Woe to those that hate my most
pure Light, whereby the eternal and unchangeable Good is known, and preferred
before created good things. It had been better for those Men, if they had not
been born. For it is extreme Unhappiness to err from my Faith, and to cast away
my Yoke with a darkened Understanding. And thou therefore, my Son, considering
what has happened unto others like thy self, return unto me; lest perhaps
being weary of my immaculate Law, thou begin to have hard Thoughts of my
Goodness; and giving loose reins to thy Heart through the Love of Temperal
things, thou give thy self up to wicked Doings, and ungodly Lusts, unto the
prodigious denying of my Faith. My Son, look whither thou art going, whilst
thou ceasest not to sin; be not cruel to thy self in running swiftly to
Destruction; take heed lest thou despise my Admonitions, with which I instruct
thee; stop not thy Ears, being seduced with carnal Love, which drowns
multitudes of Men into Perdition. The time is short, traffic till I come to
reward thee with eternal Life, or with everlasting Fire. If thou shall take
away, from the midst of thee, thy Sins and thy Idols, and return and call upon
Me thy God and Redeemer, and Preserver, I will enlighten thine Eyes, lest at
any time thou sleep the Sleep of Death; I will preserve thee, and my Candle
shall shine upon thine Head: And thou shall rejoice in my most pleasant and
most blessed Light, wherewith I will direct thy Paths, in the night of the
mortal Life, leading thee to my bright-shining Glory, in the ways that lead to
eternal Life. I will open thy Eyes with the Beam of my infinite Light; and thou
being awaked as it were out of a heavy Sleep, shall wonder how in the bypast
time, thou did walk in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death. And thou shall
love Me thy Deliverer with all thy Heart, and shall honor Me with the
Sacrifice of perpetual Praise. Arise speedily, my dearly beloved Son, arise
from the Darkness and Horror of Hell, where thou lie, and receive the Light
of Heaven, which will rejoice thee, before the last night come; which will be
the last Punishment of Sinners, who despise my present Inspirations and
Mercies. Meditate on these things in the inner Chamber of thy Heart, and cast
thy Eyes upon Me the Sun of Righteousness, who am desirous to enlighten thee,
and to fill thy dearly beloved Soul with the bright-shining Glory of the Saints
of Light.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the unhappy Death of a Sinner.
THE Sinner, whilst he lives, runs through the Fields of the World like an Ox,
satted for the Slaughter. The miserable Man considers not that he will be taken
by Death, as a Highway-Man lying in wait. That being bound in the Chains of
Hell, he may pay unto the utmost Farthing. He drinks, he eats, he plays, he
laughs, he swears and blasphems, and in the very time whilst he is sinning
without restraint, Sickness and Death comes suddenly upon him, and he is called
to Judgment. O how bitter a Grief is it to be called to Death! O how great
Trembling and Horror takes hold on the Sinner, when he sees that by a most
grievous Death, he is separated from all things which he dearly loved! O how
lamentably, says he, in that distress, the Sorrows of Death have compassed me,
and the Pains of Hell have taken hold upon me! Woe to the wicked Man, when he
dies, upon whom all the Billows of Sorrow and Afflictions do suddenly rush,
that he may have a fore-taste of the Torments of Hell, who did not breath after
eternal Consolations. Now the riotous Banquets are passed away; now the ungodly
Games are gone: Now Kinsmen and Friends have failed: Now Riches profit not; and
whatsoever was delightful, is turned into Matter of Desolation and Despair. The
unhappy Soul, which despised my Inspirations, is afraid to go out of the Body
into everlasting Flames; and flys back as far as it can, if so be it may find
any that can comfort it in that distress. But it resists in vain, because the
hour of Death is at hand, and the time of its giving up all its desirable
things, which it had in the days of old, when it transgressed my most sweet
Law. All its Sins, as a terrible Army, are set before it, that it may see how
sad and bitter an end follows the bypast Joys. The Devils like ravenous Dogs,
stand in expectation of their Prey which is tied with innumerable Chains of its
own Sins, that it may be dragged to Punishment. The foolish Man when he had
time, took no care to be reconciled unto Me; and in the last hour he has not
any whom he may look to for help. All his Persecutors over-take him between the
straits, and desire cruelly to suck up his Blood; and then the Sentence of my
Justice being pronounced, the Vessel of Wrath, fitted for Destruction, is
halled to Torments. This is the Lot of an unrighteous Man, whom Evils do
overtake in Destruction. What think thou then, my Son, who have sinned? What
do thou expect? Is not thy Mind terrified at the hearing of these things,
which a Sinner dying suffers against his Will? Turn then to thy God, who can
deliver thee from the Wrath to come, and comfort thee when thou art going out
of this Life, by his infinite Grace, and his unconceiveable Mercy. Be greatly
afraid of my Wrath and Justice, whilst thou art alive, that at thy Death thou
may find my Fatherly Compassion: For they that in their life time fear me as
a severe Judge, in their Death they find Me as a most bountiful Father. Blessed
are they who observe my Ways with all their Heart, being mindful of their
latter end: They shall not be afraid of the Terror of the Night, when they
shall speak with their Enemies in the Gate; to wit, when they shall pass out of
this Life: After which will follow the eternal Night of Sinners, or the eternal
Light of the Righteous, whom I have loved. Follow me, my Son, and let my Law
cleave to thy inward Parts, and the Torment of Death shall not seize upon thee,
but thou shall rest in a joyful and delightful Peace.

FINIS.

