A LETTER TO A Person OF Honor IN LONDON, From an Old CAVALIER in YORKSHIRE,
concerning the Papists.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXIII.

A LETTER TO A PERSON of HONOR IN LONDON, From an Old Cavalier in Yorkshire.
SIR,
HAd you told me of the late storm of Thunder and Lightning that killed a
Shepherd or the wonderful inundation of waters, that endangered a little Child,
you had not fri hted me half so much, as this new and unexpected Alarm against
the Papists: You tell me His Majesty (upon the Petition of those who were not
like to be denied* has banished all their Priests: You tell me a Bill has been
read in the House of Commons and is committed, to renew against the Layity all
the former penal Laws, and add more, even to the taking away their Children,
etc.

Why, what evil have they done? they fought daily with us in the field, and
none laid hands on them but the Kingdoms enemies; they killed indeed, in a just
and honorable War, some that called themselves Saints, but none but such as we
call Rebels. Whence then should all this anger come? it is not from jealousy,
nor interest, nor policy, nor all these together; but from some strange unhappy
conjuncture, which I know not how to name; and therefore without insisting on
an event so wholly unlike the causes that were laid for it, I shall seldom look
backwards to what the Papists have done and suffer in these late calamiies; a
thing so evident, it need not be mentioned, nor can be denied; but chiefly
consider what they now are in reference to hereafter. I see the noise of their
complaints is not heard in the streets, but generally they take their
mischances with silence; which as I esteem for a generous and manly virtue
where e're I find it, so I cannot but freely express to you my thoughts in so
singular and pressing an occasion.

We fear, say you, the growth of Popery, and to that fear you ascribe the
proceeding against the Papists; but must we therefore absolutely ruin them? Is
there no difference betwixt checking a Tree that is spread not too far, and
utterly extirpating it root and branch? Is it not enough to see them in a shade
of the private life, and deny them the fruitful showers of rich Offices, but we
must suck the sap out of their hearts, and leave them to wither away by
degrees, and dye?

Besides, when the grounds of such a suspicion are thoroughly examined, they will
certainly be found too week to sustain so heavy a severity: For to omit the
pious Arguments, That we are secure enough by the nature of our Cause, and the
protection of our God; we have sensible and humane Reasons, (which many sooner
believe) derived from plain and evident experience.

Are not the Papists tolerated in diverse parts of Germany, where the
Reformation is Master* and yet they grow not? Is not the Reformation it self,
which has so many advantages over Popery, tolerated in France, and yet it grows
not? In Holland, in Switzerland, and generally in all Countries where they live
mingled together, they stand as it were at a certain mark, and seldom overflow;
but like the Sea, if they gain on one side, they lose as much on another.

I know what soil your Country is made of, but as I think we love our Religion
as well as our Neighbors, so I Am confident our Reformation is so much more
rational then Theirs, that we have far less cause to apprehend any change or
defection than they: They fear it not in their Laws, they find it not in their
practices; why should we alone enter into unnecessary suspicions, to the
discredit both of our Religion, while we declare by our proceedings that it
needs the prop of force to support it; and of our Policy, while by chasing some
from home, and discouraging others abroad, we diminish the wealth and
prosperity of our Country. Let us open our eyes, and look on the wisest of our
Neighbors, and see how moderately they proceed in matters of Conscience, and
how notably they thrive and improve by their moderation.

Possibly at first, when Liberty is newly given, some number* who now conceal,
may discover themselves* but after the first Run, the rest will stand firm and
be more unchangeable* and this, when all is considered, may prove the safer
course, to separate such as dissemble from among the cordial Professors:
However, it is time enough to prevent the increase, when we see the increase
grow really dangerous.

In the present state of our affairs, the Roman Catholics seem so far from
dangerous, that they rather are particularly useful. The Nation we see is
divided into four Parties, Protestant, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian and
Fanatic. And were there now a War to begin, we might easily guess which of
these four would likelyest agree, by remembering which of them agreed in the War
that is ended. If we think the Roman Catholics would again assist the right
way, why do we so terrible discourage them? If we believe them loyal (as we
have found them by the best Argument, Experience) why should we so diminish
them, that we make them inconsiderable* Were it not more suitable to our true
interest, so far to suffer them as they are necessary to counterballance one
sort of our discontented Neighbors, and then we should easilier secure our
selves against the other? Can we forget a Trick so lately passed upon us?
First, they cried out against the Papists, as if they were Traitors, till they
had disabled them: Then, against the Protestants, as if they were Papists, till
they had mastered them: Then, against every one that would not rebel, till they
had ruined all.

'Twas a shrewd word, and very true, in our Country, of him that said, I have
observed few of the fighting Cavaliers speak against the Papists. I Am sure we
(of my Noble Lord of Newcastles Army) know well enough their constant Fidelity;
we fought and fell together, we freely ventured our lives for one another, and
in all occasions, that might any way conduce to our Princes service, we
perfectly agreed, and little thought, if it had pleased God to have given us
success, to exclude them wholly from sharing in the benefit.

Were we all one in Religion, 'twere certainly best for peace, but if such
Union be once become impossible, then let the Master-Religion be established;
and for the Rest, the more sorts of them there are, the more safely they are
governed: Should now the Papist and Fanatic be suppressed; the Civil Interest
would be more endangered, unless we overcom the Presbyterian too, which will
be a harder task, when by the disbanding of others, they are grown more
numerous. Two Factions in a Commonwealth are desperately dangerous, but twenty
not at all; unless they conspire into Two, which is not so easily done, as
they who originally are no more. However, that evidently is the dangerous
number, since none else is dangerous till they come to that.

If the present Papists be too few to be feared, what need we punish those who
now are Papists, lest they should grow hereafter so many as to be feared? Is it
not enough to lay penalties on such as shall turn to them for the future? If to
preserve the peace be our intention, and that cannot be molested by those of
the Roman communion, as now it stands, let us but shut the door that no more
enter in, and we are safe, without pulling down the House on the heads of those
that are there already.

I cannot deny but I Am thus far Popishly affected, that I willingly converse
with a Papist, if he be a Cavalier, and heartily love a Cavalier, though he be
a Papist: this is my character, and I Am not a jot ashamed to own it. Show me a
Papist that took the Covenant; or fought against the King, and I Will hate him
worse then a Presbyterian, so much care I for their Religion: but when I find
many of them civil and ingenious, and well-bread persons, why should I decline
their Company? When I find all of them true, and earnest, and constant
Cavaliers, why should I hate their Persons? All this I see may easily be done,
without either approving their Religion, or diminishing my own: Especially
since the most eminent Divines of England allow the Church of Rome to be a true
Church, from whence they acknowledge to derive their Orders; wherein they agree
that both salvation may be had, and all fundamentals are professed; which I
believe they will not say of any other Dissenters in this Nation; I Am sure, if
they say it, they cannot maintain it, till they have answered this Argument.

No true Church without true Pastors: No true Pastors without true Ordination:
No true Ordination without true Bishops: Therefore, where there are no Bishops,
there is neither Ordination, nor Pastors, nor Church.

Thus clearly to my eye, Protestants differ from Presbyterians and the rest,
not in circumstantials only, but in essentials; they differ as Church and no
Church; which is a far grater distance then between Protestant and Papist. This
single consideration has often made me wonder why we should so violently
persecute the Papist with the uncouth names of Idolatrous and Antichristian;
and, which is worse, with the churlish actions of Sequestration and Death,
hanging and quartering them only for taking Orders from the same Church from
whence we derive our own: And all this while we kindly call our other
Neighbors Brethren and pray for our Sister-Churches beyond the Seas; who yet
are so far from having One Mother with us, that our selves say they have None
at all?

Are then the Calvinists no Church? are all the Reformers in France, Germany,
Holland, and even Geneva it self, no Church? I refer you to the Argument; the
Conclusion perhaps may be unwelcom; but the Premises, I doubt are unavoidable.
If no Governors, there can be no Governed, and if neither of Those, there can
be no Community; whether we speak of spiritual or civil Communities. Only
sometimes when we would reckon up our numbers to cross-bite the Papists, (who
for the same purpose will count the Greeks their Brethren) we let all sorts of
Reformers pass the Muster for Protestants; a kind of pia fraus to sustain
reputation, and bear up the hearts of the People, and have somewhat to say to an
Adversary.

Whether upon this Reason, or some other, I know not, but I observe our gravest
Preachers, and our learned Writers generally affirm, that We punish the
Papists not for Religion, but for Treason. Sure we must not mean their Religion
is Treason, for then we plainly contradict our-selves, while we say we punish
them for Treason, not Religion; if at the same time we make them but two Names
for one Thing.

What is then their Treason? Either their Actions; and let all that are guilty
dye without mercy, without so much as the least syllable of benefit by the Act
of Oblivion; let them all be hanged, and drawn, and quartered, and none be
found to pity them; only let our Justice not be blind, and punish the Innocent
with the Criminal; but the Soul that sins, let that dye. Or else their Opinions
are Treasonable: And then let the Opinions be first singled out, and either
publicly renounced, or the Maintainers proceeded against with what penalty you
please. But, if their Religion (that is, their Faith, not their Opinions,) be
clear from the charge of Treason, let us honestly stand to our Principles, and
no longer, upon that account, punish them as Traitors.

Well, though they now have approved themselves good Subjects, yet time has
been when they were not so. But shall we not cease to punish, when they cease
to deserve it? Shall we not take off their Fetters when they do well, as
willingly as we laid them on when they did ill? Nay, shall we charge them with
new and heavier chains now they have given us such evidence of their constant
Loyalty? even Bedlams themselves are set at liberty, when we see they are
returned to their wits. We know all have suffered long for the crimes of a few;
Why may they not hope as well to be indulged now for the Loyalty of many. Time
too has been, when others were no good Subjects, and that within the memory
even of young men; but the gracious clemency of His Majesty has buried all in
Oblivion; and may all treasonous Rebellions, of what Sect or Faction soever, be
eternally buried, and never rise again to molest us, either in our duty to our
King, or charity to one another.

But let the Lovers of Peace do what they can, some will be still delighting to
rub over old sores: and immediately they fall upon the Gunpowder-Treason, and
the Spanish Invasion: As for the last, if we look into our own Histories, we
shall see, our Nation had disobliged the Spaniard by a long course of sharp
unkindnesses, of which he des^^^ng to be avenged, and finding no handsomer
pretense then that of relieving the oppressed for Religion, he took it (...),
and brought it along with him. But in all (...) the crime of the English
Papists? Do not our own Historians say, they were ready with their service like
true Englishmen, and desired to take their fortune with the common Soldiers? Do
not our Authors expressly note that the Spaniards indeed persuaded themselves
they should be seconded by the English Roman Catholics, but were utterly
deceived? The truth is, a few English Fugitives beyond Sea were guilty, and all
at home were punish^. And for the other, it was indeed the most devilish and
most foolish Plot that ever was devised. But how many were ge^^ry Read the
Proclamations immediately upon the Discovery, and you will find the number of
their chief Contrivers to be about a dozen, and all the forces they could levy,
say our Histories, were not full fourscore. Now if we reflect on the multitude
of Roman Catholics who faithfully served our Gracious King, and his Royal
Father, we shall easily see how far more apt they are to adhere to their
Prince, then rebel against him. Read then the death even of those few desperate
men, and you will find they heartily repented, at least, most of them: Read all
their History, the foulest that ever that Party was concerned in, and I am
confident, though you will continue your just indignation against those who were
Traitors, yet your anger will be allayed toward the rest that were Innocent;
at least, all Revenge will be satisfied, when you have considered how long, and
how universally that one crime of a few desperate men has been punished. Mistake
me not, I would not have so great a Crime forgotten, but I think it belongs to
Christian charity, that the greatest should at last be forgiven. Can there be
imagined a more detestable Treason then that against our late gracious
Sovereign, in which, though Justice take care to conserve the memory, yet mercy
already has pardoned the Offenders.

And here I cannot but remember some passages among us, that keep alive our
animosities, and certainly have more of humor in them, then ingenuity. We call
the Papists Ignorant, and yet fear their Subtilty: We cry out of the Foggy
Mysts, and Egyptian darkness of Popery, and at the same time, rail against
their Priests and Jesuits, as Crafty Foxes, that destroy the Vineyard of the
Gospel. If they write openly, we say, they grow insolent: If privately, they
seek to surprise us: If they say nothing at all, we suspect they are plotting
to do the more. Even since the late Proclamation for banishing Priests, a
Friend of mine told me he heard this captious Dilemma made use of. If many go
away, then there were many here, and it was time to look to them: If few, then
the more are left behind, and still we must have a care of them: If they
complain they are afflicted, we say, they are Malcontents; if they take all
with patience, we say they are well enough now, if they can be contented. Nay,
so crosly we interpret one another, that, to my amazement, I have heard some
zealous Discoursers affirm, the Papists were guilty of all our Divisions in
Religion; because they were striving still to show that our Principles lead to
Divsion. Which if it be true, is no Crime in them at all; If false, let us
labor to disprove it; they who discover the consequences of inconvenient
Maxims, are not too blame: but they who set up those Maxims. Therefore
methinks our better play in this point is, first to prove the Papists in an
error, and then the union and unchangeablenesse they so much boast of, will be
the greatest Objection against them; since such union makes an error apt to
deceive; and such fixedness makes it impossible to be mended: Whereas our
variety has this advantage, that some may be in the right, while others are in
the wrong; and if to day we mistake, to morrow we may correct it.

Other accusations we too hastily impose on them, which none but Fools and
Bedlams would be guilty of: As, that whoever is in power and prevails and
rules, they still oppose him; And therefore, at first they were against the
all-commanding-long-half-lower-House; then against Oliver: then against the
Rump: Now, against the King: Thus some among us still seek to make it be
believed, the Papists are always against the governing Powers, only that the
governing Powers may be always against them. Sure, if all be true we say of
them, our English Papists are a strange race of people, every kind of Reformer
suspects them to make Plots and Conspiracies with his particular Adversary
against him. In the beginning of the late times, they were charged to conspire
with the Protestants against the Presbyterians: In the midst of these miseries,
they were accused to conspire with the Presbyterian against the Fanatics: Now,
in the end, some are found to murmur up and down, that they conspire with the
Presbyterians and Fanatics too, against the Church of England. All, I can say
to this case is, either we mistake them, or they are mad men, and have no more
wit then a weathercock, that where e're the wind is, still turns his face
directly against it.

Though in all these Instances, I think, they are extremely misunderstood: yet
is there one wherein I am not satisfied my self; and that is, their
acknowledging a Foreign Authority in prejudice of our Kings Supremacy. And at
first sight I easily discern, the Controversy has, for a long time, been
somewhat mistaken, at least misexprest. The Question, I conceive, is not whether
the Supremacy in matters purely Spiritual be in the King, or the Pope: but,
whether in the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Pope: I shall only loosen the
knot a little, and then 'twill unty it self. We know our graver and more
learned Divines, distinguish between the inward power of the Keys, and the
outward jurisdiction by temporal penalties: This they assign to the King, in
all Causes, and over all Persons: That they reserve to the Clergy, as neither
derived from the Civil Magistrate, nor dependant on Him. And thus much the
Papists, unless I Am misinformed, are ready to profess, only they fasten the
toplink of the pure-Spiritual chain to the Chair of Rome, and not to that of
Canterbury. Which of these ways is the more convenient, I cannot judge, but
plainly see, if one be inconsistent with Monarchy, the other is: And if a
Subject may be, in any consideration, Supreme, without derogating from his
Prince, a Stranger may be so too. Think on it well, and instruct me, if I err.

But you will Reply, if the Moderate on both sides so nearly agree in sense
concerning the Kings Ecclesiastical Authority, why do the Papists refuse the
Oath of Supremacy, and the Protestants admit it? shall I tell you freely my
thought? I believe, if the Protestants understood that Oath as it sounds, they
would never take it, for it gives the King more then they mean; and if the
Papist could understand it to sound no more then the Protestants mean, they
would never refuse it. How then shall this difference be reconciled? Either let
both sides be understood to mean as they speak, and then neither of them will
take it; or to speak as they mean, and then neither of them will refuse it. The
remedy, if heartily desired, is easy: There needs no more but fairly to frame
the Words according to the sense: I mean all this while, as far as concerns the
Royal Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs, not intermedling with the pure
Spiritual part, which I leave to the discussion of pure Spiritual Persons.

And indeed, the Oath it self aims at no more then to assert these two Points;
that the Supreme power in Spirituals belongs to the King; and that none of That
Power belongs to any Forreigner, as is clear by the Words of the Oath, nor to
any other, as may clearly be inferred from the Form of Submission made 35. Eliz.
1. where the Submitter is required to testify in his Conscience, that, No
other Person has, or ought to have any Power or Authority over his Majesty:
Which I understand in matters belonging to the Church, for those were the Cases
provided for by that Act.

I had almost forgot a principal consideration. The Papists, it is said
solicited his Sacred Majesty to publish the late Declaration for tender
Consciences; and did none solicit but they? Or must it be counted so
unpardonable a Crime for Subjects to beg of their King the Performance of his
Royal Word? At least thus much we must confess in excuse of the Papists, they
needed most their Princes Indulgence, because the Laws were severest against
them: They deserved it best, because, of all that needed it, they were most
faithful to him. They moved in the fittest time, after the Common Uniformity
was Enacted, and before the Services they had done were forgotten? Yet for all
this the general mercy was far more sparingly expressed to them, then to any of
the rest. Sullen Presbyterian, that rather will starve himself, then endure a
Papist to have a morsel of bread!

It Is true, some withdrew themselves from the public Service upon that
Declaration: But, was there one Papist among them? Why must the Papist and none
but he be whipped; when the Puritan, and none but he plays Truant? for the
Papist went to another School before, and therefore though he still be absent
from ours, yet cannot he properly be said to play Truant. Nor can the endeavor
of procuring this Declaration be suspected (as our fashion is) for a
Popish-plot, and that all the Papists conspired in it together; when I have
Reasons to be extremely confident few knew of it till 'twas cried in the
streets. I know it is easy to be jealous but every one knows it is uncharitable
too; unless we have a cause; we, that is, some peevish spirits among us, say,
that all along the late times, their Priests and Jesuits were in the enemies
army, and (under the disguises of Tailors and Weavers,) preached them into
rebellion: But if never any one of these were discovered, on what ground do we
say they were there? and if they were discovered, by what favor were they
protected against the Law? sure nothing can be aid why they were not found
guilty, but that they could not be found.

But it is time to conclude; for my part, let others do as they please, I Will
strive to love my own* Religion, without hating another man's; much less will I
hate another man for his Religion. I conceive him in an error, and he thinks
so of me; I have some marks of being in the right, and he believes he has as
many as I: I read the Bible, and so does he: And after all, our differences
continue: What shall we do, but live peaceably together, till it please God to
clear the truth among us; Only this advantage I cannot deny to the Papists,
that in temporal respects they are incomparably more tolerable, then either
Presbyterian or Fanatic; In spiritual, though we charge them all with Errors,
yet those of the Papists consists with the Being of our Church, the other
destroy it. Excuse this long Letter, and believe me ever,

SIR, Your most humble and H. M.
York, 13 May, 1663.
FINIS.

