THE Clergyman's Office, AND THE Clergyman's Due.

A SERMON Preached at the Triennial Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in
GOD EDWARD Lord Bishop of GLOVCESTER, AT CAMPDEN, October. 7. School.

By ROBERT MORSE, A. M. Rector of Willersy, in the County of Gloucester, and
Master of the Free School in Campden.

Fortis est falsam infamiam contemnere. Sunt qui quod sentiunt, etiamsi optimum
sit, tamen invidiae metu non audent dicere. Tul. Of. l. 1. p. 37. LONDON:
Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Henry
Clements, Bookseller, in Oxford, 1699.

To the Right Reverend Father in God Edward, by Divine Providence, Lord Bishop
of Gloucester.
My Lord,
HAving received your Lordship's Letter to Preach the Visitation-Sermon at
Campden, I was not long in resolving what Points of Doctrine to insist upon.

The Duty of Prayer took up my Thoughts in the first place; one of the
principal Duties of sinful Men, though now accounted (if we may guess by their
general Practice) the least of Christian Obligations. I am much afraid, that
they who are negligent in coming to the Public Divine Service, are not more
forward in the performance of this indispensible part of Religion elsewhere.

Though Common Prayer is now become a scandalous thing in the Opinion of some
(woe unto them by whom the offense comes) yet I am persuaded the more frequent
use good and wise Men make of it, the higher esteem they must have for it.

Discoursing once about the Excellency of our Service Book, (as some Men call
it by way of contempt, as if Book-Prayer was altogether Antichristian) with a
Minister of the Presbyterian Communion, upon his Accusations of it in General,
I desired him to instance in some Particular. After some pause, he at last
pitched upon these Words; Give Peace in our Time, O Lord, because there is none
other, etc. God be praised, by the Courage and Conduct of His Present Majesty,
King William, we have the Blessing prayed for: but, as the Learned Bishop
Stillingfleet says to Mr. Baxter, in his excellent Book of the Unreasonableness
of Separation, on a like occasion; at this rate some Men may want Causes to
defend, but they can never want Arguments.

That I take occasion in the second place to Discourse upon the Duty of
Thanksgiving, Gratitude at this time more particularly obliges me, and all of
us of the Reformed Persuasion. For I take it to be past all doubt, that we of
the Church of England, and Protestant Religion, were not long since in imminent
danger of losing the public Exercise of it.

In my third and fourth Particulars I aim at the Honor due to the Clergy, upon
the account of their Office; and show that they ought to preserve themselves
from Contempt, by a Demeanor suitable to their Sacred Office. That this of
ours is a despicable Deanery of Clergymen, we dare challenge our greatest
Adversaries to prove. Bishop Nicholson used to call it his Beloved Deanery; and
I hope we shall all deport our selves so as to find the like Approbation in
your Lordship, our Diocesan.

That Sober, Religious and Learned Ministers should be any where despised, must
proceed from a gross and barbarous rudeness of Men, mixed with an Atheistical
Genius: Wherever Men have been truly well Bred, sincerely Virtuous and Pious,
they have paid their due respects to God's Ministers.

That your Lordship may long enjoy that Happiness, wherever you are concerned,
as you justly merit it by your Love to the Church of England, which among
sundry other Instances you have signally demonstrated, in your late
Encouragement of the Minister of Cirencester, is the very hearty wish of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Dutiful And Humble Servant, ROBERT MORSE.

1 Thessal. Chap. V. 17, 18, 19 and 20 Verses. Pray without ceasing: In every
thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
Quench not the Spirit: Despise not Prophecyings.


THE Occasion of St. Paul's Writing this Excellent Epistle to the
Thessalonians, was the ill usage those among them who had embraced the
Christian Faith received, together with their Apostle, who had Preached it into
their Ears, and by those Instruments of Conveyance (God Blessing the Seed sown)
by the best of Demonstrations, and most Infallible Arguments, rooted it in
their Hearts. The hard Treatment they underwent, was from the Unbelieving Jews,
or their Adherents, who lived in Thessalonica, or were Inhabitants of some part
or other of Macedonia. They were none of them at that distance, but their
Malice and Revenge would bring them quickly together to Consult, and effect, if
possible, the Extirpation of the Christian Religion.

The Good Apostle had dealt very fairly with these Believing Thessalonians, and
the other Macedonian Christians; he had told them plainly what they must trust
to, if they were Christians in reality. 'Twas not a Life of Ease or Luxury they
were to lead, but such as his own; a Life of Labor and hard Travel, yet withal
alleviated by a cheerful Spirit, and a thankful Commemoration of the Disciple
being like unto his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, Mat. 10.25. With an
Assurance, That Sufferings for Christ's sake would not last for ever but the
recompense of the reward would, which God the Father, through the Merits of his
Son Christ Jesus, would bestow upon them.

The Persecutors of the Church, St. Paul knew, would flourish like a Green Bay
Tree for a while, but their end, he foresaw, without timely Repentance (which
he most earnestly desired) would be Infernal Flames; and that it would not be
long ever the Christians, as 'twas revealed to him from Heaven, should have a
glorious Deliverance; and after the Storms and Tempests of Persecution, quiet
Halcyon Days; as they had.

The danger was, least in the interim, upon a timorous prospect of the Trouble
that should intervene, they should be drawn away from the Profession of the
Faith, turning aside like a deceitful bow, Psalm. 78.57.

As to this Affair, St. Paul was very sollicitous, lest his labor in the
Gospel should prove in vain upon their accounts, tho not his own; as appears
from the Third Chap. of this Epistle, ver. 5. Wherefore he saw it necessary
frequently to put in mind what they were, and what to do. To this end may be
read what is antecedent and consequent in this Epistle to the Chapter where my
Text is.

Pray without ceasing.
In every thing give thanks, etc.
Quench not the Spirit.
Despise not Prophecyings.
Which Words are several short and pithy Sentences of Exhortation to Believers,
how to behave themselves in this World, in order to their being happy in
another, not limited wholly to the Thessalonians particular circumstances, but
very extensive, and reaching all Christians, of all times and places whatsoever.

In the Words we have these Particulars;

First, We are positively enjoined the great Duty of Prayer, and the Constancy
of it, Pray withont ceasing.

Secondly, The Duty of Thanksgiving in the like positive manner, and how
universally to be performed, and for what reason; In every thing give thanks;
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

Thirdly, We have a Negative Precept not to quench the Spirit; which includes
this Affirmative in it, viz. that we reverence the real gifts of good
Ministers, Sound and Orthodox Divines.

Fourthly and lastly, We are obliged not to despise Prophecyings, which is a
negative precept also, and contains this affirmative, that we set an especial
value on Genuine Interpretations of the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, meant
here by Prophecyings; and consequently on those that make them.

1. We are here positively enjoined the great Duty of Prayer, and the constancy
thereof, Pray without ceasing.

We have many Enemies to contend with in this Vale of Misery, and Temptations
to Sin; and those very potent, subtle, and ensnaring. Such is, First, the
Prince of Darkness, the Devil, with other his accursed Accomplices, and
Eternally condemned Retinue; partly by that Sublime Angelical Nature they are
of, and partly by that shrewd Experience they have gained by the indefatigable
diligence they have used for some Thousands of Years together, Egged on and
Exasperated by an inveterate hatred to Mankind in general. For these being
desperate Apostates themselves, and seeing a second Creation ordained, as it
were, in direct opposition to them, to supply the places in Heaven by these
Rebels Eternally lost, a keen and endless Malice inflames them to do all they
can, to bring us also into the place of Torments; where they will not pity us;
no, that will be as far from them as Heaven is (...) hell, but cruelly
Tyrannise and Insult over us when they have done: And also much Animated they
have been to persist in these their Diabolical Attempts, by that victory
obtained over Primitive Innocence, whereby their Stratagems have gone on with a
more fatal success over the infirm Posterity of our Lapsed first Parents.

2. Besides these fierce and implacable Foes, which will always be endeavoring
to draw us into Sin, and ruin all our hopes of Eternal Salvation, the World is
another Enemy that has a thousand Gins to entangle us in; such as, Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness, Profaneness, Irreligion, Voluptuousness, Intemperance,
and the like, which if compli'd with, will draw Men into Destruction and
Perdition.

3. Our own corrupt Flesh is apt to concur with these, to hinder us from doing
good, and incline us to evil; Hence arise inordinate Affections, and evil
Concupiscencies of the Mind. So that we must needs miscarry if we rely on our
own Strength, and seek not out for some Assistance more powerful than our
selves; and how is this to be sought, but from our gracious Father in Heaven,
who has promised to be found of them that seek Him, if they seek him with all
their Heart, and with all their Soul. This must be done by Prayer at the Throne
of Grace; and to this end the Apostle tells us, that we must pray always with
all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18. This he had from our Savior, who commands us to watch
and pray lest we enter into temptation; Mat. 26.41. and always to pray and not
to faint, Luke 18.1. We must pray every where, says St. Paul, lifting up holy
hands, without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8.

By this Prayer to God's Majesty, as we are taught to use it, w^ distinguish
our selves from Atheists and Heathens; It Is true the Heathens themselves, by the
Dictates of natural Reason and Religion, held themselves obliged to one sort of
Adoration or another; but here was the mischief, their Gods were no Gods;
Mentis ludicras omnia.

Picti ludibriae trunci.

Autebur in varias aut saxa incisa figuras.


they Worshipped the Fond Imaginations of their own Hearts, and many times the
work of their own Hands. They carved themselves Gods out of some senseless
Stone, or hewed them out of some inanimate Tree; of part whereof they made them
a Fire to warm their Hands at; of the other part they fashioned them Gods to
invoke and hold up their Hands unto. To this Horace alludes, Sermon. Lib. 1. Sat.
8. Olim Truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertis scamnum faceret ne Priapum
Maluit esse Deum.
But our Addresses are to the right Object, and Owner, God alone; A God that
can hear our Prayers, and not only can but will; a God that takes pleasure in
our Applications to him, and has commanded us not to neglect it to our own
hurt. We continually stand in need of God's Forgiveness and Pardon; when we
have Sinned (as, alas! who is there that Sins not?) we must pray for the
averting God's Wrath and Indignation; we cannot be penitent if we pray not; if
we confess not our Sins, we must not expect an Absolution of them.

Neither is the whole Duty of Prayer consisting of Confession alone, to expiate
for the past Offenses of our Lives; but it is also necessary to be used as a
Method of Prevention for the time to come. This is the Antidote to keep off the
infection of all Spiritual Maladies, the omission whereof is like going out
fasting in a time of Epedimical Pestilence, whereby a free Passage lies open
for the Contagious Air to insinuate it self, and corrupt the whole Mass of
Blood. The holy Father, and great Penitent, St. Austin, confessed it as a just
Judgment of God once upon him, in giving him over to the mischief of a
prevailing temptation, for having gone out that day without making his Prayer
to God, as he ought to have done, and as he used to do. It always behooves us
therefore, e're we enter on our several Employments, to beseech the favorable
Influences and Assistances of Heaven; else what good Success can we look for,
when we are out of God's Protection? But with his help what shall be able to
annoy us; what may we not obtain at his hands by Prayer that is really for our
Good?

It is a thing that is almost Omnipotent, like the God that hears it, and whom
it is made unto. Nay it binds the Hands of the Almighty himself; the effectual
fervent Prayer of the righteous avails so much. Thus, for instance, when the
Israelites in the absence of Moses, had made them a Golden Calf, and God was
angry thereat, he does as it were ask leave of Moses, as if he could do nothing
without his consent; Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may consume
them, it is a stiff-necked People: yet when Moses meekly besought the Lord, he
repented of the evil that he thought to do unto his People and he did it not,
in the Psalmist words; God said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, least he should
destroy them. Thus Nineveh was threatened, Yet forty Days, and Niniveh shall be
overthrown. This determination seems absolute and irreversible, yet it was not
so; for when the Ninevites fasted, and prayed, and repented, upon the preaching
of Jonas, this made God himself repent, Jonah, 3.10. O the wonderful Efficacy
of Devout Praying! So the Zealous Breath of Hezekiah's mouth scattered, like
Chaff before the Wind, the Numerous Host of a Blasphemous Sennaoherib, 2 Kings,
chap. 19. ver. 15. etc. and blew them into ruin and destruction. Thus his
earnest Entreaties and Tears disanull'd the sad message, Set thy house in
order, for thou shall surely dye and not live; for we read that God heard him,
and added to his Days 15 Years, Isa. 38.5. So True and infallible is the Word
of him that says, Whatever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive, Mat.
21.22.

We read in Eusebius of St. James the Just, how that his custom was, to enter
Daily into the Temple by himself, and there with bended Knees, to entreat for
Grace and Remission of Sins unto his People, (...). Eusebius. Lib. 2. c. 23.
Insomuch that his Knees were hardened like a Camels, into a callous substance,
by his constant using to Pray Kneeling. Which I mention not only as an Example
of constant Prayer, but also as to the Posture of it, Kneeling, miserably
neglected by the Majority, even of our own Communion.

Thus much for the Usefulness and Necessity of Prayer, which is of Three Kinds.

1. Private, in our Closets.

2. Domestic, with our Families.

3. Common, with the Church.

1. As for Private Prayer, it cannot be imagined, that any good Christian can
live a Day, nor scarce an Hour without it; so many are his Necessities, so
great his Infirmities, and so violent his Temptations: And it is not to be
expressed what good a short Ejaculation will produce to a Pious Christian, when
for want of Time, he can use no longer Address: what Comfort it brings to an
humble Penitent, though he say no more but with the Poor Publican in the
Gospel, smiting his Breast, God be Merciful to me a Sinner. Morning and Evening
we should implore God's Pardon for our Iniquities, his Grace to Support us, and
Enable us to serve Him; but as for Ejaculations, they should be as frequent, I
had almost said, as our Pulse beats, as the Minutes of our dying Breath.

2. Family-Devotions should not, unless upon very extraordinary Occasions, be
passed by Morning and Evening; that so we may make a neat Epitome of the Church
of GOD, in our several Habitations. Then,

3. As for Common Prayers, or the Prayers of the Church, they are the best of
all, especially as we have them; and we should be present at them, without
ceasing, as my Text says, (...), without leaving off; not forsaking the
Assembling of our selves together for this purpose. They are the Public
Prayers of the Church, as Expositors tells us, that St. Paul chiefly means in
this place, (...). The Words are (St. Luke, Chap. 21. and Ver. 26.) Always,
that is upon all Opportunities, especially upon the Lord's Day, and other
Feasts and Fasts of the Church.

And however it may be allowed us at home, to use a greater and more unconfined
Freedom of Expression, by our selves, or with our Families in some particular
cases; (though there I think Forms, generally speaking, most proper to be
observed) yet for the Church of God, I esteem Forms of Prayer, and an
Established Liturgy, so far from Stinting of the Spirit (as some Men would have
it, who know not what they mean, or else would not have other poor ignorant
Wretches understand) that nothing but wild Disorder and Confusion would arise
amongst us, if every one (who only fancies himself sufficient for the Work) was
to be his own, and the Congregations Prayer-Maker, upon every Return of Divine
Worship, who knows not how to Pray with the Spirit, and to Pray with the
Understanding also, 1 Cor. chap. 14. ver. 15.

And this may suffice for the Duty of Prayer. Only let me add this, with all
humble Submission to you (my Reverend and Learned Brethren of the Clergy) to
beseech you still to use the Prayers of the Church, with such Decency and
Devotion, as may show you to have truly Pious and well-affected Souls; and that
you Love and Admire the Unparalled Prayers of the Church, beyond any other
Compositions whatsoever: And as for the Crude, Extempore Effusions of
Enthusiasts, that you esteem them to admit of no Comparison (but what is
odious) with them.

Secondly, I pass on now to the Duty of Thanksgiving, and the Universality
thereof, and for what reason; of which more briefly.

The Apostle tells us, We must in every thing give thanks, because this is the
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us. Which is as much as to say, That we
must look unto God, as the great Disposer of all the things of this World, and
that what He allots, is best for us, in General and in Particular. If He
ordains us Adversities, Troubles and Sicknesses, Patience and Submission will
carry us through them, when Murmuring and Discontent will not ease our Load
here, but aggravate that and our Guilt together; and Repining and Reluctance
under our present Infelicities, will but consign us to a more irreversible
State of Dissatisfaction hereafter. The Apostle tells his Thessalonians, That
this is the will of God, that they should in every thing give Thanks, even in
Tribulations and Afflictions for the sake of Christ Jesus, whose Disciples they
were. Rejoice evermore, says he, ver. 16. of this Chapter.

Now this is the Life of our Religion in all Occurrences, to be of a Thankful
Temper to our good God, and to Adore him for his unspeakable Gifts the Gifts of
Food and Raiment, Health, Relations, Friends and Benefactors; all the
Necessaries and Conveniences of this Life; but above all for the means of
Grace and hopes of Glory; for the Purity of the Reformed Religion, and the
Benefits of the Gospel Light, which we enjoy in this our Goshen. That we are
not overwhelmed by the Darkness of Popish Superstition, by those sundry and
late Attempts that have been made to bereave us of this Happiness; that we are
not deprived of the Inestimable Privilege of serving God in such consecrated
Places as this, after the best and most Primitive Modes of Worship; that the
unjustifiable Paradoxes either of Rome or Geneva are not Transplanted hither:
We ought to render thanks, both Ministers and People, not only with our Lips,
but in our Lives. And that will induce God, when he sees us thus greateful to
him, to continue us in the state we are now, Objects of his Divine Favor, in
the preservation of our Church, as it is now amongst us Established, blessed be
his wonderful and most Glorious Goodness for it.

All you of our Communion, ought in particular to consider your Felicity in
being within the Pale of the Church, and that you have not blind Guides to lead
you astray, you know not whither, till you fall into the Bottomless Pit; that
you have such for your Pastors, as are able to confute all Gainsayers, able and
willing to instruct you in all the necessary Points of Salvation, rightly
dividing the word of God, and not rending it asunder, as the manner of some is;
such as Pray for you without ceasing, at home and in the Church; such as
instruct your Children in the Fundamentals of Christianity; the Excellent
Church Catechism; and your selves, as well as them, in the Exposition of it;
such as visit you in all your Distresses, and Trials, council, comfort, succor
you; For these Blessings we ought all to give Thanks, and for the enjoyments of
the Gospel without the cruelties of an Inquisition, or the barbarities of an
Oliverian sequestration. For if the Thessalonians were in every thing to give
thanks, and rejoice in the Lord always, though surrounded with Persecutions, much
more we who have no disturbance in our Religion, as the poor Afflicted
Protestants now in France and Savoy, and other places have, whom God of his
All-sufficient Grace support, God of his Infinite Goodness in his due time
deliver.

3. I proceed now, after these two foregoing positive precepts, to one that is
negative, which is this, Quench not the Spirit, including, as I intimated, this
affirmative, viz. That we reverence the real Gifts of Good and Faithful
Ministers, Sound and Orthodox Divines. The Spirit of God does not now adays
Operate in an extraordinary manner, as in the Primitive Times, so as to ennable
Men, otherwise Illiterate, as most of the Apostles were, to speak diverse
Languages, not taught them the common way.

The Apostles were (...), Inspired by the Holy Ghost, and in a more peculiar
manner (...), Taught Immediately by God. The holy Ghost descended visibly, in
Cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, as appears from Acts, Second and Third, from
whence this passage of not Quenching the Spirit, seems to be derived. And to
Give them their due, though many Enthusiasts boast of Inspiration, Extraordinary
Call, and Apostolical Endowments, to qualify them for the Work of the
Ministry, they pretend not to the Gift of Tongues; here they will grant that
the Spirit is stinted to them, and that they are not absolutely so good
Linguists as the Apostles were.

They have had those among them indeed, who have made a vain Ostentation of
this gift also; but they have been Subtle Popish Priests in Masquerade, who in
Mechanical Dresses, have endeavored to make men believe, that they never had
any learned Education, and yet that they did not want it, as having no less a
Person than the Holy Ghost himself for their Tutor, who has taught them the
Learned Tongues; but these have been detected for Impostors, by trying them in
such Languages as they have not understood. And so for the gift of Healing,
Curing the Deaf, Blind, Dumb, Lunatic and Paralytick, and Ejecting of Devils,
they do not lay claim to them; and yet one thing, observe by the way, they
assume to themselves, which is the Gift of Unpremeditated Prayer, and yet that
is not mentioned amongst any of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, described at large
in 1 Cor. 12. nor in any other place of Holy Scripture beside.

It may be asked then here, What is the Quenching of the Spirit now adays? Does
not the Spirit of God work still on the Children of Obedience, as well as the
Evil Spirit on the Children of Disobedience? Ephesians. 2.2.

I Answer Yes, without doubt, so as to assist all those that use honest
Endeavors, and proper Means, to fit themselves for the Ministerial Function.
But how can we once think that God will work Miracles upon some, to save them
the Pains of Study, and the Charges of Education, and forsake others, that by
all possible care, have made it their Business, and been at great Expense both
of Time, and upon other accounts, to qualify themselves for the Ambassadors of
Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 5.20.

For my part (and I doubt not the concurrent Sentiments of all unprejudiced and
considerate Persons) I give no credit to any that arrogate to themselves a
Supernatural Call to the Ministry. With great and profound Humility, we Sons of
the Church of England, are ready to acknowledge, That the best Men of us all
are unable to act any good thing, as of our selves alone, but our Sufficiency
is of God. We owe all we can say or do well, to the Aid of God's good and
gracious Spirit, Cooperating with our earnest though weak Endeavors. But how
unlikely is it, and indeed absurd, to imagine, That God should deny us the
Blessings of his Holy Spirit, who are always praying for its Sanctifying
Influences, kind and benign Assistances, and by incessant Studies, striving to
improve our Talents of Grace, Learning and Knowledge, for the Edification of
our Brethren; and bestow it in a Super-eminent degree upon Persons who never
had any extraordinary Parts, or common Ingenious Education, so as to enable
them to do more without any precious Pains, than those who have always been
diligent to supply themselves with necessary Sciences of all sorts, in order to
the great Work of the Ministry?

Certainly our Heavenly Father has always been more propitious to the sedulous
Endeavors of his Pious Servant, joining the help of his Spirit with ordinary
means; such as Learning, Study, Meditation, comparing of Passages of Holy
Scripture one with another, Consulting Original Languages, and the like. This
undoubtedly is the way to a true Gospel Ministry, to have such for the Guide of
Souls, as have had good Education, have been such Studious Preparers of
themselves for their Sacred Office, that as it would be presumption in them in
the highest degree, to expect Miracles in these Days, to make them Learned
Rabbis extempore of Illiterate Men, so (God be praised) it is no wise
necessary for them to plead any such thing, as being qualified for the Work in
the usual Method, as the Nature of our Established Church requires, viz. by
being taught the Learned Tongues in their youthful Days, Philosophical
Insititutions in their fresher Academick Gowns (which Philosophy is justly
Styled the Handmaid to Divinity) and afterward in the Maturity of their
Judgments, have searched into the great Truths of the Christian Religion,
Perused the Councils, Fathers and Primitive Writers, and the Defenses and
Apologies of our Church, against all sorts of Opposers. Which by the Grace of
God will still be done, against Atheists and Theists, which, I look upon to be
as near in their Notions, as they are in their Names, if not, many of them
(though dissembled) altogether the same: Against Socinians, who deny the Lord
that bought them, and put him to an open shame, who, as far as in them lies,
make Him suffer in his Divinity, as he did once in his Humanity: Against
Jesuited Romanists, and Bigoted Separatists and Schismatics, of what
Denomination whatsoever; in the mean time showing a Spirit of Moderation, and
of some having Compassion, making a difference, as St. Jude speaks, ver. 22.
endeavoring to win them, together with the Strength of Arguments, by all the
Sweetness of Temper imaginable, Brotherly Love and Respect, Neighbourly Visits,
especially in any Affliction, extraordinary Emergency or Occasion; but above
all, by the Gravity of our Deportment, and the Luster and Ornament of Sober and
Religious Lives.

Where there is such a Ministry, as God be thanked ours is, And Honor is due;
Divines that have been Episcopally Ordained, according to the custom of the
Church from the Apostles times, having been strictly examined as to their
Abilities before admitted Graduates in the Universities; afterward, before the
Imposition of Hands for the Susception of Holy Orders, by the Holy Prelates of
the Church themselves, or by persons of Learning and Integrity deputed by them,
whom they can safely confide in for that weighty purpose.

These are the Levites that (as the Scripture speaks) the Laity are not to
forsake as long as they live upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 12.19. such are to be
reverenced for their works sake, the Message which they came upon, being no
less than the Reconciliation of Men to God; the Salvation of their unvaluable
and immortal Souls. Which is one great meaning of the not quenching the Spirit;
that as the Ministers of the Gospel should not by neglect of their Office, and
illness of their life's (which God avert) drive off the Holy Spirit from
assisting them in their Labor, but keep up Godliness and Religion, by devout
Prayer and good Preaching, joined with a sober exemplary Life and Conversation;
so where such persons and gifts are seen, none should be averse to them, as if
they were false Prophets; None should rob them of their Tithes and Dues, which
is called robbing of God, Malac. the 3d. and v. 8. and such sacriligious
Persons are said to be cursed with a Curse in the verse following; None should
wrong them in their good Names, by execrable Lies and Villainous Slanders, or
any way grieve or misuse them; none should be (...) (as I may so speak) haters
of the Clergy, which yet more than a good many are, but (...), lovers of the
Clergy, remembering that ancient observation, Qui vera fide colit Deum, amat
etiam Sacerdotum. He that loves God in sincerity, loves his Ministers so too;
and as the Apostle speaks, let us be so accounted of, as Ministers of Christ,
and stewards of the Mysteries of God. 1 Cor. 4.1. And that all we that are
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, may be found
faithful in our several Stations, which is required of us v. 2 of that Chapter.
May the Good Spirit of God guide and direct us, that thus by the goodness of
our Lives, and soundness of our Doctrine, we may save both our selves and them
that hear us, 1 Timothy 4.16.

4. Which introduces the Fourth and last Particular, Despise not Prophesying,
i. e. Genuine Interpretations of the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, nor
consequently those that make them, such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, as
the Apostle's expression is to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.17.

The Holy Scripture is the Rule that we are all to walk by, and the Expounding
of this, and the exciting our Brethren, from the Examples, Precepts, Promises,
and Threats thereof, how to deport themselves, is our Ministerial Office and
Duty. That the word Prophecy is Interpreting Scripture and preaching upon it,
is evident from the 14 Chap. of the 1 Ep. to the Cor. v. 1. Follow after
Charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy; and v.
3.4. He that Prophecieth, speaks unto men to Edification, and Exhortation and
Comfort; he that speaks in an unknown Tongue, edifieth himself, but he that
prophecieth Edifieth the Church. This was our Savior Christ's Prophetic
Office, to make known the Will of God to the World, and so all that have in any
good degree done the like, are styled Prophets, all that have Taught men their
Duty toward God and man. Thus among the Pagans, the Divines who taught them
what they ought to do, their Priests or Religious Persons, were termed Vates,
Prophets. The word does always imply such as are indu'd with a Spirit of
foretelling future Events, but as Grammarians, informs us, naturally signifies
no more than a Procurator, or Prolocutor, speaking from, or instead of another,
or acting in his stead; as a Pro-Consul is he that supplies the Consul's Place,
(...) in Composition being the same with (...). Upon this account the Jewish
High Priest was a Prophet to his People, who entering into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, to inform himself of God's Will, was to reveal
the same to the People. In the like Sense it is that God says to Moses,
concerning Aaron, He shall be thy Spokesman to the People, and he shall be to
thee a mouth, and thou shall be to him instead of God, Exodus 4.16. That which
is here rendered Spokesman, Orator, or Prolocutor, is Chap. 7.5. Interpreted
Prophet. See (says God) I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy Prophet. In the acceptance of speaking from Man to God,
Abraham is called a Prophet, Genesis 20. v. 7. where God in a Dream speaks to
Abimilech in this manner: Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. Whence may be inferred, that the
Appellation of Prophet may be ascribed, not improperly, to them who in
Christian Congregations have a due Ministerial Call to put up public Petitions
for their People, and Administer all the Offices of Religious Worship. Now,
though the Word of God it self, in this degenerate Age, is despised by many
evil Men, under the Notion of Revealed Religion, which they are great
Contemners of, yet since it is clear as the Sun, that it is unjustly and
groundless (no Writings whatsoever having the like Authentic Truth, as the
Learned Bishop Stillingfleet, in his Origines Sacra, makes appear) So I take
those Words to be Reflection sufficient upon them, and which ought to be a
Terror to them, from the Examples of others, as being spoken on the like
occasion, Acts 13.41. Behold the desisers, and wonder, and perish. The
Despisers of the Gospel are here particularly threatened, for disbelieving and
rejecting our Savior's Resurrection, and other Divine Works foretold by the
Prophets long before. And what if the Romanists vilify this Word of God in
comparison with their Traditions, their Foolish and Ridiculous Legends (as the
Pharisees of old) is it ever the worse in it self? No, it is for this very
reason that they do it, assigned by St. John, chap. 3.20. Every one that does
evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved. And as for those that call it a Dead Letter, doubt we not, upon the
good evidence we have, but they received it from those Deluders, the first
Projectors of this rude and ill manner'd antic and ridiculous Profession.

As to us Ministers of the Church of England, we desire upon all accounts to
have the Scripture for our Test, To the Law and to the Testimony, as Isaiah
speaks, Isa. 8.20. They who speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them. If the Scripture be not on our side, let none bid us
God speed, or wish us good luck in the Name of the Lord, 2 John 10. Maledictus
est, says St. Austin, qui quidpiam praedicat, praeterquam, quod in Scripturis
legis and Evangelii recepimus. Though an Angel from Heaven should preach
otherwise, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. But (as it has been sufficiently
proved against all our Adversaries) if we act consonantly to the Word of God,
derive the Authority of our Commission and Doctrine from thence, and live
accordingly, then are we not to be despised, but to be accounted worthy of a
double Honor; then they that despise us, despise Christ that sent us, and our
Heavenly Father that sent Him, Luke 10.19. Despise not man but God, who has
given unto us his holy Spirit, 1 These. 4.8.

St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 3. That the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus: And that all Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. (...), The Man of God, that
is the Teacher or Preacher of the Gospel, sent, and authorized by God, may by
the Study of the Scriptures be supplied upon all Occasions to discharge his
Duty toward Men's precious Souls, committed to his care.

The necessity of these public Instructions from the Public, may be deduced
from Romans 10.14, 15. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in Him, of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they
be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?

That the Ministers of our Church are lawfully Commissioned, and sent to Preach
the Gospel, I have showed before, as not usurping the Office of the Ministry,
but having received the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, (...), the
Bishops, as the Word signifies; no Inferior Novel Imposition.

Which Episcopal Order, that it has been from the Apostles times, is manifest
from the Apostles themselves: For St. Peter was Bishop of Antioch; Titus
Archbishop of Crete, and Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. And we need go no further
for the proof of it, than those Words in this Chapter, Ver. 12. and 3. where
you find my Text; We beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly
in Love for their works sake. The Greek Words, (...), those are set, or rule
over you, signify the Bishops of the several Churches in those days, called in
the first times (...), as the Learned Dr. Hammond observes. As appears then,
Preaching was one of the Bishop's principal Works of old, which since they
cannot do so constantly in all places now adays, their Diocesses being so
large, and their Avocations so frequent upon diverse accounts, our Church has
found it necessary to have settled Parochial Ministers, who are to be Faithful
and Wise Stewards under Christ and them, Rectors or Rulers over God's Household,
the Church, to give them their Portion of Meat, Spiritual Sustenance for their
Souls, in due Season.

To conclude then, Happy ye Sons of the Tribe of Levi, the Lot of God's own
Inheritance, Priests of the Most High God; who like Timothy, from your Youth
have Studied the Word of God, and ever since made it your Employment and
Delight together, to Consult these Lively Oracles: Here is the inexhaustible
Fountain of Comfort, to which you Shepherds of Souls are to lead your Flocks;
here are the Pastures whence you are to Feed those whom Christ has Purchased
with his own Blood; from this Magazine you are to Arm your selves and others,
to war a good warfare; fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold on eternal
life: Hence you are to supply your selves with Materials, as the Apostle speaks
in this Chapter, v. 14. where my Text is, To warn them that are unruly, comfort
the feeble-minded, support the weak, and be patient toward all men; i. e. To
preserve your Flocks from the Inroads of Wolves in Sheeps clothing, to spare no
Pains to reduce the lost or straggling Sheep, from the Example of the good
Shepherd in the Gospel, That bore him on his shoulders rejoicing, Luke 15.5.
Hence, like Boanerges, the Sons of Thunder, whilst you proclaim the Terrors of
the Lord against hardened and presumptuous Sinners, you are to Animate the
timorous and weak of Faith, that they despair not, pouring Oil into their
Wounds, and showing them what a Gracious God, upon unfeigned Repentance, they
have to deal with. And as the Apostle speaks to the Galatians, Gal. 6.1. to
restore such as are overtaken in a Fault. Brethren, says he, if a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, (...), Divines, restore such a
one in the spirit of meekness. Blessed are they, whom the Lord, when he comes,
shall find so doing; if He come in the Second, or come in the Third Watch,
blessed are those Servants; assuredly, when Christ, the Chief Shepherd shall
appear, they shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

FINIS.

