THEMIS AVREA.

THE LAWS OF THE FRATERNITY OF THE ROSY CROSS.

Written in Latin by Count MICHAEL MAIERUS, And now in English for the
Information of those who seek after the knowledge of that Honorable and
mysterious Society of wise and renowned Philosophers.

-- Quae non fecimus ipsi Vix ea nostra voco --
Whereto is annexed an Epistle to the Fraternity in Latin, from some here in
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill: 1656.

To the most excellently Accomplished, The only Philosopher in the present
age: The Honored, Noble, Learned, ELIAS ASHMOLE, Esquire.
SIR,
SO few and precious is that number of the sons of wisdom, which the Creator
(as so many Jewels) has laid up in his Treasury from the beginning, for the
adornation of the World, as that more then one cannot be afforded to stand as a
Golden Candlestick for the holding forth that Lucerna Dei to the sons of men,
by the light whereof the most reclused Mysteries, both natural and divine, may
in some measure (such as is fit for us to know while we remain in these earthly
tabernacles) be discovered to those diligent and humble seekers who make it
their business to search after the knowledge of the Creator in the works his
hands have made.

That this was the principal end and design of the divine goodness in
bestowing your self upon the world, we are fully convinced by those
Scintillations which our eyes (dim as they are) have seen darted from that uxor
solis which has its habitation in your breast: and although we should be
frustrate of our ends in the present design, it is an happiness great enough that
we have lived at such a time, and in such a place as has given us the
opportunity to know and be acquainted with a man in whose bosom God has so
abundantly stored up the treasures of all sorts of wisdom and knowledge. The
main of our wishes are that we may so acquit our selves as that you may have no
cause to repent of those kindnesses and respects wherewith you have or shall
honor

Your servants, N. L. T. S. H. S.


The Preface.
THe Goddess Themis after the Deluge being asked of Deucalion and Pyrrha, how
Mankind swept away with the overflowing of the Waters, should again be restored
and multiplied, commanded them to throw over their heads the Bones of their
Great Mother: the which Oracle they rightly interpreted concerning the stones
of the Earth, and thereby attained their desired end; For which cause Themis
was afterward accounted the first Promulgatrix of Laws. But without doubt Her
answer was not thus understood by the ancient Poets, who supposed that she
rather meant that Mankind was generated by two stones, the Male, and the
Female, whence proceeds the wonderful multiplication of that Golden Medicine:
For the Man Deucalion, and his Wife Pyrrha are the Gabritius and Beia, the Sun
and the Moon, which two by projection of their Specific stones can multiply
even to a thousand. Pyrrha within is ruddy, not unlike the color of Flesh,
although Her outward garments are white, and some have named Her according to
her clothing: Deucalion is a Lion, not in body, but spiritually; not in shape,
but operation; because He is so cruel to his Wife that he kills her, and then
bewraps her with his bloody mantle. But very few have attained the true
knowledge of the Oracle; since most men apprehend it to be only an History, and
thence draw some wholesome Morals, which here have no place, neither were they
ever intended.

And now this Title is vindicated viz. why we call it the Golden Themis which I
Dedicate to the Courteous Reader.

For seeing it is as much the Property of a man to reason, and judiciously to
determine, as it essentially belongs to a bird to fly, or an horse to run and
traverse the Fields; we would not impose on any, or seem to deprive them of
their native freedom by captivating any ones Judgment.

It is said of the whetstone, that being it self blunt, yet it sharpens other
things; and though the Steel and flint have not actually fire in them, yet
being struck against each other, they mutually send forth sparks; give me
leave (I pray thee) to apply. For if thou reapest any profit hereby, I shall
think my self to have been serviceable.

Be Candid and Farewell.

Viris clarissimis, sapientissimis and vere Philosophis, Fratribusque
conjunctissimis R. C. S. P. D. Theod. Verax. Theophil. Caelnatus.
CVm oculi nostri Humum and Terrena quaelibet despicientes, in Altum paulo
sublati essent, aciem collectis una radiis fixerunt, ut Coelum and Aethera sin
minus penetrare, ad illa tamen sine piaculo collimare possint; etenim apud nos
haud leve habebatur solatium, intueri raptius, and mirari ^a quae capere non
licuit; and sane Aemulatio tantum pia erat, eo non nisi impetu ferri, quo
consultius ire metuimus: penna nostra dum humilis sort pulverem tuto
excitasset, sed ambitioso admodum volatu ruinam vereatur, cadat tamen in aquas,
at Audaciae crimen eluat; immo cadat in aquas quae solum long supereminent;
adeo ut aliqualis fuerit gloria labi, and quodam deficerimus Triumpho: sic
meteora casu accensa micant and terrorem diro ineutiunt praecipitio. Verum nos
tum Pietate, tum candore vestro tanquam alis utrinque expansis suffulti, and
supra Livorem sordide reptantem, and supra Inscitiam inerti pondere
degravantem, facile erigemus.

Quidni igitur ipso in vestibulo salvam esse rem auguremur? quodcunque enim
judicium de nobis feratis, idem emolumento erit, si blandum; mox facilem
gratulabimur Favorem, si modo severius, quanto magis miseri indigemus, tanto
amplior Benevolentiae a^sa conceditur.

Et vobis nimium molesti, and nobis ingrati essemus, si a capite ad calcem
hodiernae causam querelae enarraremus; utcunque tamen cum taciturnitas aut
stultitiae sit index, aut superbiae, utramque vitabimus, ne in Scyllam
incidamus aut Charibdim. Juvat igitur (Pace vestra) totam miseriae seri^m
breviter percurrere, ut inde quietem and solamen speremus; siquidem aliquod
infortunii levamen est aerumnas effutire.

Nobis serio pensitantibus Philosophiam a Scholis corruptam esse, and quotidie
magis horrenda quam ipsa Africa parturire monstra, illico terreri caepimus, and
illam dehinc tractare perhorruimus; ecquis enim sui compos pectori serpentem
admovebit, ut vivaciori pungat aculeo? ecquis (perituri instar natatoris)
fallaci unda attolli optabit ut celerius imum petat, ut profundius immergatu^?

Aristoteles, uti and caeteri ejusdem facinae, Philosophiam nostram impotenti
suae gloriae studio ancillare eoegerunt, and nulla hodie veritas esse creditur,
nisi quam illi invenerunt: sic nobis placita obtrudunt, and scientiae avidos
adunco servituti hamo inescare solent; sed ingrati ingenuis, si non turpes
habentur Tituli quos aliena illis inscribit ignominia; nec laud dignum est,
per quorundam ruinas, quasi tot gradus, sublimia ambire.

Non est nostrum tot s^ripta secretis luxuriantia igni tradita hic deplorare,
quorum Splendour satis emicuit, dum cremarentur; nec omnino incredibile est
scintillas multo licet cinere depressas, aliquando clarissima eruptururas face.

Nescit profecto veritas ullas fallendi technas, quae larvata non incedit, sed
nuda, ut sine naevis and errore se spectatoribus exhibeat; unica haec sibi
constat, and quanquam plurimi ejus nomine utantur, ut tuto n^hil cogitantes
decipiant, illa tandem fallere prorsus nescia mendaces deteget; qui interim eam
officiose insectantur, non solum ipsi statutam attingent metam, sed vestigia
post se linquent quae alios pari felicitate ad eundem literaturae apicem ducent.

Nos etiam prosperum nobis sponderemus exitum, si neglectis cujuslibet
Philosophastri ambagibus (quod perquam difficile est) paucorum passus, licet
non aequare oculo, tamen concomitari valeremus: miseri adhuc in lumine
haeremus, and nisi aliquis quasi a Caelo nobis viam calcandam indigite^,
commune pariter n^s manet Fatum, senes erimus Elementarii. Pudet, he^ pudet ^
nos cantilenis nescio quibus allici, quae demulcent, juxta ac consopiunt, pro
comperto habemus plusquam mill hominum mira consentiendi ignavia periisse;
prosit interim, nobis edocta aliorum periculis cura, and s^ modo daretur optio,
nos colluctatione mori quam desperatione supina absorberi maluimus.

Vos itaque (viri Prudentissimi) vota nostra solicit petunt, penes quos est
opem far; tenuitatis nostrae sat conscii sumus, and ideo remedium quaerimus:
lethali nondum (uti sperare est) morbo laboramus, quippe qui male nos habere
probe adhuc sentimus; and ille calamitatem prope videtur evasisse, qui stuporem
excussit, and ad se rediit.

Languentes fere spes nostras sterilesque vos mitiore humanitatis jubare
animastis, and in vindemiam canescere jussistis; adeo ut libera jam certe
eruditionis paeteat Jan^a: nemo imposterum Artibus non Vltra figat, vos enim
exorsi estis ubi alii omnes Finem statuerunt and columnam. Veluti etiam
enarrabiles sunt vestri quavis Facultate progressus, ita and Clementia
Panegyrim superat and vel inde licet conjicere vos omni numero absolutos, quia
tam mites and blandi estis: ii solum Frontem contrahunt, qui in rugis inscitiam
latere vol^nt, qui omnes in parts suas trahent, eosque satis cum imperio
cogent assentiri, quibus adversari ^iment.

Ignoscite nobis (viri Spectatissimi) si inepte efferamus illa, quorum adhuc
ignari sumus; certe elaboratum exigit encomium, quicquid sub vestrum titulo in
luc^m prodit; and Fama vestra seipsam sola valuit ebuccinare: nobis tamen far
et furfure liceat tantis Nominibus litare, quae cum (uti par est) la^dare non
possimus, nobis venerari Religio erit.

Libellum vestrum omni ex part nostro animo usque congruum quasi nobis
solummodo conscriptu^ fuisse opinemur, and revera Providentia haud vulgaris
erat, quae nos e Cimineriis plusquam tenebris nonnihil eduxit, et in dubia luce
collocavit, quae Solemn mox oriri efficiet, et optatam dabit meridiem ubi nulla
fere umbra, aut saltem brevissima se nobis sociabit.

Nos non sumus ex eorum numero, qui elati nimis, cachinno et sannis solent ea
accipere, quae Institutioni suae non quadrant perinde acsi Doctrina illis tam
arcto vinculo alligata esset, ut nemo st^e ^orum consilio illam adire, ut
salutare possit: nempe Hi fast^osi sunt Peripatetici, qui in Aristotelis verba
jurarunt, qui Ethnico ded^re nomi^^, in suum exitium Fideles; Hi sunt qui inani
aura ^umentes, orbem iis angustum nimis conqueruntur, qui Axiomata satis larga
tradunt cuivis rixae apta* idemque iisdem fere verbis modo aiunt, modo negant:
Atque Hi (Boni viri) strenui audiunt veritatis Patroni! sed nodum quem solvere
non possunt, risu disrumpunt, probe enim aliorum laboribus multum invident,
quos in exile corpus mox odio marcescere videre erit.

Vobis nauseam crearemus, si ineptias quibus ^orum Libri scatent, in medium
proferremus; quotiescunque enim magnum aliquod mysterium tractandum venit, id
vel dubie et obscure absolvunt, vel prorsus negligunt: Quis ab Aristotele
materiam ediscet? quam cantus occultare voluit, ne inseitiam proderet; verum
quia admodum difficile est arcana haec rimari, an ideo tutum est errare? majori
quidem commodo id penitus latet, quicquid in ulterius damnum explicatur:
fortassis multi ingenio pollentes materiam hanc invenire aggressi fuissent,
nisi prius inventum putassent.

Nescimus quonam Privilegio Aristoteles Antecessoribus eruditione ceden^
(utinam and animi simplicitate) se omnem veritatem detexisse iactitet; suas
enim habent Litterae vices; Cum itaque Aristoteles omnium aetates hominum non
vixerit, absit utnos (nisi in poenam) vivos cadaveri jungeremus, ut scriptis
fama defunctis, nova inventa collocaremus.

Philosophia autem vestra (viri eruditissimi) non est hisce nugis referta, sed
abditissima Naturae secreta clarissime pandit. Parum sane laudis est vilia
feliciter indagasse, ultro produnt se lapides quos nemo colligit; illud
solummodo vobis dignum, quod alios lass^vit; and fumi qui omnium fere oculos
extinxere, vestros reddiderunt acutiores. Philosophia etia^ vestra modesta est,
and vere docta, quippe quae e Coelo lapsae est, originem S. S. Scripturis
debet, ex quibus veritatem tuto discernere licet; nihil siquidem illic vel
suspicatui habere possumus, multo minus erroris arguere: cum igitur unusquisque
Sacram paginam volvat, quorsum falsa improbo labor amplectimur, and fugitivam
deperimus umbram? cur gradum sistimus? quin materiam cujusque rei e Bibliis
er^amus; nam plusquam verisimile est Deum, qui liquidum illud Naturae creavit
id optime proditurum; siquis scriptis hisce incubuerit, brevi sciret a qua
materia omne quod vivit, tanquam tot rivuli a mari suam hausit originem, nec
non in illam ludente paulisper unda exoneratur.

Qui pertina citer negant quosdam esse viros quos Deus selegit, ut intime
mysteria cognoscant, summam pariter Creatoris curam tollunt, qui nihil nobis
utile and necessarium negabit. Qui enim totam universi machinam in humani
generis usum fabricatus est, tum in suiipsius gloriam, tum in nostrum commoda
ejus opera intelligi voluit; Quorundam igitur mentes e coelo eluminavit; and
cogitationes quid plane divinum meditantes indidit; captus sane noster adeo
humilis est, ut plurima supra vires experiatur; perpetuis torqueri studiis,
solitum non concedere oculis somnum, penes nos sunt; sed nisi radii coelestes
in mente accendant diem, ipsis nox oritur vigiliis; nisi Deus fere insperato
superveniat auxilio, ipse labor est tantum operosius otium.

Deus igitur Ter opt. Max. uti d^o prima mundi origin creavit Lumina, quibus
omnia conspici ac illustrari possint, ita quorundam animos tanta Luce affudit,
ut Solemn ipsum, Lunamque ne dum occoecati intueantur, ut creaturis Face illa
coelesti praesint, et florere eas efficiant: ita Chaos literaturae in gloriosam
evasit fabricam, coelum in terras descendit, utrunque centrum semota superficie
semet in conspectum dedit, et siquae adhuc majora, a^demus dicere ea quosdam
non latere.

Verum hanc esse Societatem Vestram cui Deus oracula aperuit, multa sunt qu^
nos i^ducunt, ut credamus: Probabilius quidem est illum Ecclesiae suae potius
miranda Haec indulsurum quam Ethnicis qui scintillantem Naturae Facem Soli
accendunt; and siquando Lux e Caelo i^ micet, magis inde coecutiunt; quippe
oculi tenebris perpetuo versati, Lumen tam purum minime sine detrimento ferant:
Hand dubio Deus iisdem quibus su^ mysteria libere donavit, alia dabit beneficia
paulo inferiora; qui Lege Divina peritissimi sunt, convenit etiam ut illi
Naturae non sint ignari; qui denique in Dominae admit^untur consortium,
Ancillae ejus eodem pacto fiuut Familiares.

Alia subinde Ratio est quia admodum pauci estis; vulgus multitudo est, sed
rudis, nocetque illi in altum spiranti propria moles, cum interim unus aut
alter mira se moveant agilitate, and super^^ evadant ad auras: vilescit p^rro
quicquid temerariis omnium manibus tractatur; sagax igitur Natura divitias
i^timo sinu occultavit, ne sordescerent: ita sua habet and Ar^ penetralia;
illius petendae sunt Gemmae, effodiend^m est Aurum, Divinum etiam opus est
auxilio ut haec ita and illa investigemus.

Fama Vestra in linguam translata Anglicanam ad nostras man^^ pervenit (edita
simul Praefatione Viri Illustrissimi E. P. Orbis Britanici Soli^) in illa
scripsistis vos plures modo dignos in Societatem adoptaturos:

I Will hinc procul ite Prophani. Non decet omnes cujuscunque faerinae hom^^ciones
in tantam Humanitatem involare, aut alios spei melioris eam ante pedes positam
conculcare: accerrima interim in nobis exorta est pugna, utpote qui nos tanti
favoris immeritos negare non possumus, sed tandem impotentia nobis visa est
Vestrae Gratiae succumbere, sic gauvisi sumus, quia victi, and vestrum
exoscul^mur Laurum.

Caterum amputato uno Hydrae capite, aliud subinde se attollit, adeo ut
Infortunium nostrum damno videatur vir^s acquisivisse; ad illud igitur tanquam
Virtuti affine contendimus; quod difficultatibus acsi numeroso satellitio
constipatur: Nobis a^sa defuit ad vos mittendi; ubi terrarum vos quaererent
Epistolae non satis constitit, quibus nominatim literas inscribere aeque
incertum; siquidem and Nomina, uti and degendi locus quoscunque nisi vos ipsos
latent.

Paulatim, itaque invasit animos Tristitia, and Queruli, uti accidere solet
anxiis, haec verba ejulavimus. Quid proderit nobis manus auxiliatrix quae
calamitatem nostram non attingat? Sint Fratres R. G. Viri Sapientissimi, etiam
and Benevoli; quid inde hoc solatii, nisi nos beneficiorum compotes simus? id
sane nos magis torquet, quod in deliciis habitum non consequan^ur, uti sitim
accendit augetque aquarum scaturigo e longinguo sita; sic novissima faelicitas
aerumnas, reddidit acutiores; ille enim qui semel frustra speravit, est bis
miser.

Altum subito exoriri silentium videbatur, and sacra vox (...) hunc retulit
Responsum. Quam solicit ambitis Fraternitatem, tandem Dei gratia invenietis;
vota vestra non irrita in aerem evanuerunt; haud dubio qui ejusmodi scintillam
primo accendit, eandem in flammam erumpere and potest efficere and vult:
pergatis itaque tanto flagrare discendi studio, and ascendet ad nos licet
obtorta face ardens industria.

Auditis hisce, timorem omnia fere membra modo occupantem abjecimus, and quasi
redivivis spiritus etiam and agiliores rediere; omnia denique superato dolor
Gratitudinem spirarunt; multum vel ipso lapsu profecimus: sic flores imbre
nonnihil depressi, vegetiores evadunt, and eo latius expandunt folia, quo
compendiosius contraxerunt.

Plusquam verisimile est multos auro allectos Societatem vestram optare;
student, ^^arcescunt ut crescat pecunia, ut arca impleatur; sed revera opes and
omnia id genus sordent, si eximia Scienti^ dignita^ spectetur: istum sane
Metallorum Regem procatur Ignorantia, quae exinde tam profligatae soboli^ fit
matter: Alii porro ut suppetat iis quod voluptatibus indulgeant, Fraternitatem
sollicitabunt: iis cerebrum in ventrem degeneravit, Artesque proh nefas ad
compotaticnes vocant; quis non miretur aliquem tardum ventris onus vix posse
post se trahere? Vrbes Gentesque uno cyatho absorbere? Maluimus autem nos
Secreta nescire, quam ut iis freti in sceler^ rueremus.

Vobis interim (Viri Doctiss^mi) ne mirum videatur nos in^er tot calls misere
lassatos ad Mercurios Indices accedere qui terendam praemonstrent viam. Multi
profecto scribendi pruritu laborantes Artibus scabiem induxere: Hic ad magnum
Elixar contendet, ille ad Panacaeum, uterque etiam Aenigmatice scribit ut
obscuritate decipiant: Quot homines toto vitae curriculo insudarunt, ut quod
Author ipse non intellexit in eo invenirent? quem igitur in exemplum proponere
difficile admodum est judicatu; etenim sat liquet illos qui igne Fatuo illusi
sunt, alios etiam, ne ipsi ridiculo sint, in eandem provocare sortem: ita
multum juvat infaelices miseriae socios habuisse.

Ne igitur inconsulti habeamur, qui spretis Pseudo-philosophorum promissis,
toti veritatem indagamus; terra sterilis esse solet, quae Aurum tegit, nullis
luxuriat floribus, qui praetereuntium oculos delectent, and ad latentem ducant
Thesaurum; haud aliter qui Naturae secreta callent, taciturni sunt, and tanquam
nescii, rarissima audire est verba, scripta fere nulla emittunt quae Discipulos
alliciant, imo se potius subducunt, ut magis occultentur, altoque silentio vivi
sepeliantur.

Quocirca liquido constat, neminem, licet plurimum studiis invigilaverit, posse
proprio Mart arcana haec a^tingere: qui falso interpretati sunt veterum
Fabulas, novas tantum excuderunt; qui very sunt Mystae omnia de industria tam
spissis offudere tenebris, ut quicunque ea dignoscere aggrediatur, citius
mentem amittat, quam instructiorem habeat.

Nos omnia haec animis serio perpendentes iterum atque iterum vos obnixe
rogamus nostrum misereri; vota nostra quoniam grande aliquod sapiunt, fausta
sint: Fatemur nos adhuc Iuvenes esse and Tyrones (uti etiam Epistola minus
nervosa indicat) sed animus forte nobis senior inditus; simus tamen teneri, dum
sequaces: quodvis facile illi imprimitur, quos nullum adhuc vitiavit sigillum:
Sumus etiam Duo quasi unico anim^ ad idem tamen contendentes; and quid obstet
quo minus Fraternitas vestra Gemellos uno partu edat, utpote quam Deus
faecundavit, sit illi imposterum numerosa, modo and legitima proles!

Quod Religionem attinet, profecto nobis long alia men's est ac iis qui
excutiunt Deum; clamitent nihil non a Natura profluxisse, per eandem
conservari, and ridiculo Definiant Naturam: quicquid vero est, vel a se fuit,
vel ab alio; nihil autem, cum nondum esse habeat, det sibi originem; unde ab
effectu ad causam Philosophando, tandem ad Deum mundi Creatorem ascendemus: quo
oculos convertamus, ubi Numen non intueamur?

Monstrat praesentem quaelibet herba Deum. Qui Animalia etiam and mineralia
perscrutantur, dum miram utriusque generationem, forte and Transmutationem
sciant, been intelligunt Quis sit omnium (...) and (...): Deus itaque qui ipsa
est Veritas, inimicum non habet nisi ignorantem.

Quae vos de Papa dixistis, nobis arrident: Religio illa (si Religio dicenda
sit) licet per Sectas and Haereses nunc dierum tanquam tot vehicula spargatur,
eandem cum illis ruinam expectet. Quem non movent lapidem Iesuitae, ut nos in
antiquum Chao^ confundant: hic audacter Blasphemiam spirat, ille superstitionem
colit; si vero tot immania and nefanda scelera hic impune ferant, Deus tandem
ulciscetur.

Nulla jam (uti speramus) obstacula supersunt, quae nos a Societate vestra
detineant; magna quidem rogavimus, sed quae vos concedere potestis: ne nobis in
crimina cedant Temeritas aut segnities, quae duae sunt cujusque aevi pestes,
iisque sapientissimi alioquin viri periere; veniam itaque date (Fratres
Amantissimi) si in vos ruere visi simus, apertisque brachiis nos amplecti
dignamini.

Quod si vobis non vacet rebus tam exiguis adesse, nos satis conscii fere
animum despondebimus, and sucoumbentes Coelo and terrae magis forsan propitiis
hosce gemitus erumpentibus ultro singultibus edemus. Fratres Illustrissimi nos
merito Luce Divina indignos judicarunt; quo demum nos infaelicissimos
recipiemus; tenebras modo repudiavimus, nec fas est virginem adeo pulchram, and
been dotatam ambire; necesse est igitur pristin^m petere caliginem, qua pullati
incedemus, dehinc noctem deperibimus, quoniam in illa obdormire tuto possumus,
and infortunia nullo modo vitanda otio pertransire and silentio. Tu interim O
Coelum ad Tui partem accedere, and in nocte nostra stellas fac emicare. Tu
etiam O Terra omnium vera matter, suscit^ Te in aliamque abeas formam, ut nobis
opem feras, sinu tuo cadavera amplectere ut denique reviviscant.

Vtcunque nos meliora nobis polli^emur; quippe qui pro certo habemus vos semper
vobismet constare, nempe vos non posse nos deserere, nisi sitis perfidi; adeo
gratulandum preces nostras desiderio vestro consonas; si tamen nimis duri and
crudeles Lumen vestrum occultare statuistis, non illi^^ extincti erimus;
Paulatim and tardius Lucerna nostra exspirabit: etenim spes nostrae cum a vobis
tanquam medicis long optimis remedium non habeant, suas advocabunt vires,
quibus languentem suffultire Naturam and desperationem possint expellere; nos
scilicet propria manu ramum prendere conabimur, quem Dii ostendere recusant;
studiis igitur indefessi, licet Domum vestram S S. Spiritus invenire non
possumus, fortassis tamen in vicinum hortum, si^^ jucundum, fructibus ornatum,
ambulachris hinc atque inde conspicuis incedemus, and Font aqua coelesti
seaturiente sitim levabimus.

Et jam plane verendum est, ne ultra limits excreverit Epistola nostra, and si
votum forsitan placeat, ne petendi prolixitas nauseam creet; difficile erat
nobis gressum sistere tanto stimulo concitatis; utcunque tamen non est eadem
Epistolae and Spei periodus.

Vobis devotissimi Theod. Verax Theoph. Celnatus.


CHAP. I. That all Laws which bear the Title of Themis, ought to respect their
profit for whom they were made.
AS Laws do differ not only in their Institutions, but their acceptance; so,
if not Tyrannically imposed, they center in the Public good; For if by them
Humane Society is maintained, Justice exc^cuted, Virtue favored, so that no
man may fear the insolency and oppression of another, we may conclude that
they profit and advance a Commonwealth: If every man duly receives whatever
belongs to him, he has no cause of commencing a Suit with any, or to
complain, much less to engage in a War; but on the contrary, All (as in the
golden Age) shall enjoy peace and prosperity: But the Laws defend this justice
by which only Peace is established, contention ended, Themis worshipped, and
lastly, all things in a flourishing state and condition. Whence the Poet^
advisedly ^^igned Themis to be the Daughter of Heaven and Earth, to be the
Sister of Saturn, and Aunt to Jupiter, and have done her very much honor, and
celebra^^d her Fame, because she so constantly administered Justice: for Equity
and upright dealing were by her enjoined, and all Virtues which might render
men either acceptable to the gods, or serviceable to each other, were to be
embraced. She therefore taught them (...) live justly and contentedly, to sh^^
violence, injuries and robbery; that they should ask nothing of the gods (as
Festus observes) but what should savor of honesty and Religion, or otherwise
that their prayers would have no good issue. She furthermore said that the
great God did look down upon the earth, and view the actions of men, whether
good or evi^^ and that he severely punished the wicked for their iniquity with
eternal punishment; that he rewarded the good son their integrity with a life
which shall neither end nor decay.

Others were of an opinion that this Themis was a Prophetess amongst the
Grecians, and did foretell what should happen, by which endowment she got great
Authority; so that they esteemed her an Enthusiastesse, and thought that she
had familiarity with Spirits, nay even with the gods themselves, from whom she
sprung and had her Original; to whom also after her decease she was supposed to
have returned, where they have enlarged her Commission in relation to mankind.
When she was accounted the Goddess of Justice, by her Kings held their
Dominions; she instructed them in their duties to their Subjects, and made the
rude multitude pay due homage and subjection to their lawful Princes. She laid
the foundation of Magistracy, and built an orderly structure of Politics; for
which cause she was in so high estimation amongst the Heathens, that they
supposed the World by her Divinity to be upheld and supported. They erected
Temples to her, and Instituted divine Rites and Ceremonies in honor of her.
The first that was dedicated to her was in B^^t^a near to the River Cephissus,
at which after the Flood, Deucali^^ and Pyrrha are ^^id to have arrived; where
they enquired of the Oracle, how mankind which had perished in the Deluge,
might again be restored, as Ovid Lib. primo.

O Themis, show what Art it is that repairs,
Lost mankind, voutchafe to help our sunk affairs.
This also was Allegorically spoken concerning our Themis, that she being very
prudent and more beautiful then all her Contemporaries, was beloved of Jupiter;
but after much solicitation he was repulsed, and all intercourse broken off,
till at length she was surprised in Macedonia, and forced to be espoused to
him, by whom she was with child, and brought forth three Daughters; Equity,
Justice, and Peace. She is reported to have had by the same Jupiter a son named
Medius Fidius or the righteous, being Faiths Guardian; wherefore an Oath sworn
by his name was sacred and unalterable: and this solemnity the Roman Patriarchs
challenged to themselves as their due, because it was held an execrable thing
for an ingenious man to be forsworn.

Although we are confident that there was never upon the face of the earth any
such Themis, who after consultation returned that Oracle; much less that she
was translated into heaven, as the Heathens ignorantly imagined; yet we
confess that ^he true Idea of Justice, or an universal notion of Virtue may
herein (though occultly) be insinuated; for out of her springs good Laws, and
not as some think out of Vice, which is only a thing accidental.

This Equity keeps Kingdoms in safety, Commonwealths and Cities in order, and
lastly, emproves small beginnings to a great height and degree of perfection.

This Equity is that rule by which men ought to frame their words and actions*
Polycletus a famous Statuarie made a Book in which was proportionably expressed
to the life each member in man's body, and he called this a pattern by which
other Artificers might examine and prove their pieces. Such Rules indeed there
are in all Arts and Sciences named Axioms, which by deduction of things from
their principles do rightly conclude.

This Equity does so poise all our manners and actions that they are not swayed
to injustice and wickedness, whereby very many inconveniences are eschewed
which happily might lead us away: For as Luxury and Riot are the causes of
diseases, so injustice has annexed to it as an inseparable companion loss and
punishment: and on the contrary, as Health renders men most happy, not only
because of it self, but as it is big with other Benefits: so by this Equity,
wholesome Laws are enacted to the great comfort and advantage of mankind. But
because this is so clear to every Rational man, in vain are words spent to
demonstrate it.

CHAP. II. Those Laws which the Founder of this Fraternity prescribed to the R.
C. are all good and just.
AS no Rational man can deny the absolute necessity of good Laws; so it is most
fit that such Laws should have their due praise and commendations; that the
sluggard hereby might be pricked on to Virtue, and the diligent might have his
deserved reward.

Seeing therefore that these Positions or Laws, laid down by the Father of the
honorable Fraternity are worthy of special view, we shall truly according to
their nature, and the advantages men may receive from them, Crown them with due
commendations, counting them not only worthy of acceptance, but an Encomium.

First it is most reasonable that every Society if it be good, should be
governed by good Laws; if otherwise, by bad: but that this Society is good and
lawful, we do not only suppose, but may gather from particular circumstances
to which their Positions are agreeable.

Something may be said concerning their number of six, which has very much of
perfection in it; so that the Society by an abundance of Laws is not in
confusion, nor yet by the paucity and fewness tied up from all liberty. When
there are multitudes and great diversity of Laws, we may probably conjecture
that there will happen many crimes and enormities; for he that sleighteth the
straight path of Nature and Reason, will certainly be misled into many windings
and labyrniths before he comes to his journeys end. From these inconveniences
our Laws are free, as well in quality as number; they are voluntary, and such
to whom all may easily assent as most Rational.

They follow in their order.

1. That every one of them who shall travel, must profess Medicine and cure
Gratis.

2. That none of them, notwithstanding their being of the Fraternity, shall be
enjoined one habit; but may suit themselves to the Custom and Mode of those
Countries in which they reside.

3. That each Brother of the Fraternity shall every year upon the day C. make
his appearance in the place of the holy Spirit, or else signify by Letters the
true cause of his Absence.

4. That every Brother shall choose a fit person to be his Successor after his
decease.

5. That the word R. G. shall be their Seal, Character, or Cognizance.

6. That this Fraternity shall be concealed an hundred years.

The Brethren are solemnly sworn and strictly engaged to each other, to keep
and observe these Conditions and Articles; in all which we find nothing either
prejudicial to themselves, or hurtful and injurious to others; but that they
have an excellent scope and intention, which is the glory of God and the good
of their Neighbor. We shall further prosecute these things, and by running
through their several causes and circumstances, give any one a greater light
into them.

In the first place, as touching the first Author of these Laws, it will be
worthy our consideration to examine whether he had power and authority to make
such Laws for himself and others, and of requiring obedience thereto; then who
was the Author? and why his name has been hitherto concealed?

It is most certain that a Prince who is as it were an Head to his Subjects
that are his Members, it is indeed a thing ^^questionable, but that he has
full power of making and ratifying of Laws: For chiefly it belongs to the
Emperor, then to each King, because they have right to govern. Lastly it
concerns any Princes or Civil Magistrates.

But Laws that are brought in by Inferiors, extend only to those that have a
particular Relation to them; neither are they long lived, nor do they excuse
from the Laws of Superiors, being only obligations which respect Time,
Place, the Person and Subject.

Amongst the Ancients those men who were of best repute for their Wisdom,
Learning, Authority, Sincerity, and of greatest Experiences, might set up Laws
in any City or Nation. Thus we see that Moses was made Ruler and Cheiftain
amongst the Hebrews, and amongst the Heathen the first Lawgivers were called
Zephyrians: after them Zaleueus in imitation of the Spartanes and Cr^tians (who
were thought to have received Ancient Laws from Minos) wrote severe Laws, and
found out suitable punishment; he left rules whereby men might try their
actions, so that many afterward were fr^^^ted into good manners; for before
him Laws were not written, but the sentence and state of the cause lay in the
Judges breast.

Afterward the Athenians received Laws from Drac^ and Solon; upon which they
proceeded in all Courts of Judicature, from whom the Romans who lived after the
building of the City three hundred years, had their Laws of the twelve Tables
published by the Decemviri; and these in process of time being enlarged by
Roman Magistrates and the Caesar's, became our Civil Law which at this time is
used amongst us.

Other Nations also had their respective Lawgivers, as Aegygt had Priests, and
Isis, who were taught by Mercury and Vulcan. (These were golden Laws, and such
as owed their birth to the fire.) Babylon had the Caldeans, Persia had
Magitians, India had Brachamonds, Aethiopiae had the Gymnosophists; amongst the
Bactrians was Zamolsis, amongst the Corinthians was Fid^, amongst the Nilesians
was Hippodamus, amongst the Carthaginians was Charonda; lastly amongst the
Britains and French the Druides.

From what has already been said there may be gathered thus much, viz. That
any one has liberty (his Companions complying and faithfully engaging) to
prescribe Laws to himself and them, especially if such Laws are founded upon
Reason and Equity; For (as the Comedian has it) amongst the good ought to be
transacted just and honest things; but as the combination of the the wicked is
unlawful, so are those bands that oblige them damnable, whose trust and
fidelity are but true cheats and sure deceits; their constancy but obstinacy,
their oaths cursings, their rules methods of villainy, their laws are commands
to wickedness.

Our Author indeed was a private man, and no Magistrate; but in his particular
relation he was invested with much Authority, whereby he might oblige and bind
others, be both Lord and Father of the Society, and the first Author and
Founder of this golden Medicine and Philosophical Order. If any one shall
attempt to usurp jurisdiction over any against their wills and consent, he
shall find his labor to be in vain; for he must needs suppose them to have a
prejudice against such designs* since he plays the Bishop in another
Diocese: But certainly the case is different here, because by a fair
resignation they devoted themselves to his command.

Surely for confirmation we may take notice of the Time; They have been kept
and observed for many Ages, and this does not a little strengthen the first
Authority; for if you prescribe Laws to any who were not under such before,
and and such Laws continue a long season unviolated, it will follow that those
Laws being just and good may yet endure: for that nothing hinders, but that
this private Legislative power may be in force, being neither contrary to
Divine or Civil Statutes, the Laws of Nature, any positive Law, or Custom of
Nations.

To some it may seem a strange thing that our Authors name should not be
known; to which we answer.

Our Father indeed has lien hid as being long since dead, and his Brethren
although they live and retain in Record and Memory his Sacred Name; yet
because of some secret and weighty causes, are not willing to have his name or
person known. Besides they have a continual succession and genealogy from him
to themselves; and they received afterward a Lamp from a known confederate
and colleague of their Fraternity; They can read the Authors soul in his
Books, view the true Feature in the picture, judge of the truth of the cause
by the effect; whose actions confirm their goodness and sincerity; their
hands are set with eyes, so that their belief goes beyond their sight; whar
other men foolishly and ignorantly think incredible and vain, they know to be
real and possible.

Shall we deny that those men who were chosen and selected to be of the
Fraternity, were unacquainted with our Author? Surely they were most intimate
and familiar with him, and performed with alacrity what ever he commanded or
enjoined them.

To those indeed to whom the knowledge of him was no benefit, he was not,
neither was it necessary that he should be known, unless such persons over
curious pryed into matters which concern them not; for as it belongs not to us
to have intelligence what designs are in agitation within the walls of Troy,
or who in India does administer justice or give Laws; so likewise ought they
not to intermeddle with this Author and his Brethren altogether unknown to
them. If we behold smoke breathing out of an house, we presently conclude that
there is fire within. And why should not we although the Father and the
Fraternity have not been seen by outward eye, yet because of their works, by
the eye of our minds discern and satisfy our selves concerning them? We can
pass a judgment upon a Tree by the fruit, although the fruit be plucked off;
it suffices to the knowledge of a man if we hear him speak: Whence Socrates
spoke thus to a young virtuous man, but one that held his peace; speak (said
he) that I may hear thee. A Dog discovers himself by his barking, a
Nightingale by her sweet chaunting notes; and we judge of all other things
according to their actings. And why then cannot we distinguish this our Author
from cheats by his Positions and Laws, since it is the others whole design to
delude? they make gain of their tricks; that which would be iarksome to
another, they take pleasure in, and make a sport of dangers and hazards.

Our Author is namelesse, but yet worthy of credit, unknown to the vulgar, but
well known to his own Society. And some may ask the reason of his concealment.
We know that the Ancient Philosophers counted themselves happy in a private
life; and why may not Moderns enjoy the same privilege, since necessity may
put these more upon it then them? The World is now more burdned with
wickedness and impieties: Indeed the whole Creation as it flowed from God was
exceeding good, but man's fall has brought a curse upon the Creatures.
Polidorus had not been so credulous, could he have foreseen his Fate; by whose
example others have got wisdom, they dare not entrust themselves with the rude
multitude, but secretly do withdraw themselves; for commonly an handsome
opportunity makes a Theife; and he that exposes his treasures upon an high hill
to all men's eyes, invites Robbers. Men called Homines have both their name and
nature ab humo, from the earth, which sometimes being parched with extreme
heat opens; sometimes seems to be drowned with floods; which depend upon the
Sun, Wind, Showers, either of them either yiedling no influence at at all, ^or
exceeding in their operations. Even so the mind of man is not always in the
same condition; sometimes it enlarges it self in covetousness, sometimes
Vice is more pleasing to it then Virtue, and plundering is preferred before
honesty and Justice. But I would not be thought to include all men in this
censure; for we intend only those who having neith^r reason nor learning, do
differ very little from the brute beasts.

Wherefore the Father of this Fraternity was not so much careful of concealing
himself in respect of his own interest; but herein he wisely consulted the good
and welfare of his successors and the whole Fraternity. Shall we esteem him a
wise man who is not wise for himself? so that Aristippus, Anaxarchus and many
others do worthily bear their disgraces.

Every one by dangerous atcheivements and noble exploits can get renown; and
some have grown famous by notorious and execrable villainies; As Herostratus who
fired the great Temple of Diana: But this our Author and his Successors
conceal themselves, very well knowing what a sting Honor and Popularity
carries in the tail of it; not that they hate or scorn humane Society, but
that they may as it were at a distance behold the enormities of men, being
only spectators and not actors. Democritus is reported to have put out his
eyes that he might not see the vanity and emptiness of the world in respect of
goodness and virtue, and its fullness of deceit, luxury, and all vice: But our
Author and his Successors have taken a very wise course to conceal themselves:
no man that would exactly see an object, will fix both his eyes upon it;
neither will a wise man put himself into the hands of either Mercury or Mars,
they being Patrons of Theifes and Robbers; neither will he entrust himself
with Jupiter or Apollo, since that the one is armed with thunderbolts, the
other with arrows, by which the unfortunate Hyacinthus perished, and was
Metamorphosed into a flower bearring his name.

CHAP. III. Concerning the general intent and effect of these Laws with the
particular Circumstances of Place, Time, Means, and the End.
WE have already at large discoursed of the maker and efficient cause of these
Laws; now we shall treat of their Effects and Circumstances.

That is properly termed an effect which in all points agrees with its cause;
so that if our Author was an upright man, these Laws which flow from him shall
likewise be good, it being a very rare thing to see a virtuous offspring
degenerate from their Parents and Ancestors.

It is evident enough that these Laws do answer their intention, by that order
and firm knot of friendship which yet continues amongst that Honorable
Society; for if Reason, Nature, and Truth, had not justified their proceedings,
doubtless they had long since been ruined and come to nothing. Many indeed
aim well, but yet hit not the mark; and we know that a sudden storm crosses
the endeavor and desire of the Mariner in arriving at his safe Haven: even so
he that sets himself to any noble exploit, shall find blocks in his way; and
if he goes through with it, God should have due thanks by whose providence and
blessing he obtaines so happy an issue.

Hitherto these Brethren have not repented of their condition, neither will
they ever, being servants to the King of Kings, all the fruits of their labors
they dedicate to him. Religion with them is in greater esteem then any thing
in the World; as well in the Book of nature as the written word they read and
study Gods Omnipotency, his Providence and his Mercy; they account it their
duty to help and relieve the poor and oppressed; and surely such actions
become Christians; so unworthy a thing it is that Heathens and Turks should
outstripe us in them!

It is not necessary that any should know their place of meeting, but they whom
it properly concerns. We are sure that it is not in Vtopia, or amongst the
Tartars, but by chance in the middle of Germany; for Europe seems to resemble
a Virgin, and Germany to be her belly; it is not decent that a Virgin should
discover her self, lest she rather be accounted a Strumpet then a Virgin: let
it suffice that we know her not to be barren; to have conceived, yea and
brought forth this happy Fraternity: although hers is a Virgin-wombe, yet she
have teemed with many rare and unknown Arts and Sciences. We mean Germany
which at present flowrisheth and abounds with Roses and Lilies, growing in
Philosophical gardens where no rude hand can crop or spoil them.

The Hesperian Nymphs have their abode here; Aegle, Heretusa, and Hespretusa,
with their golden boughs, lest they again become a prey to Hercules, are here
secured. Here are Geryons vast bulls in fair and safe pastures; neither Cacus,
nor any malicious person can steal or persecute them. Who can deny that the
Golden Fleece is here, or the princely Garden of Mars and Aeta who is feigned
to be Son of Phoebus and Phaetons Brother? here are fed the sheep and oxen of
the Sun called Pecudes, whence is derived the word Pecunia, Money the Queen of
the World.

It would be to no purpose to speak of the means by which these things have
been deduced from their first Author; since that the Brethren in their Book
entitled their Fame and Confession, and in other writing have at large
declared them. He brought them first from Arabia into Germany his native
Country, and then designed to make up the Fraternity; and these made the first
part of the Book called M. of which there is so much mention in their Fama;
which was afterward translated out of Arabicke into Latin; out of which Book
M. they learned many Mysteries, and in it as in a glass they clearly saw the
Anatomy and Idea of the Universe: And doubtless shortly they will let the Book
M. come abroad into the World, that those who covet after knowledge may receive
satisfaction; nay I confidently believe that happy day to be at hand; so may we
judge of the Lion by his Paw; for as the ^bbings and flowings of the Sea (as
Basilius Valentinus reports) does carry much wealth to diverse Kingdoms; so
these secrets coming into public view, having much in them of the Worlds
Harmony so much admired by Pythagoras, may yield us no less profit and content.

Neither has it been ever known that two have been so much alike as this to
the M. yes this F. is the M. neither must we expect another M.

The end for which these Laws were made was the common good and benefit which
partly belongs to the Brethren themselves, and partly respects others, either
in their minds or bodies to the furnishing of that with knowledge, and to the
remedying of the diseases of the other; for they being ambitious to profit and
advantage others, have taken a course suitable to their intentions.

But if any shall object and say that they have not consulted their own safety,
these things will confute; as also that they have endeavored the good and
welfare of others.

In this case the scales hang very even, inclining neither to the one nor
other, and the first Unity is equivalent to the fifth, or second and third
linked together; every one (as the Proverb has it) will christen his own
child first; and Rivers (as the Wiseman speaks) stream not out, unless the
fountain is full; he gives best, that gives so to one that he may give
oftentimes.

But when were these Laws first promulgated, you may learn out of the Fama by
chance about the year 1413! If he was borne in the year 1378. and traveled
at 16. years of age, he was out 6. years, and returned at the end of 8. but
expected 5. years before he brought his business to any end, and gave his
Laws: But these things are rather conjectural then certain, in regard that we
want the History in which they are distinctly set down.

CHAP. IV. Of the First Law, and the excellency of Medicine above other Arts,
to which the Brethren are devoted.
WE are now come to treat more particularly of each Law, and we will begin with
the first, viz.

That whoever of them shall travel, must profess Medicine and cure gratis
without any reward.

Necessity has forced men to invent Arts for their help; curiosity has set
others on work to satisfy Fancy, and luxury has not been idle in seeking out
means to please it self: Now amongst these Arts and Inventions, some are more
noble and excellent, both in respect of themselves, as also in the estimation
of men. Do not we count it a Divine and Majestical thing to govern? what more
glorious then to wage War with success? There are Merchants, Handicraftsmen,
and Husbandmen, in a Commonwealth, and every one acts in his proper sphere. In
any profound point in Divinity we consult the able Clergy; in a doubtful and
subtle case we go to an able and honest Lawyer; in desperate sickness we
seek to an experienced and learned Physician: But Medicine seems deservedly to
have the pre-eminence; for a Physician in sickness governes the Emperor,
prescribes Rules and Directions which the Lawyer cannot do; for the Lawgiver
being present, the Law has no force, and may be changed and altered at his
pleasure who first instituted them.

The Physician likewise fights with the diseases of man's body, and has sharp
battles with them, he overcomes to preserving or restoring health almost lost
and decayed. Hence Aristotle places health amongst those things in which all
men agree; for every one knows that it is best, and desires to be well, and in
the next place to be rich and wealthy.

Wherefore a Physicians employment is so far from being contemptible, that it
is concerned in a man's chiefest outward good and happiness, in maintaining
health and curing diseases. God at first created man; Nature Gods handmaid
conduces to the generation of him from ^he seed of both Sexes; and it is the
Physicians office to recover man diseased, and to restore him to his native
health, so that this Art has much in it of Divinity, having the same subject
with the Creation and Generation, viz. Man who being created after the Image of
God, was his by Creation, being begotten was Natures by Generation; nay Christ
himself being incarnate did not disdain to be as well as the Physician of the
soul, so also to be the Physician of the body. The Prophets amongst the
Israelites practiced Physic, The Priests amongst the Egyptians out of whose
number the Kings were chosen. Lastly great Princes have studied this Art, not
covetously for the reward, but that they might help the sick. We have heard of
some who having slain many in a just War, yet to clear themselves have freely
given Physic, doing good to men to expiate the hurt they had formerly done.

Wherefore since the Profession of Physic is so high so noble and sacred, we
need not admire that amongst other Arts and Sciences in which they excel,
these Brethren of the Honorable Society should choose and prefer this above
the^ all. I confidently believe that they knowing the most intimate secrets of
Nature, can naturally produce very strange effects, which may as much amaze an
ignorant Spectator as the Gorgons head; bu Medicine was dearer to them, as
being of most profit and greatest value.

But some perhaps may exclaim against these Brethren, saying that they are not
Physicians, but mere Empericks who intrude upon Physic: Such indeed should
first look at home, and then abroad. I confess that few of the Brethren have
had their education, but yet they are great Scholars; not fresh or raw in
profound learning, but the greatest proficients. They compound that Medicine
which they administer, it being as it were the marrow of the great World.

To speak yet more plainly, their Medicine is Prometheus his fire which by
the assistance of Minerva he stole from the Sun, and conveyed it into man;
although diseases and maladies were afterward by the gods (as the Poets
feign) inflicted on men, yet the Balsome of Nature was more powerful then the
distempers: This fire was spread over all the World conducing to the good both
of body and mind, in freeing the one from infirmities, the other from grievous
passions; for nothing does more cheer and make glad the heart of man then this
Universal Medicine; precious stones wrought into subtle powder, and leafe-gold
are the Ingredients of this powder commonly called Edel heriz pulver: Aeschilus
does attribute the invention of Pyromancy, the composition of Medicines, the
first working upon Gold, Iron, and other metals, to Prometheus; hence the
Athenians erected an Altar common to him, Vulcan and Pallas, considering how
much fire conduced to the finding out of the secrets of nature: But we must
know that a fourfold fire is required to bring this Medicine to perfection, and
if one of them is wanting, the whole labor is lost.

CHAP. V. That the Cure of diseases by specificke remedies of occult quality,
which the Fraternity uses, is most suitable to man's Nature, and prevalent
against all distempers.
WE must not by what has been hitherto spoken suppose that the Brethren use
Medicines which are not natural; for they have Vegetables and Minerals, but
they having a true knowledge of the secret and occult operation of things, know
what will be most effectual for their purpose.

They have their Panchresta, their Polychresta, their Manus Christi, and other
great titles; their Narcoticas and Alexipharmaca, of which Galen and others do
much boast, thinking them a present help at a dead lift; and to color their
cheats, strictly command that none shall either prescribe or give them without
a large fee, as if the price added virtue to them, and the effect did much
depend upon the cost.

The Brethren also have variety of Medicines; some called Kings, some Princes,
some Nobles, and others Knights, each one being denominated according to its
excellency and worth: But we must take notice that they prescribe not according
to the purse, but the infirmity of the Patient; neither do they desire a reward
before hand; they likewise fit not a childs shoe to an old man, because a due
proportion ought to be carefully observed; a dram is sufficient for the one,
and an ounce of the same Medicine for the other. Who would not think it absurd
to apply the same Plaster to the hardened and brawny hand of a Plowman, and to
the delicate and neat hand of a Scholar or Gentleman?

He that practices Physic aright does consider the different temper of
persons in the same disease, as a learned Judge does not always give the same
judgment in the same cause, which circumstances may very much alter: The
Brethren look chiefly to the constitution of the Patient, and do accordingly
prescribe.

They have in all things experience to confirm their knowledge; they use very
choice Vegetables which they gather when they are impregnated with heavenly
influences, not deluded with common idle Astrological notions, but certainly
knowing at what time they have received a signature effectual to such an end;
and they apply these Vegetables to such diseases for which they were intended.

It is a most irrational thing when nature has afforded us simple Medicines to
correct and amend its deficiences, that we should mix and compound with
qualities hot, cold, moist, and dry, so that one Specific being perhaps
secretly of a contrary operation to another ingredient, the proper virtues of
both, if not lost, yet are much diminished.

The Galenists say that the first Qualities do alter, that the second do either
thicken or attenuate, and so foolishly and ignorantly of the rest: Whereas each
Vegetable has in it virtue essentially to chase away that disease to which it
may rightly be applied. It is here in Medicine as in an Army, if each Soldier
falls out with the other, or they mutiny against their Commander, the enemy
gets strength, and makes use of their weapons to slay them.

Some may ask, what is here meant by Specifice? I answer that I intend that
which the illiterate Galenists calls an occult Quality, because it is neither
hot, cold, moist, nor dry; because indeed true profound knowledge was above
their reach or understanding.

Valescus de Taranta, lib. 7. cap. 12. defines or describes the Galenical
occult Quality. A question is started how a Locust hanged about the neck does
cure a Quartane? To which they answer, that if these Empirical Medicines have
any such virtue, they have it from their occult Quality, which contains the
Specific form of the distemper conjoined with the influence of the Stars: but
then we may ask what that total propriety is? Averrboes calls it a Complexion;
others say that it is the substantial form of a compound body; some will have
it to be the whole mixture, viz. The Form, the Matter, and Complexion, which
Avicenna names the whole substance, when he said that a body has neither
operation from the Matter nor Quality, but the whole Substance or Composition.

But to speak truly and clearly as it becomes Philosophers, we hold that there
is a natural virtue and certain predestination flowing from the influence of
heavenly bodies, so particularly disposing the Form to be introduced, that it
is (as it were) determined to its proper object, whereby after due preparation
of the matter, and conjunction of the form, the whole Substance or mixed body
necessarily produces a proportionable effect. And Avicenna perhaps meant thus
much; whence Arnoldus in his Book De Cause. Sterilitatis, says that the
peculiar propriety of a thing is its nature which proceeds from the right
disposition of the parts to be mixed, and this is called an occult Quality, to
most men unknown because of its difficulty. Hence it is that Nature is styled a
Complexion, not because it is so properly, and found out by reason, its secrets
being only discovered by experiment and practice: by this the understanding
knows that experience is above reason; because there are so many experiments of
which we can give no rational account, nor find out any method to satisfy our
selves concerning them.

By what has hitherto been spoken, it plainly appears that the whole propriety
of any thing is not the Complexion; for if it were so, all things which have
the same propriety, would consequently have the same complexion, which is
false; for Rubarb and Tamarinds from their whole propriety do attract and draw
choler, and yet are not of the same complexion. Thus Valescus.

It is therefore evident that the true propriety of Medicinal things is only
known by experiment, and not by the false Galenical rules of Art, which do not
give us light into the nature of any simple. For instance, consider the Rose,
it sends forth a most pleasant perfume, and is of a ruddy lovely color, not in
respect of the Quality cold and dry, but of that proper virtue essentially in
it; neither can there be any deduction from those Qualities being not subject
to Taste, to Feeling, to Hearing, and consequently none at all, because
Specificks have another original.

How are the first Qualities observed? not from their essence and nature, but
as sense discovers them, whence reason draws a conclusion: But we see not how
reason can determine concerning the Qualities of a Rose, whether it is hot,
cold, moist, and dry, unless it has been informed by the senses, as by the
color, sent, taste, or touch.

But these Rules are altogether uncertain and fallacious, and there are more
experiments to overthrow then to confirm them; for who dare affirm that all
cold things have no sent, that all hot things have sent? that all sented things
are hot, that all that have no sent are cold; or that white* things are cold or
hot, that red things are hotter then white, or contrarily that bitter things
are hot, narcotick cold? etc. for Opium, the spirit of wine, the Rose and more
things will confute such an opinion; so that the Qualities do depend upon such
uncertainties in respect of every simple, that it is far better to trust to
experience to search into the secrets of Nature, then vainly to trif^le away
time in gathering the second Qualities from the first, and the third from the
second, or to gain reason by sense; a thing most ridiculous, unless it be in
the cure of diseases where the Qualities are in confusion.

When the Egyptians understood this, they studied and most esteemed of that
Physic which was experimental, and not notional; and therefore they used to
place their Sick person in the streets, that if any one of the people that
passed by had labored under the same disease, he might tell the Specific
remedy with which he was cured; whence it sometimes so falls out that an old
woman or an Emperick in some certain diseases may effect more by one proper
specific, then many Physicians by their methods and long courses.

I would not be misunderstood, as if there were no judgment to be used in the
administration of Physic, but that experience should be the only guide;
Medicine whether speculative or practical, must concur and meet in truth: I say
we must not as to the invention or prescription of Physic trust too much to
Reason informed falsely concerning the nature of things, but when experience
has confirmed us in mysteries and secrets, because reason is too weak-sighted
to reach them, we must not perversely slight them, disesteeming enviously what
we cannot attain.

I do not account him a rational Physician who has only a large scrowle or
bill of Simples in his memory, and can distinctly tell you what are hot in the
first degree, what in the second, what in the third, and can run through the
second Qualities and third; and if at any time he is called to a Patient, from
this rabble as from the belly of the Trojane horse issue many Receipts, many
bands, when he is ignorant of the most inconsiderable Simple, and knows not how
rightly to apply it: Shall not he who understands and is well acquainted with
his Medicin^^, be of more repute? A few select prescriptions that are
infallible and effectual to the cure, are of more worth then a rude multitude
of Galenical Receipts.

We have indeed now so great variety of Medicines, that it puzzles a Physician
more to choose what is best then to invent* for it is not the abundance of
remedies that overcomes a disease, but the virtue, method, order, and choice of
time and place, that give success.

We read in Histories of the courage and skill of a Spartane King, who with a
band of 400. stout Lacedaemonians possessed the streights by which Xerxes should
pass with an Army of 1700000. and made there a great slaughter of them; when
the insulting Persian boasted that they would close the Sun with their arrows;
the Spartaine King answered that then we will fight in the shadow.

By these examples it appears tha^ a select company of choice soldiers have
great advantage against a confused multitude; And why are not a few choice
remedies beyond an heap of vain receipts? Some have said that an Army is
complete that has an hundred thousand; and if the number exceeds, it will be
tumultuous, and in no order and discipline. We may assert the like of Medicine,
if it increases to a great number, it rather kills then cures; for every
Specific waging war or being opposite to another, must necessarily disturb
Natures peace and tranquillity.

CHAP. VI. Although other Physicians may challenge, as indeed they deserve, a
due reward; yet the Brethren do cure gratis, not valuing money.
WE read in History that great persons, Kings and Princes, have entertained
famous and learned Physicians, not only allowing them a considerable annual
stipend, but have raised them to great preferment and honor: Erasistratus
found out the disease of Antiochus, viz. his love of his mother in Law, of
which he recovered him, and received of his Son Ptolomy an hundred Talents:
Democides restores the Tyrant Polycrates for two Talents of Gold; The same
person for curing Darius had given to him a very rich chain of Gold, and two
golden Cups. Jacobus Cocterius Physician to Lewis the second King of France,
had 50000. Crows yearly paid him; and Thaddeus the Florentine got 50 Crowns
daily, traveling up and down to cure the sick.

The reward and gains Physic brings in has caused many Students to employ
all their time and labor therein, who for the most part look more to the
profit then health of their Neighbor, and good of the Commonwealth: If we
indeed consider to how many infirmities we are subject, we shall find Physic
to be as necessary as food and raiment; and then able Physicians are to be
sought for, who may judiciously administer it; but no man will employ all his
pains, cost, and labor, in that of which he shall reap no harvest; who will
be another servant for no wages? Will a Lawyer plead without his Fee? neither
is there any injunction or law to command and oblige a Doctor to cure for
nothing. It would be very hard and rigorous, if any man should be forced to
give away what properly belongs to him. Menecrates the Syracusan had nothing
for his pains but affected Divinity; he would be thought and accounted
Jupiter, which was worse then if he had required a reward suitable to his
Calling.

The Brethren are so far from receiving a Fee, that they s^orne it; so far from
vain glory of their success, that they will not have such a favor
acknowledged. They have not one Medicine for a great man, another for the poor,
but equally respect both; frequent in visiting, comforters in affliction, and
relievers of the poor; Their labor is their reward, their pains to them gain;
no Mice or other Vermin can diminish their heap, no Dragon or wild Beast can
either poison or exhaust their Fountain.

Coelius Lib. 16. Cap. 10. tells us of Philo a Physician, who found out certain
Medicines which he called The Hands of the gods; but this great Title was but
as Ivy hung out for a show to take the eyes of the Spectatours, to surprise
the ears of the Hearers, which promised more then they performed* and rather
deluded then helped any, having a glorious outside, but within dregs and
corrupt: But the Brethren although they have the most efficacious Medicines in
the World, yet they had rather conceal the Virtues then boast of them; their
Powders perhaps may be accounted a little Cinaber or some slight stuff, but
they effect more then seems to be expected from them: They possess the Phalaia
and Asa of Basilius, the Nepenthes that drives away sorrow of Homer and
Trismegistus, the Ointment of Gold, the fountain of Jupiter Hammon, which at
night is hot, at noon is cold, lukewarm at sun rising and setting; for they
contemn gains and income by their possession, neither are they enticed with
Honor or Preferment; they are not so overseen as one of whom Tully speaks,
who wrote against others affectation of esteem, and placed his name in the
Frontispeice of his Book that he might be more known; they embrace security,
and are not buried but live and are active in silence.

Is not this a rare Society of men who are injurious to none, but seek the good
and happiness of all, giving to each person what appertains to him? These
Brethren do not adore the rising Sun, mere Parasites, who conform themselves
to the becks of great men, their words and actions are masked with cheats.

It is reported that the Statue of Diana by Art was so framed, that if a
present was brought to her by a Pilgrim, she would show a cheareful and
pleasing countenance; but if any one came empty she frowned, was angry, and
seemed to threaten: even so is the whole World, wherein all things are subject
to Gold; this dust of the earth is of no value with them, because those things
are low in their eyes which others much adore. They had rather find out a
Mystery in Nature then a Mine; and as Gold serves to help forward their
studies, so they esteem of it: They wish and are ambitious of the age of
Solomon wherein there was so great plenty at Jerusalem as tiles on the houses,
silver as common as stones in the street: so in the golden age its use was not
known; men were contented with what Nature freely afforded them, living
friendly under the Government of the father of the family, without broiles,
luxury, pride, much less war.

CH^P. VII. Abuses in Medicine censured; as the long bills for ostentation,
that the Physician may not seem an Emperick, and for the Apothecaries gain,
without respect to the benefit* and purse of the diseased, when a few choice
Simples might do the cure.
WE daily see how many weeds sprung from Gold, have and do still overrun the
whole World; it has not only overthrown Cities, destroyed Commonwealths,
but also has corrupted the Arts, and of Liberal made them almost Servil.

Let us a little (passing by the rest) cast our eyes upon Medicine, whose
streams the further they have run from the Fountain, the more dirt and mire
they have drunk up, and now at last they are full of stanch and filthiness. We
before have said that Nature is contented with a little, which holds good as
well in sickness as in health; for the more simple diet is, the easier it is
digested, because it is hard to turn many heterogeneous things into one
substance: so likewise in diseases, the variety of Ingredients distracts, if
not totally hinders Nature in her operation, in regard she struggles not only
with the infirmity but the very remedy; and how can those things which are
opposite and fight amongst themselves, procure and maintain peace?

We confess that a judicious composition is necessary, because one simple
specific cann^t confer to the cure of complicated distempers; so that more
simples united may effect that which one could not; neither would we be thought
so absurd as to question so good and requisite a Method.

That which we complain of is the great multitude of Omnium gatherum put
together of Herbs, Roots, Seeds, Flowers, Fruits, Barks, hot or cold, in the
first, second, and third, degree; so that you shall have thirty, forty, or more
Ingredients in one Receipt, to show the Memory and Art of a dull and blockish
Physician, and to help the knavish Apothecary, who extolls his gain for
learnednesse, the quick utterance of his drugs for experimental knowledge.

On the contrary, if any one making conscience of what he undertakes shall
prescribe a few rare and approved Simples (as that famous Crato did, Physician
to three Caesar's) he shall be thought an Ignoramus, if not a mere Empyrick;
although he excel those Receiptmongers by far in all parts or learning.

Take notice how the Apothecaries slight a short though effectual Bill, because
it brings in little profit; but if they receive one a Cubit long, they bless
themselves; and thus the Patient pays for his sickness, when if he recovers,
his purse will be sick.

Consider how injurious these are to each person and the Commonwealth; by
destroying the one they diminish the other; for if they remain, yet are they
but poor members thereof; the disease is protracted by the contrariety of
Medicines, and Nature weakened: We account it absurd when a straight way leads
to the wood, for haste to countermarch and make windings which may confound and
not further: multitude breeds in most things confusion, but especially in
Medicine, when the essences of Simples are not known.

We may fetch examples to confirm this from a Court, where if every one at the
same time may plead and declare his opinion, the case would be made more
intricate, so far would they be from deciding the controversy: Wherefore a few
wise Counselors on each side will clearly state the Case, and bring it to a
sudden and safe determination. The same discord will appear in Physic, if
each Simple in the same disease should have its operation, when a few select
ones may quickly do the business.

It is therefore an expedient course out of many things to choose a few, out of
those that are good to pick the best, which may assist and strengthen Nature in
her conflict; if these observations were taken notice of, a Physician would not
be reputed able for his large rude Bills, but for the Quality of his
Ingredients; the Apothecary would have more custom, because men would not be
frighted with the charge, and dye to save expenses, but willingly submit to an
easy and honest cure.

Every thing is not to be esteemed according to its bulk; we see that brute
Beasts in body and quantity exceed a man; but yet the less being Rational and
wise does govern the other: a little Gold is more worth* then an heap of
stones, then a Mine of base metals; so in Medicine, a small quantity may have
more virtue in it then a great measure of many Simples.

It is sufficiently known to wise men, that the same herbs do alter under
several Climates; and that which is innocent in one may be poison in another;
wherefore it is not safe to compound India, Arabia, America, Germany, and
England together; for the Sun and Planets have a different influxe upon this or
that Country, and accordingly alter the Planets; Nay we cannot be ignorant that
the same field abounds, as with wholesome so with venomous herbs; we have
examples of this truth in Minerals; for common salt alone is harmless, as
also your vulgar Mercury; but if these two be sublimed together they become
venomous and rank poison: but perhaps some may think that this proceeds from
Mercury; which indeed is false; for it may be brought by Art to run again, and
then its innocence returns; so likewise the spirit of Vitriol may be taken
without danger mixed with another liquor, and the water of Saltpeter may be
received into the body; but if these two be distilled together, they make a
water that will eat any mettle except Gold, and certain death to any one that
shall take it; but if you add to the former Armoniacks, its strength is
increased, and it will reduce Gold into a watery and fluid substance, yet its
nature is pure (...) perfect.

It may be objected that Treacle, Mithridate, and Confection of Hamech with
others were compounded of many Simples, which being after long fermentation
well digested became most sovereign remedies, and have been in use almost 600.
years, and have helped many thousands of people.

We deny not but these compositions are excellent, and have been in great
esteem in foregoing and latter Ages; we likewise approve perhaps of six hundred
more, if they are grounded upon experience; for they who first invented these
Medicines did not consider whether the Qualities were hot or cold, but to their
Nature and Essence, as they either resisted poison, or conduced to the
Evacuation of ill Humors in the body, as in Treacle there is vipers flesh, and
many others of the same virtue. Our discourse is against the vain extemporary
ostentation in prescribing of Medicines compounded of Plants hot, dry, cold,
and moist, in this and that degree.

We knew a Physician who was wont to boast that he knew not any one particular
experiment, but all remedies were alike to him respective, the first, second,
and third Qualities: and this surely proceeded from his ignorance of what was
to be known; but a wise and prudent spirit searches more narrowly, and descends
to particulars; For indeed it is more easiy by general rules to pass a
judgment of Simples, then by experience to find out the proper virtue of
Specificks; and the reason is because each Simple has a peculiar property
which distinguishes it from another, and sometimes contrary; nay the Qualities
do not only differ in respect of others, but the same Simple may have effects
differing in it self, as it appears in Rubarb, which in respect of its first
Qualities, hot and dry, it does increase Choler in man's body, but in respect of
its essence and specific nature it purges it. To pass by Opium and Vinegar
with many others, we see how the same thing in their first, second, and third
Qualities have many times contrary operations; so Runnet makes thin thickened
blood of the hare, but if it be very fluid it thickens it; so also Vitrioll
according to its nature does penetrate and is astringent, yet it does repel and
disperse Lead outwardly applied to it: though Quicksilver is most weighty, yet
by the fire it i^ sublimed and ascends; and though it is a thick gross body,
it may yet by Art be made to pierce any body, and afterward be reduced to its
own native purity.

Many more proofs might be brought; for their is nothing in the World how
abject and low soever but it has a stamp upon it, as a sure seal of its
proper virtue, of which he that is ignorant has hitherto attained but the
husk and shell, the outside of knowledge.

Lest therefore this error in judgment should corrupt practice, and men's
lives thereby should be in danger, we thought it a good piece of service to
desire those who bend and employ their studies in the Honorable faculty of
Medicine, to seek more after a few rare and certain Specificks, then to follow
generals which so commonly deceive. We ought not to show our selves so impious
and undutiful, as being in honor, having increase of riches, to scorn our
poor parents; so Experience is the mother of Art; and shall we now contemn her
as having no need of her? Experience has been styled the Mistress of Fools,
and Reason the Queen of Wise men; but in a different respect they ought not to
be separated; as many Experiments beget Reason, so Reason maintains and adornes
Experience.

CHAP. VIII. That many Medicines because of their high titles, and the fond
opinion of men, who think that best which costs most, are in great esteem;
though others of less price, proper to the Country, are far above them in
excellency and worth.
BEsides the abuses mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, another is crept in;
the former were cheats in respect of Quantity and Quality; here by this the
purse is emptied; for they fall in with men's humors, who then think a thing
good when they have well bought it.

Hence Galen concealed his Golden Emplaister for the Squinancy, by which he got
an hundred Crowns, which indeed was in it self of little worth; for there are
many things of excellent use which if they were divulged, would be foolishly
despised, because vulgar hands pollute whatever comes into them; some reason
may be why after they are not so succesful, because the Imagination and Fancy
works not so strongly, and desponds as to the cure from such slight means, and
so hinders the operation; for although another man's imagination has little
force upon me, yet mine own much alters the body, and either hinders or
furthers a remedy in its working.

As this is clear in many diseases, so especially in Hypocondriack Melancholy,
called the shame of Physicians, because rarely cured; wherein the non-effecting
of the cure depends upon the prejudiced imagination of the Pat^ent, who
despairs of help; for cares, grief, and despair, do alter and change the
blood, corrode the heart, overwhelme the spirits, that they cannot perform
their offices; if therefore these can first be removed, there is very great
hope of recovery.

Under this Cloak many cover their knavery and covetousness, who seek nothing
but gain by their practice; for they call their Medicines by great names, that
the imagination of the Patient closing with so rich and precious remedies may
promote the cure; and therefore they compound their Medicines of rare
Ingredients, as Gold, Silver, Pearls, Pezoar, Ambergrease, Musk, and many more;
and then they christen them according to their birth. They call them the
Balsome of Life, the Great Elixar, the Restorative of Life, Potable Gold,
Butter and Oil of the Sun: and who indeed can reckon up their tricks by which
they draw in and delude such multitudes of ignorant people? yet their great
names are not altogether insignificant; for by their Balsom of Life, they mean
that which maintains and keeps themselves alive.

But grant these costly Medicines to be good and useful, yet they must confess
that others not so chargeable have greater virtues in them.

We may also question whether they deal honestly, and do not sell a little
salt for Gold, and rank poison for the Balsom of life; we have known some at
deaths door by their Mercury: I speak this that others may be cautious; think
what would come of it, when one mistaking administered Opium for Apium or
Parsley: thus they try experience upon men's bodies, and kill one to save another.

Besides, though these may be very excellent Cordials or Antidotes, ye tae they
not appropriated to the disease, and so consequently little conducing to the
grief.

Consider then the abuse; the Patient pays a great price for that which is of
small advantage to him, and scorns those means which are at an easiy rate;
wherein also there is no danger, as being by experience confirmed, and by all
hands received.

It is not hard to prove that each Country abounds with Simples suitable to the
Diseases of that Count^y, and that we need not go India, or use Exotic Drugs.

This Question has been handled by many learned men; at present we will not
spend much time about it. We deny not men the use in Food and Physic of India
and Arabicke Spices; neither do we condemn other most excellent gifts of God,
but here we find fault with the price; let us therefore use them in their
place and time: Perhaps such precious things were intended for great persons,
but yet great care must be used in the preparation that they be not
Sophisticated. I say rich men may afford to pay for these Medicines, who
delight to eat and drink Gold, and hope as by that they can purchase all
earthly things, so they may buy health.

Neither would we be thought ignorant of the great virtues* and rare efficacy
of Gold; but we speak against the abuse of those Impostors who instead thereof
do cheat and rob: and we can assure all, that there is no worth in the
boiling and reboiling of Gold: They indeed give their menstruous stuffes for
dissolved Gold, which being reduced to a spirit may corrode; and let all men
beware of it; imitating a careless Cook, who if he has lost the broth in
which the meat has been boiled, sets new upon the Table which has no heart
nor strength in it: So they when they have consumed and lost their Gold with
Salts and other ways, they sell that which remains; when the Bird is gone
they sell the Nest; and this they call Potable Gold spiritualized because
invisible: it may be they put Gold into their furnace; but that they by those
means can produce such Medicines we deny: There were many Alexanders, many
called by the name of Julius, but yet but one Alexander the Great, one Julius
Caesar, the others agree only in name.

Should any one enquire into the excellency of our own Countries Simples, he
would have work enough upon his hands. We shall leave this to another time and
place.

But besides the price, may we not justly suspect the preparation, that they
instead of true may sell false compositions failing in their Art and
Profession? for the balance of Humane frailty being at the one end by Justice,
at the other by Profit, the last overweighs; because honesty may be an
hinderance to us, but profit brings pleasure and delight along with it. So now
Merchants count it part of their Trade to learn and skill the adulterating of
their Commodities; when the Thebans would admit no such persons to the
Magistracy, unless they had left off their Trade at least ten years before, by
which time they might forget to cozen; but I will not here censure all of that
Calling: the same may be said of those who sell Medicines, whether Physicians
or Apothecaries, if they abuse their profession.

It remains to show that Specificks of Vegetables and things of little worth,
are more powerful against any disease then those which are of so great price;
neither is the reason fetched far; for they whose Property absolutely resists
the malady, they (I say) must needs be more effectually then those who
accidentally suit the disease, and by mere chance work a cure. In Mechanicke
Arts if a man excellent in one should boast of his skill in another which he
never saw, you would find him a bungler in it; but employ the same in that
Trade wherein he has been brought up, and he will show himself to be a
workman: So in diseases, when each Specific does its own office, there is an
happy issue, but applied to another proves of no effect; neither can it be
expected from one man (thought he had an hundred hands) to conquer an Army,
which yet choice Bands of experienced Soldiers may easily overcome; but we
have been tedious about this subject.

CHAP. IX. That many are haters of Chemistry, and others scorn the use of
Vegetables and Galenical compositions, either of which may be useful in proper
Cases.
AS the Palats of men are not all taken with the same taste, but what is
pleasing to one, is loathsome to another; so men's judgments do differ, and
what one approves the other assents not unto; both which happen or are caused
as by Sympathy or Antypathy, drawing them on to embrace, and provoking them to
hate such a thing; so also by prejudice or reason corrupted.

Some dare not taste Cheese all their life; some abstain from it a few years;
some drink only water, refusing Wine or Ale; and in these there is great
variety; no less is the difference among^^ Minds: Whence it is that two
meeting when neither has seen or heard of the other, at the first sight, shall
desire and seek each others friendship; and on the contrary, whence is it that
one hates another from whom he never received injury? as evidently appears by
one coming where two are gaming, he presently shall find his affection to
close with the one, and if his wish might succeed he should win; and he would
gladly have the other lose, though he neither recevid courtesy from the one,
nor harm or ill word from the other.

Now as much as the understanding excells the taste, and dull and sensual
faculty; so much a truly wise man surpasses one that only outwardly seems
judicious; one by reflection considers and weighs the matter, the other not so
acutely apprehending is tempted to rashness. Thus many learned men whose
Fancies have not been in due subjection to their understandings, have abused
themselves, and have heedlesly embraced this as good, and cast off that as evil.

It may seem as strange in Medicine that some Doctors should only prescribe
Vegetables and Galenical Physic, perfectly hating Chemistry, and that others
wholly inclined to novelty should refuse all Medicines that are not Chymically
prepared.

Both parties (in mine opinion) are swayed more by Fancy then Reason; for I
suppose it absolutely necessary to study first your ancient dogmatical Medicine
both as to the Speculative and the Practical part, and to correct the faults as
we have already pointed in the first, second, and third Qualities; and the same
course is to be taken in Chemistry, so that they be without suspicion and
deceit: and first we will begin with the old, and then proceed to the new.

We have sufficiently proved that there are occult properties and specific
virtues in Simples, as no learned Galenist ever denied; who have also confessed
that these did not work from their Qualities or degrees, but their natures to
mitigate Symptoms, take away the cause of the disease, and to Enthronize
health in man's body.

If this be true, why are not Physicians more careful in gathering and rightly
understanding the nature of Simples? Fernelius in his Book De abditis reru^
causis, says that this Specific virtue which he calls the Form, lies hid in
every part of a Simple, and is difused throughout all the Elements; hence if by
Chemistry water is drawn off, oil is extracted, and Salt made out of the ashe^
each of these, the Water, Oil, and Sal^ has the Specificall virtue of the
Simples* but I suppose one not so much as another, yet all joined together are
perfect and complete.

These things being laid down and confirmed, we must confess that the outward
tangible body of any Simple that may be beaten, cut, sifted, boiled, mingled
with any other, to be the bark, the carcass, and habitation of the Specific
Quality which is the pith, the soul, the householder: And now what shall we say
of our common preparations in Apothecaries shops, which have good and bad, nay
most corrupt in them? would not all laugh him to scorn who being commanded to
call a Master out of his house, will needs have the house along too? that
cannot use the birds unless the nest be an Ingredient, that cannot eat Oysters
unless he may also devour the shells? But the Apothecaries think this lawful
enough, because they can do no better; these occult Qualities indeed are so
subtle, that they make an easiy escape, unless they be narrowly watched, and
with a great skill housed or incorporated. Camphire loses its strength unless
it be cherished with flaxe-seed; Rubarb is preserved by wax and the spirits of
Wine; the Salt of goats blood does evaporate, if it be not close stopped in
glasses.

What shall we then say of these Specifical Qualities separated from their
bodies? will not they return to their first principles? for who can separate
the Quality of burning from the fire? the quality of moistning from the
water? but if this be impossible in simple bodies, how much more difficult is
it in compound?

I could therefore wish that Medicines were used which were lawful, possible,
and reasonable, that laying aside ostentation and pride, truth might flourish.

Perhaps we might allow of Syrups, Juleps, Conserves, did not that great
quantity of Sugar clog the natural operation of the Simple: Perhaps we might
approve of Electuaries, Opiats, Antidotes, unless the multitude of simples
confusedly put together did hinder, if not totally extinguish the true virtue:
Perhaps Pills, and all bitter, sour, sharp, stinking Medicines are good; but
yet they destroy appetite, cause loathsomenesse, that a Patient had better
endure the disease then the remedy; if bitterness, sowrnesse, sharpness, and
an ill savor, are the Specifical Qualities, they should be rather checked then
let loos^; and indeed they are but handmaids to their Mistrisse, but
subservient to the specifical Quality; and the true difference is discovered by
Chemistry; for it separates the impure parts from the pure, if rightly used:
yet mistake not, we say not that Chemical preparations are altogether spiritual
and without any body, but are more peircing and subtle, more defecated then
gross bodies made more heavy by a great quantity of Sugar, so that they are
not free and at liberty to act and play their parts.

By this time you may see the folly and madness of those who hate Chemistry,
which ought to be used, but with care and judgment; for it is not the part of
a Physician to burn, lance, cauterize, and to take away the cause of the
disease, by weakening the Patient, and indangering his life; but Symptoms must
be aba^ed, nature restored and comforted by safe Cordials. One Archagatus was
the first Chirurgian that came to Rome, and was honorably received; but coming
to use lancing and burning, he was thought rather an hangman; and for the like
cause at one time all the Physicians were banished Rome. One Charmis a
Physician condemning the judgment of his Predecessors, set up new inventions
of his own, and commanded his Patients in frost and snow to bath in cold water,
as Pliny reports; who says also that he has seen old men set freezing them by
his direction. Acesias about to cure the Gout, looked more to the disease then
pain, which by neglect increased, whence the Proverb had its Original,
Acesias medicatus est, as Erasmus has it, when the condition grows worse,
Acesias his Cure.

It is clear enough from what has been delivered that Nature is best
satisfied when profitable and wholesome things are applied. Asclepiades an
intimate friend of Cn. Pompey first showed the benefit of Wine to sick
persons, recovering a man carried to his grave; he taught to maintain health by
a moderate use of meat and drink, an exact care in exercise, and much rubbing;
he invented delightful and pleasing potions, he commanded bathing, and for ease
to his Patients invented hanging beds, that sleep might surprise them in such a
careless posture. The same Pliny says that Democritus was a Physician, who in
the Cure of Confidia Daughter to Consul Sereilius, did forbear harsh means,
and by the long and continual use of Goats milk recovered her.

Agron as Coelius reports, Lib. 13. cap. 22. was a Physician at Athens, who in
a great Plague when many were infected, did only cause to be made great fires
nigh to the place; and thus did Hippocrates, for which he was much honored.

Whence we may learn that mild and gentle usage in a disease is more
efficacious to the taking away of the cause, and to healing the Symptoms, then
harsh and rugged dealing. The Mariner does pray for a full gale many times to
force him into his d^sired Harbor; neither does the Traveller go in a direct
line, yet both in the end attain their hopes. We read that Fabius by delay
conquered his enemy; so that it is a Masterpeice of prudence well and maturely
to deliberate and then to execute; yet the method of curing remains and the
Axioms are firm; viz. If the cause be taken away, the effect cease; if the
disease is cured, the Symptoms do vanish and wear away.

But Chemistry stores and supplies us with Medicines which are safe, pleasant,
and soon perform that for which they were intended: and others have
abundantly set forth this in their writings, and therefore it will not be
requisite to stand longer upon it.

Now let us face about and view those who are mere Chemists; these would be
called young Theophrasts, affecting like their Master a Divine Title, which he
neither had by his Father nor Mother, but assumed it to himself as most
Magnificent and glorious: but without all doubt he was a man of eminent and
admirable knowledge in the Art of Physic; yet surely it would be worthily
judged madness for his sake alone, to forsake the Ancients and follow his new
inventions.

It may seem an absurd thing for one to undertake to restore a very old man to
his former strength, because death it then approaching, and every man as length
must submit to his Scepter.

Is not the World now ancient and full of days, and is it not folly to think
of recovering and calling back its youth? surely their new Medicine cannot
revive the dying World, it may weaken it and hasten its end: yet stay I pray
you, do not imagine that I do at present censure the excellent and plainly
divine Preparations of Chemistry; but rather the persons who profess it, who
make it their business to destroy, but endeavor not to build, who trample on
others to raise and exalt themselves; as Thessalus of old did, railing against
all men who were not his followers: So Chrysippus Master to Erasistratus, to
gain pre-eminence, despised and changed Hippocrates. These and such like men
are wont to promise much, but perform little; for we may certainly conclude,
that although such persons may affect greatness, yet they shall never attain it
by such indirect means. I would many of the Paracelsians did not too much
conform to their Masters vices; if many late writings were scanned, and their
abuses and tart language against others left out, I doubt their volumes would
very much shrink; it were much better that diseases the common enemies were
more looked after, then private grudges amongst Physicians themselves revenged:
Brute beasts do bark, show their teeth, and spit venom^; a man's weapon is
Reason by which he should foil his adversaries.

As touching Chemistry, we highly commend and admire those things in it which
are good, but yet so as not to despise Galenical Medicine, which in some cases
is as effectual: my opinion is that each ought to be used in its proper place.
Men are not mere spirits but corporeal Substances, and therefore need not
Medicines exalted to their highest degree of perfection, at least in every
grief applied to every person and to every part or member. There are some
diseases which being hot and dry are not to be cured by Chemical prescriptions,
whose Ingredients or Preparations have the like Qualities. In a Commonwealth
there is a Merchant, there is an Husbandman, but one ought not to supplant the
other; so a prudent Physician will make use of both as he sees occasion; the
one for a Country man, the other for a delicate Person; the one in slight
distempers, the other in dangerous cases; the one for pleasantness, the other
for efficacy as necessity requires.

CHAP. X. Concerning the unsufferable vices of many Physicians, from which the
Fraternity of R. C. is free.
WE have not without sufficient cause said something of the abuses of Medicine,
which the Brethren warily shunned by their first Law, which was, That they
should cure the sick Gratis; for the greediness of Physicians puts them upon
unjust and illegal actions. Whence come those terrible long Bills? those short
dear Bills, but from coveteousnesse? every one more striving to enrich himself
then to help the diseased; yet we deny to none their honest gains. Justice and
Truth should sway them in their practice: let them follow the method of
Hippocrates and Galen; yet Nature indeed is more to be looked after then either
of them, as a sure guide into its own most intricate secrets: but from the
faults of remedies we will come to the faults of Physicians themselves, by
which so many Patients do and have miscarried.

They are commonly these; Self-conceit, Pride, Malice, Hatred, Calumniation in
word and writing, Coveteousness, Ignorance, joined with a great stock of
Confidence, or rather Impudence.

This Self-conceit becomes no man; if a man is puffed up like a bladder, he may
be sooner broken, and his glory will vanish; his greatness increases his
danger; neither is Pride to be allowed of; it blaits all parts and endowments,
and if the man escape the envy of others, yet death or a slight Fever makes
him fall, and he who even now was lifted up through ambition, is brought down
to the earth. It is not true learning that causes men to swell, but an
emptiness; they suppose themselves to be knowing men, when as indeed they
understand not the depths of Nature. Socrates had learned a lesson of
ignorance, after much study he found out his insufficency; if these vapourers
would turn over a new leaf, they would see their former presumption.

Mark how Malice and Hatred prospers when two are set against each other, they
endeavor by making themselves a common laughing stock, utterly to undo both,
and each at length is whipped with his own rod. There is this benefit in having
an envious adversary, that he spends and wastes away; his malice feeds upon
himself; so that it is better for any man to deserve the envy of another rather
then his pity, the one supposing him happy, the other miserable: This vice as
the Ivy by embracing trees does spoil them; this vice I say clings to great
persons, and secretly corrodes their Honor and Fame; what noble exploits, what
virtuous deeds have been performed but they have been blown upon by some
pestilential breath? This was the cause of furious Caines murdering his
righteous Brother Abel, and that Jupiter struck Aesculapius with a thunderbolt:
to avoid this many have forsaken their Countries and lived amongst strangers,
as did Iphicrates in Thracia, Timotheus in Lesbos, Chabrias in Egypt, Chares
in Sigeum, who were all Grecians; amongst the Romans, Pompey after so many
magnificent Triumphs, for his great and and famous Victories withdrew into the
Country, and came seldom in public, that he might escape the envy and malice
which he feared, because of his innocence and greatness.

What shall we think of that monster Aristotle, who (as it is reported) was so
spightful to his Master Plato, that he caused many of his works to be burnt
that he might shine brighter? he was fearful his honor should be eclipsed by
his Masters greatness. Ajax hated Ulysses, Zoilus Homer; Didimus Alexandrinus
was enemy to M. Tull. Cicero. Palemon the Grammarian to M. Varro, Caesar to
Cato, Adrianus to Traian, M. Crassus to Pompey, Alexander to Achilles at the
sight of his Sepulcher, Julius Caesar to Alexander, and many others who were
all possessed with this evil spirit; but in Medicine such practices are more
dangerous, because the body of man being of more worth then Arts or other
trifles, is engaged, as being the subject of Medicine.

This flame increases and most commonly breaks out; envy turns to
Calumniation; hence is it that so many vain Pamphlets are sent abroad full of
bitter expressions, which become no rational prudent man; but this vice has
been by many set out, and we will spend no more pains upon it.

Coveteousnesse is another vice which has infected many Physicians, who make
it their only study to heap up riches; and though their strength of body is
decayed through age, yet with a most rigorous desire do they endeavor after
money; nay though they have one foot in the grave, they will have another in a
bag to counterpoize them. Physicians indeed above others are tempted to this
vice; for when they grow old they are most sought unto because of their
experience; and by this means they are encouraged to set Silver above Justice,
and Gold above Conscience. But if an Apothecary be coveteous and greedy, more
mischeifes do ensue; all his compositions will be made up either of stale or
false Ingredients, so that both the Physician and Patient are cheated; the one
is censured for ill success, the other is not only not cured, but may
complain of the bad Physic as of a new disease.

I shall speak nothing concerning the abilities and qualifications of a tried,
examined, and licensed Physician; but of the unskilfulnesse of those who rashly
undertake to practice when they want knowledge and learning to guide and direct
them; they study impudence; and note, that an illiterate rude fellow in
maintaining his opinion shall always appear most confident: their Geese are
Swans, their absurd receipts are Oracles and Mysteries, and they are enjoined
to conceal what they know not; if any one opposes them, they either slander
him or envy him perfectly.

These and the like vices have no place amongst our Fraternity; they are not
Emulous or Arrogant, they are not Spightful and Envious, but delight in
instructing one another in Mysteries; no brawling or disgraceful speeches are
uttered amongst them, much less are they coveteous.

The Book M. declares their skill a^ well in other Arts as in Medicine; if any
one please to consult their other Books, and weigh diligently their nature and
all circumstances, he shall find what we have said abundantly there confirmed.

CHAP. XI. Whether any one of the Fraternity being called to a Patient, is
bound to appear? and whether they are able to cure all Diseases; as well those
that are accounted incurable, as those that are thought curable?
THe actions of men as well as their persons are subject to many miscarriages;
as the one may die, so the other may be forgoten; as the one may be infirm, so
the other may be abused; wherefore an Act was invented by which all worthy
deeds might faithfully be kept and transmitted to posterity. Persons indeed
whose Offices are public, in performance of their duties of trust, are
necessarily bound if occasion requires, to act publicly in their place: But if
in the little World any disorder happens, as a disease subverting health, the
sick person immediately goes not to a Magistrate, but a Physician; wherefore
Medicine properly respects not the public, but the private health of this or
that Patient; therefore it will follow that a Physician being not compelled by
the Law, nor engaged by service, shall be forced to visit any Patient who sends
for him; for a Physician does not prescribe to all, but to a particular sick
man, and is a servant to Nature, but not to the diseased whom he governs by his
rules till he has restored them to health.

We may enquire more strictly concerning these Brethren, whether since they
profess only Medicine as their first Law enioine, if wrote unto, or spoken to
for the taking away of a difficult disease, whether in any particular place
they must appear being engaged thereto, either by promise, or charity? We
answer negatively; for if other Physicians are not so straightened, much less
are they, who do their Cures without price, who expect not a reward from men
but from God, to whom as also to the lawful Magistracy they are obedient.

Furthermore, whether all diseases are cured by them, even those whom others
judge past help, as the Leprousy, the Dropsy, the Pestilence, the Cancer, the
Hectic, the Gout, and many others? We answer, that they ingeniously confess
in their writings that they know not the time of their own death, and they
acknowledge that all men must pay their debt to death, which cannot be hindered
or prevented by any Medicines, if according to predestination it seises upon
any man; and to endeavor against Providence were impious and vain.

But there are three degrees considerable in the forementioned maladies; The
beginning, the increase, the state: At the first all or most of these diseases
are cureable; when they prevail somewhat over Nature remedies may be had; and
doubtless the Brethren have Medicines which will effect the cure, Gods
providence assisting them in their lawful endeavors: such diseases in their
height which have a tendency to death are incurable; as for common sicknesses
we find that either Galenical or Chemical Preparations may remove them.

We will now declare the reasons why sometimes the most able Physicians are
foiled and disappointed. First we must know that diseases are the effects of
sin, and deserved punishment does oftentimes shut out favor, so that tedious
sicknesses and death are means which God uses to check sinners, or chastise
his people; in vain therefore will man labor to frustrate the Decree of the
Almighty in his will and pleasure. The second reason may be drawn from the
nature of Diseases, which are either deadly in themselves, or as they are
consequences of others being produced by them. The Plurisie or the Inflammation
of the Pleura although it is dangerous, yet if direct means be applied in time,
it is helped and cured: But if the matter inflamming is not evacuated by
letting blood, or by expectorations there will follow a corrosion of the
Pleura, and the corruption flows into the cavity of the breast, and thus
another disease is generated called Empiema: and now if Nature stands not much
the Patients friend, and does not convey this matter into the water courses, as
often is seen, or also by Art some Musels are opened, and the corruption within
forty days carried away, the Lungs will be ulcerated, and a Consumption will
ensue altogether incurable.

The Question is whether cureable Diseases are by them helped? Such indeed
would end without any application, and Nature needs no assistance to such
enemies, so that then Medicine were useless; for who will trouble himself to
seek after means, when his grief will shortly of it self cease and go away?
Though here be many difficulties couched, yet we shall briefly state the case:
Let those who are unsatisfied in large Treatises show whether in the World it
was absolutely necessary that all things should be done which are done, or
whether they might have been otherwise disposed of. Cardanus and the Stoics do
attribute all events to fatal necessity, to which they do subject God himself,
as not being able to resist; so blasphemous are they.

We hold that God is a free Agent omnipotent, he can do what ever he pleases;
he has made Nature his handmaid, and she having received a Commission does
accordingly act; she produces all things either for the good and happiness of
men, or else to plague and punish them, and of this rank are Diseases, and
Death it self comes from such prevalent diseases: But God alone disposes of
good or evil to every one; he indeed generally lets Nature keep its course, but
sometimes to show his freedom, he interrupts that order, and by a particular
providence thwarts the intention of Nature whether it tend to health or
sickness; it is in his power to shorten a disease which to us may seem
tedious, he can keep off Death when we give over the use of means. Now if God
foresees the the evils which naturally hang over men, and does not prevent such
evils but therewith will punish men, he is not the Author of that evil foreseen
and brought upon any one by nature, although sometimes he sends miraculous
plagues upon his enemies. Hence is that saying; O Israel thy destruction is
from thy self, because thy wickedness has drawn down judgments upon thine
head. When some of the wise Heathens had taken notice of this; they feigned
Pleasure and Sorrow, to be lincked together, as if the excess thereof were to
it self a sufficient punishment: They also said that a Disease was brother to
Death, that by sweat virtue was attained; and to this purpose is that place in
Scripture; There is no evil in the City that is not from God, where is meant
the evil of punishment, either brought upon any person miraculously and by the
immediate hand of God, or else naturally falling upon him.

Hence we learn the birth and original of Vice, it proceeds from the corrupted
Nature of fallen man; his will enjoyes its liberty in respect of earthly
things, but as to heavenly things its not free: Its with a man as with a weak
infirm person who cannot lift his hands to his head, but with ease he can let
them hang downwards. So sinful man naturally inclining to sinfulness, without
any pains falls into wickedness, he needs no particular instinct from God; but
the strength which must support his infirmities, exalt him to Heaven, so that
he may obey God, is not from man himself; but from the free grace and mercy of
his heavenly Father, who has mercy on whom he will; but yet excludes none from
his favor who forsaking earthly things do accept of the true means and receive
the benefit thereof, who pray and endeavor to their utmost ability to be what
they should be, committing themselves first and chiefly to God, and then to
Nature, who faithfully obeys him in all things,

CHAP. XII. That the Brethren of the Fraternity do use only lawful and natural
remedies.
THe holy Scripture makes mention of a King of Juda who being sick of the
plague and death seemed to approach, by divine providence was healed by having
Figs applied to the sore, and he lived many years after; so that we see that
God can miraculously direct to means which in themselves are natural, as indeed
this was a very lawful remedy, and the reason is not unknown: so here we will
examine whether the means which the Brethren use be of themselves lawful and
warrantable. A certain Author thinking to insinuate himself into the favor of
the Brethren, speaks of rare blessings and Exorcismes by which a m^n may
promote the happiness of his Patients and curse and endamage his Adversaries;
but who will esteem this lawful and good? Such things may catch some ^illy old
women and by them be accounted secrets: they would be the greatest slander
imaginable to the learned Fraternity; for the Brethren use natural means
without any mixture of superstition, as we may see by the example of him at
We^z^ar; who with application of one Simple took away the raging pain of an
Ulcerated Cancer, whom Phanias applauds for his rare Art; for by the same herb
he also did the Cure, the same Brother carried a bag of roots and herbs
always about with him; he much commended the Bryony root, but chose the bitter
one; he taught also the occult virtue and proper use of many Simples, which are
lost and forgotten.

We will not decide the controversy whether the Simples ought to be gathered
according to particular constellations; many very learned men do favor this
opinion: As first of all Barthol. Carrichterus, who divided the most approved
and effectual Simples according to four Triplicities of the Signs in the
Zodiac, and in each of them made three degrees. I have known many who
addicting themselves to this study, have thereby been able to cure very
dangerous sicknesses, especially old Ulcers and outward griefs.

That so many lights should be placed in the Heavens to no end and purpose, it
were profane to imagine, because God created all things to act according to
their nature; and surely the Stars were made to yield their influences, and
there is not any doubt but that Vegetables, Mineralls, and Animals, do receive
their occult Qualities from them; he therefore is an happy man who can search
out the effect by the cause, and by the effect is able to judge of the cause.
Plants have relation as well to the heavens as to the earth, and he who knows
this community is a great Artist; but the Brethren employ all their time in
these Mysteries, as they confess as well in their Fama and confession as in
other writings.

We dare not affirm that their Astrology is the same with that which is
vulgarly professed, or their Botanick common; for theirs are founded upon
certain and true Axioms; subject to no change but always continuing the same
worth and virtue.

Other Axioms are so infirm, that they oftentimes are proved false and admit of
correction. It is an Axiom that all Wine is hot, which hitherto has been
received as true; but if from some Country be brought Wines whose nature is
cold, the falsity will appear. He who never saw a Bat or does not consider
infects will immediately say, that every thing that flies has feathers; when
there are also flying fish which make use of their fins, so that there are many
exceptions belong to the general rule: Who would not conclude this for a
certain truth that four-footed creatures cannot pass through the Air as well
as they pass on the Earth but by flying? but experience confutes this; for the
Indian Cat by spreading some membranes (not wings) from her hinder feet to her
former, goes in the Air whether she pleases: But the Axioms laid down and
followed by the Brethren are such which fail not, their principles always
attain their end; so that there is nothing deficient in them which may exclude
or diminish their perfection; wherefore cures wrought by properties truly drawn
from the Stars and the Planets, must necessarily be true and certain; for the
effects do surely result from their causes not anticipated or mistaken. He who
promises with fire, to heat, to dry, to burn, is not deceived, neither does he
deceive, because he has that which can perform all these offices: so if they
undertake a Cure, there is no doubt but that they can effect it; because they
know and can make use of the true and proper means, which M^diums are purely
natural, the hidden treasure of Nature, the extraordinary gifts of God. They
apply themselves only to the study of Natural Magic, which is a Science
containing the deep Mysteries of Nature, neither is this divine knowledge given
to any by God, but to those who are Religious, good and learned. Origin
tractatu. 5. super Matthew: says, that the Magical Art does not contain any
thing subsisting, but although it should, yet that must not be evil or subject
to contempt and scorn. The same 23. Homil. super Number. speaking of Natural
Magic, does distinguish it from the Diabolical: many hold that Tyaneus
exercised the Natural Magic only, and we do not deny it. Philo Hebreus lib.
de Legibus, speaks thus; That true Magic by which we come to the knowledge of
the secret works of Nature, is so far from being contemptible, that the
greatest Monarchs and Kings have studied it; nay amongst the Persians none
might Reign unless they were skillful in this great Art.

Magic (as some d^fine it) is the highest, most absolute, and divinest
knowledge of Natural Philosophy advanced in its wonderful works and operations,
by a right understanding of the inward and occult virtue of things; so that
true agents being applied to proper Patients, strange and admirable effects
will thereby be produced; whence Magitians are profound and diligent searchers
into Nature; they because of their skill know how to anticipate an effect which
to the Vulgar shall seem a miracle: As if any one shall make Roses bud in
December, Trees to flourish in January; shall cause a Vintage in May, produce
Thunder and Rain in the Air; as Joh. Baptista porta teaches lib. 2. De Magia
naturali; also Roger Bacon did the same: Julius Camillus a man to whom we may
give credit, affirms that he saw a child formed by an Alembick, which lived
some hours: a very strange thing, if true. Coelius de Budda writes, that he
brought forth a Virgin out of his side; but we leave these things as we found
them, we will not dispute the truth of them. We need not stand longer upon the
praise of Magic, it being of it self so honorable; but yet this noble
Science does oftentimes degenerate, and from Natural becomes Diabolical, from
true Philosophy turns to Negromancy; which is wholly to be charged upon its
followers, who abusing or not being capable of that high and mystical
knowledge, do immediately hearken to the temptations of Satan, and are misled
by him into the study of the black Art. Hence it is that Magic lies under
disgrace, and they who seek after it are vulgarly esteemed Sorcerers; wherefore
the Brethren thought it not fit to style themselves Magicians; but Philosophers
they are not ignorant Empiricks, but learned and experienced Physicians, whose
remedies are not only lawful but divine: and thus we have at large discoursed
of their first Law.

CHAP. XIII. Of the second Law of the Fraternity of the R. C. viz. That none of
the Brethren shall be enjoined one habit, but may suit themselves to the
Custom and Mode of those Countries in which they are.
MAny perhaps may blame my prolixity upon the first Law; to whom I shall
answer, that weighty businesses are not to be perfunctorily run over;
transactions in the little World may only deserve to be touched upon, but the
affairs of the great World ought to have an answerable consideration; so that I
must necessarily crave pardon for my brevity, because I could not wrap up the
due commendations of such subjects in so narrow a compass.

This second Law gives birth to the first; for without it the Brethren would
have no opportunity of doing good, who by its benefit are secure and fear no
danger: for as a Bird although it sings not, is known by the color of its
feather; so every one accustoming himself to one Habit is thereby
distinguished. We find in History that many by their enemies have been
discovered by their apparel, and the disguise has oftentimes procured liberty.
Otho being overcome and making his escape by Sea was taken by Pirates, who not
knowing him because he had changed his clothes, suffered him to ransom himself.

On the contrary King Richard coming back from the Holy Land, affairs being
there illy managed and to the displeasure of many, especially the Duke of
Austry, passing with his Navy by the Adriatic Sea was discryed and became a
prey to the said Duke, who was forced to redeem himself, to pay a vast sum of
money; and he was known and found out by his garments.

If danger attends Kings and great persons in such cases, much worse would be
the condition of private men if they should have so sad a restraint upon them.
Men in mean apparel do not fear the attempts of Robbers, neither do they
suspect a poisoned glass; whereas Potentates are a prey to the one, and very
often are taken away by the other.

Besides a poor habit is sufficient to cover Learning, and a Cottage may become
Wisdoms habitation; nay men's parts and abilities are censured by their
outside, and that which is willingly concealed must not have a being; it is a
Courtier who must only be accounted a Scholar; but indeed the soul is
clothed with the body, which to add ornament to it needs no help of Taylours
or Painters, it is graced with true Philosophy, and secret Arts are its glory.

Margaretha a Queen of France is said to have kissed the beautiful soul of
Alanus a Philosopher when he was asleep through his body, the which action being
much admired at; she answered that she then perceived not the deformity of his
body, being ravished with the amiableness of his soul. Thus we see that a
gallant spirit may dwell in an unhandsome house, and that a poor habit may be
worn by the most excellent and profound Philosopher.

There are yet many reasons which may persuade to a decent clothing, for by
every vulgar eye the mind is judged of by the garment; but we in other Books
have largely treated of this subject. Very many have instead of modest and
comely apparel run into excess, as Poppea Wife to Nero, and Cleopatra Queen
of Egypt to set forth their beauty; but this is not commendable, since Seneca's
rule is to be observed which requires a due moderation.

Our Brethren change their Habit for a virtuous end, which as it is not gaudy,
so it is not contemptible; they are always civilly clad, and not affectedly,
they are especially careful of the inside, that their hearts are real and
honest; neither would they impose on any by their actions.

There are many ways by which men may be deluded, as by a Fallacy,
Equivocation or Amphiboly, but these do appertain to Logic: The Brethren are
vigilant as well in respect of disgrace as damage; it is a very difficult
matter to cheat and deceive them.

Whereas others take the liberty to cozen a cozener, and think it a piece of
justice to repay in the same coin; The Brethren are not so revengful, they
count it an happiness to have an opportunity of expressing their patience; yet
although they are as innocent as Doves, they endeavor to be as wise as
Serpents, for there may be an harmless subtilty. We may judge easily that
they affect not vanity by the often change of their apparel, because they would
not be known, but obscure their names and relation.

If the intentions are sincere not thereby to wrong any one but to do good, we
may allow not only of a disguise in clothes, but a change of names; the sign
does not alter the thing signified, neither does an Accident destroy the
Substance. Names are notes by which one man is known and distinguished from
another, clothes are coverings as the one hides our nakedness, so the other
keeps from obscurity. The Ancient Philosophers and Egyptian priests did wear a
linen white robe which distinguished them from others, as Pythagoras and his
followers, to express both the cleanliness of body, and unspotted innocence of
soul. Nature has so befriended some birds that they change both voice and
feathers in the Winter, and thereby being not known, are safe from other
ravenous birds: In some Counteries Hares become white in the Winter, but in
Summer keep their wonted colors. The Camelion by being like no every thing
she comes near does often escape, the Ants and many Insects have wings and can
scarcely be known what they first were, so happy is that change which guides to
safety.

Shall reason withstand the lawful dictates of Nature? where necessity
compells, custom forces, shall men run upon the one, and to their damage
slight the other? The Brethren being in all points careful, will neither
violate Natures Commands, nor contemn civil rights, though they alter their
apparel, their mind is unchangeable.

CHAP. XIV. The third Law enjoynes each Brother to appear on a particular day,
and at a certain place every year, that they may all meet together and consult
about their affairs.
EVery Society has Laws and rules binding them to some Duties, so that the
Governor or chief when he pleases and thinks it necessary may summon all to
one place to consider what is most fit and convenient to be done on some
immergent occasions, for if a company be separated, their minds and Counsels
are disjoined, the one cannot be helpful to the other either in example or
advice: who knows not that most intimate familiarity, and the nearest
friendship is broken off by absence, and want of visitation, so that they who
were not long since highest in our thoughts are utterly forgotten, besides,
wherein can a friend profit, who is distant from another, even Brethren become
as it were unnatural when thus separated: we confess that letters may supply
this defect, yet writing does not so much delight and enliven, as discourse,
papers are mute, if any doubt arise they cannot frame a ready answer, but where
a man appears, he can resolve all Questions, satisfy all scruples.

Wherefore the Brethren of the R. C. thought it most expedient, if not
altogether requisite to meet at least once in the year in a certain prefixed
place: This Law as it is the third in order, so also in Dignity, by which the
true Pythagorian assembly is obliged to appearance; neither is their meeting
vain and to gaze upon each other, for they do imitate the rule of Pythagoras,
who enjoined his Scholars every day to examine themselves, where they had
been, and what good memorable act they had performed: so the Brethren of the R.
C. at their convention relate what rare cures they have done, what progress
they have made in the Arts and Sciences, and observe how their practice agrees
with their principles; and if any new knowledge confirmed by often experience
comes to them, they write it in Books that it may safely come to the hands of
their successors: Thus true and certain learning is increased till at length it
shall attain to perfection.

This School is not like to Aristotle, for there were frequent wrangling
disputes, one opposing the other, and perhaps both the Truth, however they have
no Questions free from debate, not contradicted by some of the same sect: for
example

What is the soul of man? whether the First Act, or something else, whether
(...) or (...) whether born, generated, or infused, given from heaven, and many
Thousand such fobberies, and at length they rest in Opinion.

They have therefore framed a Method to regulate disputes, and supply terms,
whereby they more darken knowledge, and willingly shut their eyes: Let them
discuss to weariness, the nature and original of Metalls, and whether there can
be a transmutation, and who will be better informed and satisfied? Thus idle
Disputation is a sport of Wit, and only a recreation of Fancy, no solid and
real Truth is to be found out by it.

A certain Philosopher hearing some dispute What Virtue is, made answer that as
they could not come to an end of the Question, so neither to the use thereof:
if any one professes hemselfe to have skill in Physics, why then does he not
let the world see what he can do? and laying aside vain bablings perfect the
great work of natural tincture, but by chance he will utterly deny that there
is any such thing to be found out, and hereby gets a cloak for his ignorance,
for he will censure all which he knows not.

But who will call him an horsman, who yet did never ride? who will call him a
Smith, who never wrought in that Art? and why should we esteem him a
Philosopher, who has never experienced his philosophy, but has only uttered
some foolish and fantastical words.

But some may here object that one part of Philosophy is contemplative, to
which Mathematics and Metaphysics do relate, the other consists in Action,
to which Ethics and Politics do guide. Plato was displeased that
Mathematics were brought to sensible Subjects, as Arithmatick to Numbers,
Music to Sounds, Geometry to Measures, but we must acknowledge that he in this
was envious to mankind, and in his passion prevailed over his reason: For what
profits it any man by mere speculation to view the mysteries of God and
Nature? is it a more commendable thing to think well, then to be good? the
same holds true in Physics, for barely to contemplate of it is as unusefull,
so absurd and ridiculous, how can you call that a true Cause, of which you
never saw an effect? There has been some ancient Philosophers who have
searched after experimental knowledge, and studied more Nature th^n Art, more
the thing, then the signification and Name, as the Magitians amongst the
Persians, the Bracmanes amidst the Indians, and the Priests in Egypt: and now
the Brethren of R. C. in Germany. Thus we see plainly they meet for a good
end, for each Court has its appointed time in which justice may be duly
executed, and no wrong^ further heightened: The Brethren assemble to vindicate
abused Nature, to settle Truth in her power, and chiefly that they may with one
accord return thanks to God for revealing such mysteries to them: if any man is
promoted to an high Office, and neglects or contemnes the Ceremonies and
circumstances of admission, the Prince will immediately put him out as one
sleighting his favors and scorning of Him: so since God has been pleased to
honor these Brethren with such rare endowments, and they should not appear to
show their gratitude, He might justly take from them His Talent, and make them
subjects of His wrath.

This Law has a Limitation if they cannot appear, they must either by others
their Brethren, or by letters tell the cause of their absence, for infirmity,
sickness, or any other extraordinary casualty may hinder their journey.

We cannot set down the places where they meet, neither the time, I have
sometimes observed Olympic Houses not far from a river and a known City which
we think is called S. Spiritus, I mean Helican or Pernassus in which Pegasus
opened a spring of everflowing water, wherein Diana washed her self, to whom
Venus was handmaid, and Saturn Gentleman Usher: This will sufficiently
instruct an Intellgent reader, but more confound the ignorant.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the fourth Law, that every Brother shall choose a fit
person for his Successor after his decease, that the Fraternity may be
continued.
ALl things in the world have their vi^^ssitudes and changes, what was to day
is not to morrow, and this appears most of all in mankind, who are as sure once
to die, as they at present do live, wherefore God out of his heavenly
Providence granted Generati^n and propagation, that though Individualls do
perish, yet the Species may still be preserved. And this is that innate
principle which is the Cause of Multiplication, so that Plants, Annimals,
Minerals, and man the noblest Creature shall to the end of the world be
increased. Many phiosophers have complained of the shortness of man's life, who
though he be more excellent then others, yet he lives not their ages. The
Eagle, the raven, the Lion and what not, dures longer then man, as though
Nature was a stepmother to him, and the others were her true progeny.

Wherefore since that the Brethren, being Mortals, must certainly once cease to
be, and undergo the common Lot of their Nature; their wise Lawmaker did not
rashly make this Law, that each Brother should chose to himself a fit person
to be his Successor: in which choice they do not look to the obligations of
friends, their natural relation neither to Sons or Brethren, but purely to
Qualifications, as Learning, secrecy, Piety and other such like endowments.

Amongst the Egyptians the sons did not only inherit their Fathers estate,
but used the same trade and employment, the Son of a potter, was a potter, a
Smiths son was a Smith: But the Kings were chosen out from amongst the
Priests, the Priests from amidst the Philosophers, and the Philosophers were
always Sons of Philosophers, but many times there happened a great difference
of parts between the Son and Father; outward Goods may be conveyed to
posterity, and the Son may be his Fathers heir, but the gifts of mind,
especially such as this Fraternity has, is rarely by Generation communicated
to the offspring: He that shall be enduced either by entreaty, or hired with
money to reveal ought to any one, but a truly virtuous man, does injure the
first Giver of such a Talent, the Lawgiver and the whole Fraternity, for
perhaps enemies thereby would be able to further their designs, God would be
dishonored, and virtue banished.

The Philosophers would have mysteries revealed to none but those, who^ God him
self shall enlighten, that their understandings being refined, they may
apprehend the deepest sayings and profoundest secrets: Others say, that we must
not trust him with whom we have not eaten a Bushel of Salt; that is, him with
whom they have not had much converse to the sure experience of his abilities
and faith, for friendship is not to be compared to Horses that bear price
according as they are young, but to wine and Gold which are bettered by Age: So
the Brethren entertain no man to be a member of the Fraternity, but men of
approved parts, and very virtuous.

There were certain rites and Ceremonies done at Athens in the honor of
Prometheus, Vulcan, and Minerva after this manner: many were appointed to run
into the City with lighted torches, and he whose light was out, gave place to
the others, so that the victory was obtained by him who could come first at the
goal with his flaming torch: The meaning was to express the propagation of
secrets for the putting out of the torch is the death of a Predecessor, so
that another living with his lighted torch succeeds him, by which means the
rare mysteries of Chemistry come safe to after generations.

Chemistry indeed is a Science above all Sciences, the Minerva that sprang from
Jupiters brain, an heavenly ray which does display it self to the comforting
of things below: This is the birth of the understanding, whose propagation is
as necessary as that of the body: we may observe the antipathy of some bodies
to others, and we may see as great difference in minds: men's dispositions are
to be fully known, least a sword be put into a mad man's hand; for a good thing
may be evilly used, as wholesome wine put into a stinking caske does change both
color and taste: Armhomedes boasted that if he could fix his foot in a sure
place, he could by his skill move the whole world, and what would not ill
affected persons do if they were matters of such secrets? doubtless they would
endeavor the accomplishment of all their wicked devices.

Some may ask why they have such an Election, and do not rather let their
knowledge be buried with them (or if not so unworthy) why do they not print,
that every one may have, read, and understand their mysteries, or else why do
they not choose more to augment the Fraternity? we shall answer to each of them
to satisfy those thus do Question.

First, why do they select a few persons? and will not have their secrets
perish? we answer, there is good reason for both. Augustus Caesar would not
suffer the Eneads of Virgill to be burnt although he had designed it so by his
will, least Romes glory should suffer thereby, and yet this Poet as Homer
amongst the Grecians had instead of Truth produced fictions: And is there not a
greater cause why Brethren of the R. C. should endeavor the keeping in memory
such secrets? may this learning never be forgotten in which there are no Fables
but true devine experiments.

We may woefully lament the loss of secrets which being writ have unhappily
been burnt, not writ have been forgotten, therefore for prevention of both it
is convenient that they should be entrusted in a few hands, and by those
careful be transmitted to others. Before the flood, the Arts were engraven on
two pillars least either fire or water should blot them out, and afterward (as
some write) the Cabalystical Art was found out, and by word of mouth
communicated, and the Rabbis have at this day rather a shadow then the
substance of that Science.

The Heathens had their Colleges in which were admitted none but such as were
of an unblam^able conversation and of choice parts; so that every one who was
educated in a Scholastic way was not thought a fit person to be of their
Societies, but they would pick of the most able and they were few, the which
rule is observed by the Fraternity of the R. C. who admitted few and those upon
good desert.

In the next place we come to the reason why they do not print and make their
Knowledge public? there are many things in Policy, more in Divinity, not a few
in nature, which ought not to see the light, but are to be kept in private
breasts, least thereby some have written of the secrets of the Commonwealth, no
one yet durst reveal the mysteries of God. Alexander the great being in Egypt
learned of Leon the priest, that the Gods there and those which were every
where else worshipped as Jupiter, Dionysius, Mars and others were no Gods, and
He by letter informed his mother, but commanded that the Letter should
forthwith be consecrated to Vulcan, least the multitude adoring those Gods
should run into confusion: so likewise in Nature if their mysteries were
known, what would become of order? but indeed how can that be called a secret
which is revealed to many: though many may be judged fit persons to receive the
knowledge; yet few have such command over themselves as to keep them, who will
tie his tongue and deny himself the liberty he might otherwise enjoy? very few
will let their words by long abiding there corrupt in there mouths, an ancient
Philosopher being accused of a stinking breath, said, that it was caused by
letting secrets putrify in it.

Why all who are desirous of the Fraternity are not chosen, is not their fault,
but the others lottery: in courts they are soonest promoted who are most
pleasing to their Princes, and they who are known preferred before the
strangers, although their parts be better deserving, but of this Law enough.

CHAP. XVI. The fifth Law: that the letters R. C. shall be their seal,
Character, and Cognizance.
THe Egyptians had two sorts of letters, the one holy called Hieroglyphics,
only known to the Priests; the other profane commonly known: The Holy were
the images af Animal vegetables, or mathematical Figures engraven in marble,
which yet are to be seen at Rome being yet brought whole thither in Augustus
his reign, for the impression being inward, it will endure long. The Proflune
were made by lines, as the Greek and Hebrew, the Priests used both the one to
the Commonwealth, the other to the wise and learned. Hieroglyphics were signs
and Characters of deep knowledge which none might expound to others under oath
and the pleasure of the Gods.

Junior Philosophers have employed all their pains and study to find out the
meaning of these Hieroglyphics: the Phoenix (properly belonging to Chemistry)
was accounted a creature dedicated to the Sun, and this Emblem agrees to all
the holy marks: so likewise the R. C. have diverse letters to discover their
minds to their friends, and to conceal it from others.

Their Characters are R. C. which they use that they may not be without Name,
and every one according to his capacity may put an Interpretation upon the
letters, as soon as their first writing come forth; shortly after they were
called Rosy Crucians, for R. may stand for Roses and C. for Cross, which
appellation yet remains, although the Brethren have declared that thereby they
Symbolically mean the Name of their first Author. If one man could pierce into
another breast and epsy his thoughts, we should need neither words nor
writings; but this being denied us, and only granted to Angels, we must speak
and write each to other. These Letters do contain the whole Fraternity, and so
darkly, that you cannot by their Names know their families, by their families
know their persons, by their persons learn their secrets.

Each order has its Formalities and coat of Arms or Emblem, The Rhodians
have the double cross, they of Burgundy the golden fleece; others a Garter, in
honor of a woman who lost her garter in a dance, The Brethren have the letters
R. C. and as some of the others are Hieroglyphics and serve to cover
mysteries; so the Brethren have a particular intention in this. I am no
soothsayer, no prophet, yet under favor I have spoken to the purpose in my
other books: for R. signifies Pegasus, C. Iulium if you look not to the letter
but right interpretation; have a Key to open secrets, and attain the true
knowledge thereof. D. wmml. zii. w. sgqq hka x, understand if thou can, thou
needst make no further search: Is not this a claw of the Rosy Lion, a drop of
Hippocrene? and yet I have not been so unfaithful as publish their holy
mysteries; for no man can pick any thing out of it, unless he is very skillful
both in words and things. Some out of proper names will make Anagrams, see what
is included in R. C. the Rosy cross (...) Ha, Ha, Eheu, in the same is
contained a laughter and a complaint, sweetness and bitterness, joy and sorrow,
for to live amidst Roses, and under a cross are two contrary things. Man being
about to be borne partly by change of places, partly by the navel string cut,
is said most commonly to shed tears, and rarely do rejoice; so there whole
life is but a continued sorrow, and have more of the Cross then Rose in it: But
I rather take R. for the substantial part, C. for the Adjective which holds not
good in that interpretation of the Rosy-Crosse.

The Caesar's of Germany, Charles the Great C. his Successors were wont to use
hand seals, and to set them to their subscriptions, it was meet that the
Brethren should not be deficient in this, and therefore let Ingenious persons
judge of this Anagram, Rosicrucian emblem For in this R. C. are Acrosticks,
diligence will find out the rest: But none I hope will be so foolish as to
think any virtue to lie in this Figure, as it suspected to be in the word
Abracadabra, for we mean nothing less, but we have only given in our verduit,
and let others have the freedom as to have their opinions: But we matter not
words; but look more after things, for things should be although they were
unnamed, but words are without things vain and insignificant: When a certain
King threatened the Laconians for their long letter, and desired a speedy
answer, they sent back one, these letters O Y, by the one meaning that they
would Not, by the other that they valued not his threats one jot; so that
multitude of words are oftentimes to no purpose, and a few carrying weight in
them may be sufficient.

Hence these Elements of the letters are not to be slighted, R. Rabies
madness and the middle, L. Luna the Moon do express, for if the Sun be
between them, they make an heart, which is the first thing in man, and if it is
sincere may be an acceptable sacrifice to God.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the sixth and Last Law, which is, that the Fraternity of
the R. C. shall be concealed an hundred years.
WHen the common people take notice of the secret managing of puclick affairs,
they because of their ignorance, suspect it to be a plot upon them, and openly
censure it, as not fitting to see the Sun; for treacheries and wickedness
desires the night and darkness to cover and conceal them, and therefore
actions are bad because they are private.

Besides the rude multitude many graver heads have inconsiderately called
apparent things good, and the other naught, saying, if they be virtuous, why
should they not be known that they may be embraced by honest men?

as if all lawful secrets because of their lawfulness were to be made
public: would it not savor of folly if a Princes treasure because it was
rightly gained should therefore be exposed to all men? surely such an opinion
would only become a thief and robber.

The Brethren are thought guilty of concealing themselves, for they might
probably do more good if they were known, because they should be sought
after, and have opportunities put into their hands, and why will they keep
close both their persons and place; but let us consider that they travel; and
they, as all wise men else, acknowledge no particular Country, but the whole
world to them is as their own native soil, now in travel diverse
entertainments are to be found, much flattery, little sincerity, much falsehood
and deceit, no truth, honestly: He who is known by his Family, name, or office
may be taken notice off to his disadvantage.

The Scripture calls men pilgrims, who have no true country and home but
heaven; so that men are strangers and travellours in their own land, in their
inheritances, and why then may they not scarcely be known to live when they
shall not abide long? Their actions are such as become those who hope to
appear and shine in Heaven though they are obscure below.

How great is their madness who spend their times in drunkenness and gluttony,
who are known by their vices; or imitate him who boasted that he never saw the
rising or setting Sun, and had no God but his Belly: whatever is rare and
brought from far Countries that they desire to eat, as though the whole world
in short time should be devoured by the filling their gutts more then their
brains; perhaps, these may have Rational souls; but so clogd that they cannot
soar aloft who drink not, eat not that they may live, but live to drink and
eat.

The Lacedaemonians placed drunkards before a company of children, that they
seeing the abominable naughtiness and deformity, might shun and hate that
vice, as Lycurgus commanded: but such beastly persons do very often draw in
others who keep them company, and their sight is too too often dangerous and
destructive.

Wherefore such vices should be covered as filthy, that others may not be
provoked and stirred up to the like enormities; nay let such things not only
be concealed but buried, and things more profitable be used in their room: But
if all good and honest secrets were brought to light, I dare say, the
Fraternity of the R. C. would not be the last as having no cause of fear upon
them, but I doubt whether yet we shall see those happy days.

There are many things bad which by custom have been in good esteem, and the
continuance of vice makes it be thought at length Virtue: The Brethren would
give no occasion of suspicion, for that which is not known, cannot be
practiced; without practice no custom; without custom no such mistake,
although their being altog^ther honest need not be so censured or entertained.

Besides, perhaps the First Author by the Law that the Fraternity should be
concealed an hundred years, would give the world time to lay aside their
vanities, folly and madness, and by that time be fitted to receive such
knowledge.

And truly every man that has eyes may see a great and happy change in the
world, that many rare inventions are discovered, many abuses in the Arts
rectified; and that they shall shine to perfection, and what then should hinder
but that the name of the Fraternity should be published in their Fama
Confessione and other books?

Two hundred years are past since the first Law was made, viz. ab A. C. 1413.
in A. C. 1613. about which time the Fama came forth: although there is no
clear manifestation of the discovery, yet it may sufficiently be gathered out
of it, and afterward the tomb of the first Author being opened, which was A.
C. 1604. to which add the years of the prophecy, after 120 years I will be
known, for 106. ab A. C. 1378. do make 1484. and afterward 120 do make 1604:
Some having this from their Predecessors have certainly affirmed this Truth.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the advantage or disadvantage arising to Learning from
the total concealment, or discovery (as now is) of the Fraternity of the R. C.
I Cannot imagine that any man can justly accuse me for my prolixity on the the
Laws of the R. C. perhaps some may suck spider like out of wholesome flowers
destructive poison; and that which to others is pleasant and sweet, to them
disaffected may seem loathsome and ugly: they erring and being vain
themselves, scoff and laugh at our Fraternity, scorn their laws; say they,
what benefit shall we receive from the discovery of them? indeed we do hear
that many under that title do abuse themselves, and cheat others, for by such
relations they vent their sophisticated drugs, and confuse all method in
medicine.

We do not deny but that the best thing may be abused, but that is not to be
charged upon the thing it self; but upon the person so employing of it: so
none can truly say that the Fraternity and Laws thereof are unlawful, whose
institution and intention may be justified; but yet envious persons who have
devoted themselves to malice may carpe at them; and endeavor the
dissatisfaction of men's minds, wherefore in this Chapter we will show the
profit and disprofit arising either from them detected or concealed.

There are four kinds of Good, Necessary, Honest, Pleasant and Profitable, by
each of them men may be drawn to the affectation or disrelish of any Subject;
the two first amongst these have the preheminency, the others are of less
authority; but yet very often the latter prevail above the first, and many had
rather enjoy pleasure and profit suitable to their natures; then the others as
being somewhat harsh, wherefore we will treat of them, but not as separated
from necessary and honest Good.

To what purpose should there be such a Society, if the profit and benefit
thereof should be wholly concealed? the Ethiopians and Jndians having never
heard of their Fama and Confession are not taken with the Fraternity, but if
they should believe that there is such a select company of men, yet they would
be heedles^, because they should receive no advantage by them: we care not for
the richest minds, if we cannot enjoy them, and affairs translated at a great
distance from us, are nothing to us, we do not take notice how the Jndians
fight, and they neglect our Arts.

If the Fraternity had not made known themselves, there might seem to have no
great damage thereby accrewed to learning, since it is not more augmented; for
heretofore cure of diseases, and preservations of health were practiced and
professed, the Sciences have been so reformed, especially the last hundred
years past, that they have attained their utmost perfection: On the contrary if
the Fraternity had been concealed, many might have great hopes and expectations
of profit, for all kind of curiosity had been laid aside, men would not have
vexed themselves with searching dilligently after them, whom they should with
the greatest difficulty hardly find, so many desires had not been unsatisfied,
so many promises frustrated, so many sighs and tears vain: lastly, no occasion
of confusion, but, because all these things are so false and absurd we shall
not think them worthy of an answer; we shall therefore proceed to the profit of
the Fraternity as it is detected and made known. There is in the world such an
abundance of all things by the diversity of Species; multitude of Individualls
that it is almost impossible to discern either their increase or decay. Hence
is it that persons of Quality being taken away by death are not mist, because
others do succeed them, and the rising Sun makes us take little notice of the
Set.

Had the Fraternity not been discovered, the world had lacked nothing; for that
which is unknown is not desired and sought after, and the absence of it is no
loss, and we doubt not but that there are very many such things in nature: who
ever dreamed of a new world now called America before it was found out? who
thought of usefulness of writing and printing till they were invented? but now
it is sufficiciently known what benefit the whole world receives by them,
although there seemed before to be no want.

For as no line is so long, nor any body so big, to which something cannot be
added; so the perfection of the world was not so absolute but that it was
capable of addition.

Thus the detection of the Fraternity did increase the worlds glory, and we
shall show after what manner, viz. by revealing secrets and finding out others
much conducing to the profit of mankind.

The Poets report of Anteus that he fighting with Hercules, and by him beaten
often to the ground, did as often recover himself by virtue received from the
touch of the earth (for he was thought to be Son of the earth) by which help
he was always victorious, till he strove with Hercules, who finding out this
mystery caught him in his arms and holding him in the air crushed him to
death. By Hercules is understood a laborious and skillful Philosopher, by
Anteus the subject to be wrought upon in which are contrary Qualifications:
This matter is not easily known, because it lies hid every where, and at the
same time lies open, understand the first in respect of men's intellects, the
other in respect of Sense, and if it were known, yet the preparation is so
difficult little good can be expected, The Philosophical earth is his Parent
whose virtue is not easily attained, Hence it is that this Anteus is secretly
strengthened from his mother, and so all endeavor of killing Anteus is in vain
and to no purpose.

Therefore Osyris being about to travel into India did not unadvisedly consult
with Prometheus, join Mercury as a Governor, and Hercules as President of the
Provinces, by whose direction and his own industry he always accomplished his
end, he used Vulcans shop, the golden house where Apis is fed and nourished,
for those three forementioned have their several offices in the Philosophical
work: but some may say what is this to the Fraternity of the R. C.? it
properly appertains to them, for they have overcome Anteus, they have
sufficiently declared their Herculean strength, the wit of Mercury, and the
Providence of Prometheus: This, this is the knowledge in which the Fraternity
is skilled, fetched from the innermost depths of nature; which to neglect or to
suffer to perish were folly and madness: There is no Chemist who understands
not what we mean.

They who take a voyage to the East- Indies, cannot be without sweet fresh
water, and if they find out a spring, they take a special notice of it, set
it down in their writings, that others traveling that way may enjoy the like
benefit, much greater reason is there that in the Philosophical voyage, having
gotten a fountain sending forth pleasant streams, which can easily quench
thirst and satisfy, how great reason is there that this should be highly
esteemed and valued: I mean here the Philosophers living water and not any
dead, which when once attained, the whole business will succeed, for the whole
work is perfected by one artifice, by one way, by one fire which is natural
(not neglecting the other three, unnatural, against nature and occasional) in
one vessel, at one time, with one labor, which must be cautiously understood.
2. The Book M always in the hand and mind of the Fraternity, and transmitted
still to posterity, does sufficiently lay open the knowledge of this Nature, in
which Book is contained the perfection of all the Arts, beginning with the
Heavens and descending to lower Sciences. For the mind of a wise man covets
after the knowledge of all truths, to confute errors, and to adorn it self
with glory and excellency, but this is not obtained by idle vain Speculation;
but by diligent practice which is the only true wisdom: 3. I have spoken
enough before of their remedies for the cure of diseases. 4. The Brethren
lastly have a secret of incredible virtue, by which they can give Piety,
justice and truth the upperhand in any person whom they affect, and suppress
the opposite vices, but it is not my duty to express what this is: I beseech
the Great God who governs the whole world by his providence, so to dispose of
all things that such mysteries may never be lost, but that the whole world may
receive benefit thereby; and that hereafter men may not think it sufficient
superficially to look into nature; but deeply prying into it may have more
knowledge of God the Center, and praise him always for his Goodness.

CHAP. XIX. That many Fables have passed under the name of the Fraternity,
raised by the multitude who always misjudge of that which they do not
understand.
It cannot be otherwise, the Fraternity being in respect of it self well
known, in respect of the persons thereof concealed, but that many strange,
horrible, and incredible falsities should be cast upon them: for if we hear,
see, or by any other sense have experienced any thing, yet in discourse this
will be altered, if not altogether changed, because he that relates will either
add or diminish; and the other not apprehending it aright, or perhaps failing
in memory, or for affection favoring or envying the business, will
unfaithfully report it: They who want those two faculties of memory and
judgment are not competent judges in matters of so great concernment; what can
a blind witness affirm that he saw? one deaf that he heard? or one not capable
of understanding that he apprehended? for all these mistake one thing for
another, they blame the subject and not themselves; they supoose all things as
low as their parts, and because they want abilities, they acknowledge no
deficiency: whoever they are who ignorantly or maliciously do cast out any
words aiming thereby to wrong the Fraternity, do only expose themselves; but
let these geese kept only to fill the belly leave off to hiss at our Swans:
The water of which we now speak, is not that in which fishes do swim;
neither is this a fit study for such doltes and blocks. Leave off to discover
what you are by your idle words: Learned and wise men are not censured by them,
and why should they receive evil for good? But some may ask, what Fables are
thus vented against the Fraternity? we answer, that many have detracted and
traduced their innocent Fama and harmless confession, that they have accounted
them Heretics, Necromancers, deceivers, disturbers of the Commonwealth: O
harsh times, O evil manners! what is the world come to when slanders shall
pass for Truths, and they who devote themselves to God, holiness, and make the
Scripture their Rule, shall be called heretics, when they who study the depths
of Nature shall be accounted conjurers, when they who make it their business to
do good to others, shall be esteemed cheaters; lastly when they who do to
their utmost power advantage their Country, shall be held the greatest enemies
thereof?

I can think these absurd railors to be none others then those who are employed
in the distillation of simple waters for Apothecaries; they hate nothing more
then learning, and count themselves so much happier by how much more ignorant;
and some (I confess) acting from a more noble and divine principle, have
enlarged minds, willing and desirous to contain the Universe, who do not only
employ their time in study and meditation, but experiment what they learn; a
wise man endeavors after the knowledge of all things; as a Prince has
intelligence of all transactions, and as by the one he is distinguished from a
fool, so by the other from a peasant; But the Fraternity do imitate both, so
that nothing is wanting to hinder their perfection.

As for that reproach they lie under concerning their disturbing of the
Commonwealth, it is altogether false and by them coined; therefore let it
return upon the first broachers of it, to whom it properly belongs as being
their own: they might justly complain of such indignities offered to them, but
they account it virtuous to suffer.

That there are so many Heresies abroad in the world, is not to be charged upon
the holy Scripture; but the obstinacy of men forcing the text to confirm their
will, is to be checked; so it is no fault of the Fraternity that they are
abused, but theirs who are so wicked as to calumniate them; for if to accuse
any man were sufficient to prove him guilty, justice and injustice, truth and
falsehood, white and black would not be distinguished, which is altogether
unreasonable.

CHAP. XX. That the Brethren of the R. C. do neither dream of, hope for, or
endeavor any Reformation in the world by Religion, the conversion of the
Jews, or by the Policies of Enthusiasts which seemingly would be established
by Scripture, but that they both acknowledge and show themselves lovers of
truth and justice.
AS that which in the day time most runs in men's thoughts, does in the night
disturb and work upon their Fancies; so every man is careful to let no
opportunity slip of endeavoring to accomplish his intention; they who set
their minds upon riches, are very laborious and painful to advance their
estates; they who bend their thoughts to change Commonwealths, to alter
Religion, to innovate the Arts, make use of very often most despicable
instruments to do their business: from this spring head has issued many
murmuring streams; such Causes (I say) have produced many tumults and
confusions in Commonwealths, where men have been acted by vain thoughts and
foolish dreams, as it now does evidently appear both in the Anabaptists and
Enthusiasts: are there not many even in this our age, who being ambitious to be
ringleaders in new ways, instead of a Reformation, have disturbed all order,
and law? they forsooth would have Religion and Learning suit with their
fantastical opinions.

As soon as these had heard of this Honorable Society, they assured
themselves that their desires would have an happy issue; for knowing that these
Brethren were able in learning and riches, they doubted not but that they would
employ both those talents to cause an Universal Reformation in the world; they
therefore immediately promised to themselves one Empire, one Religion, unity
and concord; but in all these things they were belyed and abused; for they did
never assert any such things; neither is there any ground of them in their
writings: Out of their Books something may be gathered concerning the
Reformation of the Arts which was endeavored by the first Author about 217.
years ago, about A. C. 1400. and at that time they had need of a Reformation;
witness the labor and study of eminent men who have to good purpose spent
their time to promote learning, as Rudolphus Agricola, Erasmus Roterodamus, D.
Lutherius, Philippus Melanchthonus, Theop. Paracelsus, Joh. Regiomontanus,
Copernicus with many others: and there is no doubt but the Arts may be more
increased, their luster more polished, many more secrets discovered. But herein
Religion is not at all concerned. Let Rome therefore that Whore of Babylon, and
her Idolatrous affecting an Ecclesiastical tyranny, who with mennacies makes
not only inferiors, but Kings their slaves and vassals, who belch out proud
words against the true Church of God, without any attempt of the Fraternity,
forsaking their toies and vanities, their blasphemy and profaneness, return into
the right way; so may a reformation be produced, and piety and religion shall
flourish. I fear yet that these as they who are rich and powerful will not
judge that true which may any ways prejudice them, they I doubt will not
embrace naked Truth, honest simplicity: But such Reformations belong more to
God then man, who can turn the hearts of men at his pleasure, and so dispose
all affairs that a severe check may be put to the growth of Popery. However
the Brethren (as all good men ought) count it their duty to pray for and expect
such a Reformation: the business lies more in the inlightning of the
understanding, then changing the will, which is Gods own work; for he gives to
do and will as he thinks fit: who can (although he had the power of miracles)
convert the obstinate Jews, when the scripture more confounds them and becomes
a stumbling block? Observe how their own writings do disagree; how one thwarts
another; and yet they consider not that wherein is concord. As for your
Enthusiasts their Revelations of which they so much boast, are sometimes to
Sin, but that cannot be from God; do they not dream interpretations on
scripture, and when either the Devil does delude them or they are distracted,
they count their conditions happy: they acknowledge no superiority, though
commanded and allowed in the Scriptures: But our Brethren have always had one
amongst them as chief and governor to whom they are obedient; they pity such
persons whom they find cheated and often possessed; lastly, as it is
impossible to separate heat from fire, so its as impossible to separate Virtue
from this Society: they bestow their time in duty to God, in diligent of search
of the scripture, in charity, in healing gratis, in experimenting the secrets
of Nature: they have the true Astronomy, the true Physics, Mathematics,
Medicine and Chemistry by which they are able to produce rare and wonderful
effects; they are very labourious, frugall, temperate, secret, true; lastly,
make it their business to be profitable and beneficial to all men, of whom when
we have spoken the highest Commendations, we must confess our insufficiency to
reach their worth.

FINIS.

