THE MOST Remarkable Trials Of Nathaniel Thompson. William Pain. John Farewell.
AT THE King's Bench Bar in Guild Hall, On the 20th of this Instant June, 1682.
For Trespass and Misbehaviours, in Writing, Printing, and Publishing Letters,
importing, That Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey murdered himself. Also several
scandalous Reflections upon the Government, and arraigning the Justice of the
Nation. With all the material Circumstances that attended their Trial, wherein
they were all Three found guilty.
Guild Hall, June 20.
THis being the first sitting of this Term at the Kings Bench Bar for the City
of London, and the Liberties thereof, after several Trials the long expected
Trial of Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farewell, according to the
Adjournment of the last Term came to an Issue. First the Jury were sworn, viz.
Peter Hubland Foreman, Mr. Ellis, Mr. Barry, Mr. Brooks, Mr. Bifeild, Mr. Lee,
Mr. Whitwood, Mr. Sambrook, William Jacob, John Denew, Mr. Baly, and Mr.
Howard, all substantial Citizens, and Men of Worth; whereupon Mr. Thompson,
Counselor at Law, opened the heinousness of the Fact, insisting that Nath.
Thomson had Printed and Published Two Letters, the first directed to Mr. Miles
Praunce, about his Evidence in relation to the Death of Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey, the other in answer to the Ghost, both dated in March last; In which
he not only went about to make the People believe that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey
murdered himself, but also arraigned the Justice of the Nation, the Papers
being produced in Court, Sir Philip Floyd, Sir John Nicols, and Esquire Bridgman
were called, who deposed, that Thompson had owned the Printing of them, and
that Farewell declared he brought him the one, and Pain the other, before the
Council. After the general Paragraphs were read in his Intelligence, wherein he
seemed to justify the former Letters, and that he could bring a considerable
number of Witnesses to prove that Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey killed himself, or to
that purpose; whereupon Sergeant Mainard, Counsel for the King, opened the
Cause more at large, laying open the nature of the malicious Design, which he
said was to insinuate into the People a belief, that that worthy person killed
himself, and thereby to take off the Odium from the Papists, whose Interest
those men strove to advance, who should dare to arraign the Justice of the
Nation. After which Thompson, Pain, and Farewell were called to bring in their
Witnesses, but the latter only made his personal appearance, being brought up
in the Custody of a Tipstaff, and Counsel in the behalf of Thompson,
endeavored to make his Defense, he not appearing in Court. After the Council
for the King had given the Charge, Mr. Saunders declared, that William Pain
had been drawn into the unfortunate Action, and that he did absolutely disown
it in its particular Circumstances, making many Apologies for his Client; but
withal declaring, that if he thought him wilfully Guilty of so Notorious a
Crime, he would not have appeared in his Cause; after him Mr. Yeaulding
pleading for Thompson, and then Eliz. Curtis, Mr. Brown the Constable, and
others had sworn that they gave in their Evidence at the Trial of Green, Berry,
and Hill, and that the Record of their Conviction was, Read, and their
Execution sworn to by Capt. Richardson, Farewell proceeded to call his
Witnesses; viz. one Mr. Hazard, who deposed that upon the first brute of the
finding the Body of Sir Edmund Bury Godfry, Mr. Farewell desired him to go with
him to see it, whereupon they went; when as Mr. Farewell conducted him the
nearest way to the place where the Body had lain, it being then removed to the
White House, some distance thence, and that he perceived some Blood scattered
about the place, and whether it was the Blood of his Body, or not, he was
ignorant; after him Mr. Leazenby, and Mr. Hobs, two Chyrurgions, were sworn,
who deposed, that by several Symptoms they found about the Deceased, they
verily believed he was first Strangled, and afterward Run through; the
Defendant thereupon alleging, that his Collar made the Impression in his Neck;
but the Chyrurgions, as well as others; declared their Opinions, that there was
another Impression than what the Collar made; and that by the color in his
Face when Dead it was apparent that he had been Strangled, and the Cord or
Handkerchief left about his Neck till the Blood was settled. After this he
called William Balson, to prove the great quantity of Blood that was found upon
the place, he declared that he believed in his Conscience that the Blood was
laid there, there appearing no Blood upon his Clothes, unless a small quantity
on his Shirt behind: Then he desired one Rawson and his Wife to be called, who
lived at the White House, and demanded of them whether the Mouth and Eyes of
the Deceased were not Fly-blow'd; to which they answered, they perceived no
such thing: Then my Lord Chief Justice was pleased to ask them, whether they
perceived the Flies busy at that time of the year (it being not only in the
middle of October, but likewise Frosty weather) to which they answer, they
perceived none then. Farewell alleged, that the Friends of the Deceased refused
to let him be opened, and that the Coroner at first was doubtful whether it was
felo de se, or that he was Murdered, and thereupon offered to produce the
Journals of the House of Lords, to prove that Mr. Prance, and Mr. Bedlow did
not agree in their Evidence: After which he again called Mr. Brown the
Constable, who declared upon Oath, that Mr. Farewell had been tampering with
him, and told him, he had not given in his Affidavit right, and offered to
instruct him therein; but he was wiser than to be Ruled by him; and in
conclusion, he called several other Witnesses, as Mr. Paulet, Mr. Fisher, Mr.
Whinyard, etc. who for the most part made against him, their Evidence being
contrary to his purpose; all or most of them declaring they did verily believe
that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry was Murdered by the Papist; and that what Blood
was scattered, was brought thither. As for Nath. Thompson, notwithstanding his
boast of 60 Witnesses, his Council endeavored to excuse him, by declaring that
he had voluntarily discovered his Authors, and that Pain and Farewell had put
it upon him, and brought him into that Praemunire. After all the Witnesses
called by Farewell were sworn (not any appearing for Thompson and Pain, Mr.
Sergeant Maynard offered to call Witnesses for the King, as Mr. Prance, Dr.
Oats, etc. but my Lord Chief Justice declared, it needed not, for that he only
gave the Defendants all imaginable Liberty to see how far they would drive on
the Design, the which, could they make any ways piausible, it would certainly
please the Papists that had undeniably set them on work, to obliterate their
Plot against the Nation, which was so open, and at this day apparent to all men
of reason and understanding; whereupon Farewell declared, he was no Papist, and
offered to call Witnesses to prove what he said; whereto my Lord Chief Justice
Replied, He verily believed he was of no Religion, as by his Actions in the
present Cause was apparent; for that it was a malicious Design to Arraign the
Justice of the Nation, and to vindicate those that had legally suffered, which
he by no means ought to do; and after his Lordship had given an Excellent
Charge to the Jury, they, without going from the Bar, gave in their Verdict,
that Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and Mr. Farewell, were Guilty of the
Trespass and Misbehaviour for which they were Tried; whereupon followed such a
Shout as made the Court ring; and afterward Farewell was conveyed to the
King's Bench Prison, from whence he came, there to continue till he be Fined
for the Matter aforesaid.

LONDON, Printed for L. Curtiss, at the Sign of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, near
Fleet-Bridge.


