The most EQUAL and EASY METHOD OF RAISING A SUFFICIENT FUND To Carry on A
Vigorous War AGAINST FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. M DC XC I.

WHen we consider the Wars on every side in which Europe is now engaged; the
Streams of Blood that are daily spilt; the utter Ruin of Multitudes of
Families; the Devastation of whole Provinces by Fire and Sword; and the base
Treacheries that are now practiced, to reveal Secrets of State, to betray
Cities, blow up Magazines, and to act all manner of Hellish Exploits; and all
this only to glut the insatiate Ambition of the French King: it ought not only
to fill us with Horror and Indignation, against the Cause of all these
Miseries, but should provoke all good Men to draw their Purses willingly, and
wise Men to employ their utmost Care, that the Cause of all these Evils may be
removed as soon as may be.

The English Nation has all along formerly made so considerable a Figure in the
Affairs of Europe, holding the Balance, and turning the Scale as it pleased in
doubtful Times, especially under Active Princes, that we have no reason to
doubt of Success at this time, if we do but assist his Majesty generously and
sufficiently, who has already Delivered these Three Kingdoms from the Danger of
French Bondage, and who is universally expected by all the Confederates to
become likewise shortly their Glorious Deliverer.

Now in order to this end, I humbly offer to the Consideration of this
Parliament, whether a small Excise, upon some few Commodities, (for there is no
need of a General Excise) be not the most expedite and easy, the most
effectual and surest way of raising such Sums, as are now most convenient to
carry on with Success a vigorous War against France.

It is the most easy, because the least sensible Way of raising Moneys. The
paying great Sums at once will make many a Man to stagger, as not being always
provided with a Store sufficient; but the small and inconsiderable Payments,
that are made by Excises, can be no great Grievance to any Man; for if his
Dealings be small, so are his Payments; if great, so are his Profits too. Every
thing here falls in a just proportion to Men's own Capacities, or Abilities; and
after all the Trials of the Wit of Man, Excises have been fixed upon by all our
Neighbors, as the Best, and the Easiest Way of raising Great Sums. And as it
is not now and then a Gaudy Day of Getting, that commonly makes Men Rich, but
rather a constant Course of daily Increase by small Gains; so it may be said of
the Public Treasury, that from small beginnings and contemptible, but general
Collections, it uses to grow unto prodigious Sums; like the Rain that falls,
which does by abundance of small Drops use to rise into a mighty Stream. And
that an Excise is the most likely and effectual means to raise great and
extraordinary Sums, or such as are now necessary to enable us to cope with
France, let it be considered what Funds London alone is capable of raising,
when Amsterdam with its Precinct (which bears but a small Proportion to London,
either as to Riches or Extent, or Number of Inhabitants) does hereby especially
raise for the use of the States General, at least sixteen hundred thousand
pounds per annum.

But it is become an Objection of no small Weight with some, that an Excise
ought above all things to be avoided, because it is so easy, and so tolerable
to the Subject. We shall (say they) never get quit of Excises, because they are
felt so little. Nay farther, that the Excises which have been once laid, have
been always continued by Parliament.

Indeed in a late Reign, when the Crown and the Kingdom were thought to have
different Interests; when there was reason for State-Jealousies; and the
Parliament might fear, lest the Weapons they should provide for the Defense of
the Nation might be turned against themselves; there was good reason for such
Objections. But now that we have a Prince of Heroic Virtue, Magnanimity, and
Honor; who can have no separate Interest from his People; who has received the
greatest Provocations from France; who has been so lately our Deliverer (under
God) from the most dismal prospect of National Calamities; who has already upon
great Trials resisted with scorn all Temptations to Arbitrary Power; and whose
Wisdom and Prudence and continual Thoughtfulness can never be guilty of such an
Error in Politics, as by any just Cause to create Jealousies in his People, at
a time when all his Designs do aim at no less than the Liberty of Europe. At
such a time as this, and under such a Prince, Surmises of this kind, are both
vain and ungenerous, most unworthy and ungrateful.

It has every where been the Policy and the Practice of the wisest Nations, to
contrive the Easiest and least Burdensome Ways of raising Taxes. And shall we,
when not only our own Fate is still in some suspense, but the Dominion of
Europe is so strenuously contended for, by the most dangerous and ambitious
Prince that ever sat upon a Christian Throne; shall we at this time entertain
our selves with Preposterous and Chymerical Notions of I know not what, that
may happen God knows when? and neglect foolishly our only means of Safety? Was
there ever an Excise yet laid, that did not actually expire with the Period set
to it by Parliament? If Excises that have been once established have had the
Fortune to be continued, it is much to their Credit, and to the Honor of those
that did first establish them. For if there had been any Inconveniences to the
Public found in the use of them, they would of course have been set aside, to
make way for less Grievous Taxes. But their continuance for some more years
upon repeated Experience of their convenience to the Public, does loudly speak
in Praise of them, above strained or imaginary Notions to the contrary.

The same necessity at present lies upon us, as well as our Neighbors, to
raise greater Sums than ordinary for our common Defense, and to humble France
in its highest Pride. Money must be raised, or the Nation perish. But of all
the Nations in Europe, there is not one more Rich in its proportion, or more
plentiful in all things; and yet none so free as we from Excises in general,
and consequently none more capable of bearing them with Ease. When once we dare
venture to try the Experiment, I shall from that Minute conclude the Fall of
France as good as done; and we shall soon see their humblest Addresses for
Peace, when once they see us thus in good earnest engaged against them. Did not
an Excise laid upon a few Commodities by the then Parliament contribute more
than any thing else to the Overthrow of King Charles the First? And did not
Holland by this means above all others preserve it self against the Power of
Spain. As long as the World lasts, a Shilling will beat Sixpence; and Silver
and Gold will overcome Brass-Money.

Since the Session of this Parliament, there has been Published a Treatise,
designedly writ against Excises, by an excellent Pen, and a Judicious Head, who
fears that by Excises, our Liberties will come to be in danger, and our
Constitution (so excellent, that whatsoever is said for its Preservation
deserves the highest Esteem) our very Constitution will run the Hazard of being
thereby subverted. But upon the whole, it may be considered, that very great
and wise Men are sometimes led by Prejudices as well as others; that in all
Ages of the World great Errors and Neglects have been committed, and great
Misfortunes have happened to the Public, through fond and often groundless
Jealousies of that most excellent Blessing, Liberty; that there was never a
Juncture of time wherein any danger of our precious Liberty might be less
justly suspected. And especially considering that the Settlement even of the
Revenue of the Crown is but for a short term, only four years more, no Man can
doubt, but it will be the Interest and Prudence of the Crown, not to aspire at
any thing which may give just Jealousy to the Parliament; and at the
expiration of that term, it will be in the power of the then Parliament to take
what Precautions they shall judge necessary (if these shall be then found
needful) for the Preservation of our Constitution.

And as to what that worthy Gentleman, so exceedingly prejudiced against
Excises does Object, that the Liberty of Elections of Members to serve in
Parliament, will be in no small danger through the great influence of
Excise-Men in that particular; it is easy to make such Provisoes to any Bill
of Excise, as shall prevent all Excise-Men from any Ways intermeddling in the
point of Elections, and to render such persons liable both to forfeit their
places upon any good Evidence of it, and to make them for ever incapable of any
such Office for the future.

If ever Jealousies can be safely laid aside, this is the time for it, when we,
and almost all Europe are together fighting for Liberty, against the Common
Oppressor; and indeed little is like to be done against him, unless we also
engage with all our might. A happy Issue of this War with France will serve to
deter Ambitious Princes from oppressing their Freeborn Subjects.

There is another Objection against an Excise, which, if true, were of moment;
but I believe those, who make it, are wiser than really to fear what they
pretend by it. And it is, that hereby there may be danger of Discontents and
Murmurings from the Common People, if their Provisions or their Clothing
should come to be Excised, as well as their Drink.

To which I answer, that such Taxes can never possibly be more seasonable, nor
less Grievous than at present, when Food in general bears so low and overcheap
a price. But if it were much dearer than now it is, there can be no just
apprehension of any such dangers to the Public upon that Account. For whatever
Scruples some Persons of Rank among us may have had in relation to the present
Oaths, or Settlement now by Law established, yet for the Common People, and the
lower Rank of Men (whose General Voice is said to be the Voice of God, and
often in common things, in the plain and natural Interest of their Country, is
more Infallible than a General Council in things Speculative, Metaphysical, and
such as are above the reach of Human Knowledge, or not plainly Revealed) I dare
boldly averr, that there never yet happened a Juncture of Time, wherein there
was less danger of Disturbances from Them than there is at present, The People
of England in general, were never embarked in a Cause they more heartily
espoused, than they now do this of the Present Government. To say nothing of
the late universal Expressions of Joy in London, that were never known among us
before, the late Custom of Illuminations in almost every Corner, and Alley, as
well as the great Streets, upon his Majesty's Return among us, and on his
Birthday; tho perhaps it be a greater and more evident Argument for the
Peoples Loyalty than can easily be thought on, yet I shall wave it, and rather
take notice, that a War with France (the true Interest of the Nation) has been
eagerly, and for many years past Longed for, and in vain till now, both by the
Parliament and People; and the Universal Readiness of the whole Kingdom to
oppose the French the last year, is a a strong and sufficient Argument of the
Peoples Disposition and Inclination under any Burden to support this
Government. And it was at a time, when by the unfortunate Conduct of our Fleet,
the French hovered some Weeks on our Coasts, and had the pleasure a little to
feed their Vainglory, and even threatened us with the Fears of an Invasion
they did not dare to make, but had withal the Mortification to find, that the
few Friends they had among us (and whom they had ridiculously magnified into
mighty numbers) had neither the Courage, nor the Strength to give us the least
manner of Disturbance, at the only Critical Time they are like to have this
Age. It is objected also, that the Multiplication of Excises will likewise
multiply Officers, who are apt to domineer where they come, even sometimes to
the raising of Tumults; and that by this Increase of Officers, Gentlemen will
be in danger of being continually disturbed by them in their own Houses.

To which I Answer, that there may be timely Care taken by good Provisoes, to
keep the Officers within the due Bounds of their Duty; that whatsoever
unavoidable Inconvenience does happen, is like to be but for a year or two, in
which short time (if we effectually raise Good Sums) we may reasonably hope
(through God's Blessing on a Good Cause, and his Majesty's admirable Conduct)
to see Frante well humbled, and brought to reason. If we neglect to raise
sufficient Sums, the War must necessarily be prolonged, or, which is worse,
France left in a condition to give Laws to us all; and perhaps the present fair
opportunity of humbling France may never again be retrieved. If Excise-Men, as
well as Collectors of other Taxes, have been found to transgress their Duty, to
make Seizures very oppressive, or such as may cause loud Clamours in the
Neighborhood, even to the raising Tumults or Riots, this is no Argument
against the Tax it self, but against the Indiscretion and Folly, or Barbarity
of some Cockscomb, who has thus abused his Trust, and who deserves to be
severely punished for his Misdemeanor. If a Judge should happen to be corrupted
with Bribery, must we exclaim against the Law it self? or if a Minister should
happen to be guilty of Symony, shall we presently cry down the Order of
Priesthood? By the same Rule nothing in the World, tho never so excellently
instituted, will be able to avoid our Censure and Dislike.

And as to the Molestation of Gentlemen in their Houses by Excise-Men, it is
well known, that if the Excise were, during this War, to be laid upon Malt,
instead of Beer and Ale, there could be no cause of Complaint upon that
Account, And it is thought by a good Computation, that an Excise upon Malt
would raise at least Double to what the present Excise now does. And if we were
once inclinable to Excises, there is little doubt, but there might be ways
found out (in imitation of our Neighbors abroad, who have long tried the
Experiment, and yet find no Cause of Complaint, that Officers are troublesome
to them in their Houses, unless indeed they make Concealments, and are shrewdly
suspected to Cheat the State, in due Customs or Excise) there might, I say, be
ways found out to obviate this Objection in other things to be made Exciseable.
But if in rigor it should so happen that every little Inconvenience cannot
possibly be altogether avoided, is it not much better to bear gently with some
sort of Inconvenience, during this War with France (whereon depends the Fate of
Europe) than through our Niceness, Folly, or Neglect, to run the hazard of
paying shortly (together with our Neighbors) what, and how the French Dragoons
shall think fit to order us.

But however such Objections as those beforementioned are commonly and
cunningly made against Excises, yet I cannot tell how to think they are the
True Reasons of dissiking them. There must be other Reasons, which are not fit
to be spoken out, and which every Body is not worthy to know. But this I shall
say, that notwithstanding the unaccountable, and I fear, invincible Prejudices
of some Worthy Persons among us against Excises, yet by the Observation that I
can make of the Opinion and Desire of Gentlemen of Sense without doors, I do
find them almost universally to favor, and even to solicit what I now urge.

As for Land-Taxes, perhaps no Nation in the World is so incapable of bearing
them long together, especially if they be laid heavily, as the English: None
less able to pay Taxes by the Lump, and none more able to pay them in Driblets.
The English are a People of Great Souls, Magnanimous, and Liberal in their
Expenses. They do commonly fear neither Death, nor Want. The extravagant
profuseness of our common Seamen (as stout as Lions) upon receiving their Pay,
is too notorious to be mentioned. And for Gentlemen of Estates, there are but
few who do not live to the height of what they have, and there are not a few of
them, who do live even above their annual Income. It is not with us, as with a
more frugal Neighbor Nation, where it is no Discredit to live very much below
the ordinary Income, nay where it as much discredits a Man to equal his Expense
to his Fortune, as to be guilty of any profligate Extravagance or Debauchery.
Now where a People in general is so over-generous, and thereby apt to run out
of themselves, what must we think of their Condition, when Great Land Taxes are
added to their Burden; when Great Sums must be constantly paid by them, tho
they come from them worse than so much Blood.

Whereas in Excises there is not only a most exact Equality in raising them a
thing only to be wished for in the levying Land-Taxes) according to Men's own
Abilities and Capacities, but the Payment is so small at a time, and so
insensible, that no Man's Heart (tho never so large) has need to ache on that
Account. He may buy as few Commodities as he pleases, and as for Sustenance,
Nature is content with little. If he grows indigent and necessitous under such
Taxes, it is his own fault, and he must blame himself, and not the Taxes.

Again, if we consider the vast difference between the Sums that may be easily
raised by way of Excise, and and those arising from Land-Taxes; as well as the
difference between what a Gentleman suffers by the latter rather than by the
former: we must conclude for Excises against Land-taxes, unless we are
exceedingly prejudiced, and even resolved, that no Reason, tho never so clear,
nor Instances, tho never so notorious, shall serve to convince us.

An understanding Brewer tells me, that a Gentleman, who has twenty in Family,
does usually pay by the year for the Beer of his Family but six or seven pounds
per annum Excise. Now we may well suppose the same Gentleman (who has twenty in
Family) to have an Estate of at least a thousand, or fifteen hundred pounds a
year, and to pay to the Land Tax two hundred of his fifteen. And yet this
Land Tax, on the whole Kingdom shall raise but little more than the Double
Excise, which affects but a part. Now is not there a very considerable
difference between the paying six or seven pounds, and two hundred, by the same
person, for the raising near the same Sum. In the one, the easy and
insensible Tax, it is but a part of the Kingdom that pays. In the other, the
heavier Tax, every Corner and Foot of Land pays a sensible proportion. In the
one the People of England in general, who do now pay nothing toward Taxes but
for their Liquors, must make their insensible but general Contributions, as
they shall have occasion for some small matter of the things Excised; in the
other the Gentleman or the Freeholder, pays his large, and often most unequal
proportion, even for Lands that he has little or no profit by, or such as he
cannot Let: at best, he pays very considerable Sums, and too too often more
than his Circumstances or his Family can bear. And I cannot imagine, why the
Preservation of the Freeholders of England, the Preservation of our Landed Men,
should be of less care to us, than the other People, who either Trade, or Work
for their Livelihood; and who are paid by the Gentry better Princes or Wages,
in their several Trades or Employments, that any other People perhaps in the
World.

Again, if a Gentleman who has twenty in Family, and who pays but six or seven
pounds a year to the Excise upon Beer, etc. which affects but a part of the
Nation, does nevertheless contribute a proportion sufficient to raise so Great
a Sum for the Public Good, as does that Excise, being according to estimation
twelve hundred thousand pounds, or more, this year: what immense Sums might
then easily be raised, if Wearing Apparel, Salt, Soap, Candles, Leather, or the
like, (not to mention Food) were also Excised, during this War with France.

Some persons in discoursing of these Matters have refined too far, and even
inclined to think, that the Great Inequality which now prevails in the levying
of Land-Taxes (some paying a proportion double, nay treble to others, either in
the same, or in different Counties) is a principal Reason why the House does
rather continue to Tax Land, than to lay Excises. They think that the greatest
part of the House, consisting of Gentlemen, sent from those Counties which
enjoy the Benefit of this Inequality, do reason with themselves, that if they
should ease Land, and lay their Taxes by way of Excise, they must thereby
become Sufferers, and bear an Equal Burden with the rest of the Nation,
whereas, now their Burden is but light, in comparison with others. But as no
Man can decently, or ought to think, that the Wisdom of the Nation can be
guilty of acting by other Principles, than such as tend rather to the General
Good, than to particular Interests; so I cannot tell how to think, that any
number of Gentlemen of such eminent Stations, and Knowledge in the World, can
be imposed upon by such false Reasonings. For it is plainly against the
Interest of those Counties, who now are easiest under Land-Taxes: for whatever
the Gentlemen of Estates in the not Associated Counties do now pay toward the
Land Tax, they would not pay the eighth, nay perhaps not the tenth part of the
same Sum, if double the Money that is raised upon Land, were to be advanced by
way of Excise. It is not one in a Family, the poor Landlord only, that must
make his Payments to such Excises, but the infinite Multitude, which do now
escape Taxes, and who do, abundance of them, eat and wear as well as the best,
must all come in, and (I dobut not but they will very willingly at this time)
contribute their small and insensible, but numerous Proportions.

Never was there occasion, before this, of raising such Great Sums as are now
absolutely necessary for our Preservation; never was France, before now, such a
Terror to all her Neighbors both by Land and Sea. And yet notwithstanding her
Pride and Greatness, she is become very conscious from what Person, and from
what People her Fall is like to come; as has been evidently discovered, not
only by the Ridiculous and Shameful Rejoycings they lately every where made,
for the supposed Death of our King at the Boyne, but by their so carefully and
industriously avoiding to Fight Us either by Sea or Land.

To conclude, it has been with Money, prodigious Sums of Money, that the
French have fought and beaten so many Enemies, and have taken so many Towns and
Countries; and it must be with the same Weapons, and can be with no other than
Money, that we shall be enabled (through God's Blessing) to Overcome the French.

As for one other Objection (of the Difficulty and Inconveniences in Laying and
Collecting Excises) the long Experiment we have had in Laying and Collecting
the Excise upon Liquors, and the vast Sums which it every year brings in to
defray the greatest part of our public Charges, does sufficiently answer.

FINIS.

