Debts Discharge, OR SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON ROMANS 13.8. the former Part.

Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. Being an Endeavor to state
that Case of Conscience, and designed to persuade all men to get and keep out
of Debt as much as may be.

By C. M.

The wicked borrows, and pays not again, Psalm. 37.21.

The borrower is servant to the lender, Pro. 22.7.

Post Tringita Dies a Judice Constitutos, Debtor non solvens, vinctus
compedibus, atque in nervo, tradebatur creditori, qui eum domi ceu Jumentum
cogebat operari, quoad sibi satisfactum esset.

In Legib. 12. Tab. ut refert Aulus Gellius. LONDON, Printed for Tho Cockerill,
at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over against the Stocks Market. 1684.

The CONTENTS.
THe Context opened, of dues to Magistrates Page 1 Of Debts, the Distribution
into proper Lawful 4 proper Unlawful 4 Metaphorical 4
Lawful, showed from The nature of the Contract 5 Necessity and Expedience 8
Scripture Commanding to lend 10 Commending the Lender 12 Allowing Usury 13
Paul's, and other good men's Debts 16 Mutual borrowing, is Brotherly kindness 17
Unlawful, its Debtors Careless, their Causes Not considering Estates 19
Suretiship, lawful, and unlawful 19 Creditors rebuked 24
Treacherous 26 Proud 27 Presumptuous, and Covetous 28 Concomitants Sin, and
the cause of Sin 29 Sorrow, from Disgrace, and Disturbance 30
Advice to men In debt General to all 35 Special to some Sureties 38 Heirs and
Executors 39 Corporations 45


Out of Debt, to avoid Sodomiticals Pride 48 Idelness 50 Fullness of Bread 52
Covetousness 54 Vain confidence 56
Metaphorical Debts, especially of Law 57
ERRATA.
PAge 19 line 22. for compound, read become bound. page 45 line 27. for
oblatum, read ablatum. Page 48 line 10 for Halter, read Halser. Page 49 line 8.
for houses, read horses. Page 59 line 7. for rendes, read renders.

Debts discharge: OR, Some Considerations on Romans 13.8. the former Part, Owe
nothing to any man, but to love one another.
THE Apostle having in the 12. chap. discoursed of diverse Ethical Virtues; he
comes in this 13th. to treat of some Politicals; particularly of Obedience to
Governors from v. 1. to 7th; and of common Justice to one another, from 7. to
11. In the former he presses Subjection by Arguments drawn from the Fountain
and Streams of Government.

1. The Fountain thereof is Gods Ordination, v. 1. No power but of God -- The
powers that be, are ordained of God. Whence he infers this corollary; Therefore
they that resist Government, resist Gods Ordinance, and receive to themselves
Judgment, ((...)) not only of men, but of God, whose Ordinance ^s violated by
them, v. 2.

2. His second Argument is taken out of the Streams, the use and Benefits of
Magistracy, which are (according to Gods Ordination) praise and encouragement
of good works, and a terror only to those evils (our own, or others) which
might hurt us: And therefore it is said, He is a minister of God unto the for
good, v. 3, 4.

From both these Arguments he infers a necessity of subordination ((...)) v. 5.
Wherefore we must needs be subject, and that not only for wrath (for fear of
punishment by humane laws, whereby the vilest men are some way impelled or
restrained) but for conscience sake, as genuine Christians who acknowledge this
subjection necessary by Divine Precept, and therefore readily comply with such
Magistratical commands, as they judge agreeable to the Will of God (usque ad
aras) This practical judging according to the rule of Conscience (Gods holy
word) is necessary for conscientious obedience; and a modest enquiry into the
Reasons of Superiors commands, does no more derogate from the Dignity of the
commanders, than examining Doctrines in matters of Faith, does from the
Preachers of the word; which this very Apostle commands often, and commends in
the Bereans as a noble industry.

He proceeds to show, why men do, or ought to pay tribute, v. 6. For this cause
pay you tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers. For this cause, namely,
Conscience: Because Christ commands it, Matthew. 22.21. And because they are Gods
Ministers.

He subjoins another Reason, enforcing even natural conscience by common
equity, if there were no Christianity in men; and that is, Attending
continually upon this very thing, namely, the Ministry of God for your good
(according to their afore-noted Constitution). Now, as express Law, and common
Reason, require provision for the Ministers of Worship, to carry on their
service, and maintain their persons (they who attend on the Altar must live of
the Altar); so the same Law and Reason requires support to the Ministers of
Justice, whose public Service, and honorable state, (necessary thereunto)
cannot be maintained without an answerable common contribution.

He concludes this discourse of Magistrates, and passes over to the other
branch, common Justice, with a general Exhortation, Render therefore to all
their dues. v. 7. To the Magistrates, their Tributes, Customs, Fear, Honor;
and to all others, their proprieties and due debts; be just to all; be
behind-hand with no man; if you pay it not, it still remains due; right never
rots; You are still debtors in equity, which I would not have you be (says God
by the Apostle) Owe nothing to any man but love.

In the Words there is mentioned a twofold debt; one that is incumbent only
upon one party, and this is debt proper; the other is reciprocal, and incumbent
on both, Love; (love one another) which is a debt metaphorical. It Is the proper
debt (aes alienum) of which we intend now more fully to discourse.

This in the present prohibition seems absolutely and universally forbidden;
nothing; not to any man; Prince, or Subject, high or low. But if you look back
to v. 7. (Render to all their dues); That hints to us a limited sense, in which
I conceive it must be understood: Not that to be in debt is absolutely and in
it self unlawful; but such a wilful owing is forbidden, as detains another due
without his free approbation and consent; that renders it not, when it is
required of him.

Seeing therefore the matter admits of a distinction of lawful and unlawful
owing; we shall treat of both, that the case of conscience may be more fully
resolved. And first of lawful Debt.

1. Debt is lawful in it self, for it is one of the species or kinds of
contract founded on man's dominion over his own proprieties; namely, that
between Lender and Borrower, which may be thus defined.

A contract, wherein one that has full dominion of money, (or any other thing
valuable by money) places it for a time in the hand and for the use of
another, only for his profit. In which,

1. Full Dominion; It signifies a complete right and propriety in a thing, or a
sufficient trust committed by such a Proprietor; and both the Proprietor and
Trustee must have an actual power and capacity prudently to dispose of it:
Therefore Children under age or years of discretion; madmen under distempers;
men of weaker understanding, and in this matter apt to be imposed upon; feme
Coverts in such things as are not committed to their management; Guardians and
Servants beyond their trust; Partners without consent; the trust or consent
expressed, or reasonably presumed; have not full dominion, and therefore are
not capable of any contract in such matters; and therefore not of borrowing or
lending in their own or others names.

2. Of money, or any thing valuable by it: For it may be Food, Raiment, Labor,
a Horse, a House, or any other such goods, as can be rendered again, either in
the individual (the very same) without damage, or in the kind of like value, or
in equivalent Money.

3. For a time: Either determined by the contract (as a Day, Week, Year) or
undetermined; and so is determinable by the Will of the Lender: This
distinguishes it from gift, which altering the propriety, the former Owner
does no more require it.

4. Into the hand, and for the use of another. Herein it differs from
entrusting a man with a thing only to be kept for the Owners use, when he shall
call for it: As when I put my Horse to Grass, or into a Livery-Stable, etc.

5. Lastly: Only for his profit: For if the Lender contract for profit (more or
less) to himself, it ceases to be loan, and runs into some other species of
contract. Indeed it still retains in our vulgar language (although improperly) the
name of debt, borrowing or lending; whereby the true nature of lending is but
confusedly understood by the most, and thereby many needless disputes and
scruples about Usury have been raised. Lending must be free say some; and so
say I, or else it is not lending; for if it be otherwise, the contract is
altered. As,

1. If to share of the profits, It Is not loan, but Partnership.

2. If to have compensation for damage: Neither is that loan, but hire. And
therefore some do call their interest, (not improperly) damage money; because,
tho there be not damnum ingruens (actual loss) yet there is lucrum cessans
(ceasing of profit) by having ones money in another hand. Tho a man loses not
what he has, yet he loses what he might have, were it in hisown hand to be used
and improved by him.

Now that this is lawful, consider, that money answers all things, Eccles.
10.19. that is, All that can be procured by it; and it is (on the same ground)
as true reciprocally, that every thing answers money, which by its sale can
procure it: So that my Horse is my money (so much as it is worth) and my money
is my Horse (so much as will buy one): If therefore I let my horse to hire, I
may his price as well: The Servant is said to be a man's money, Exodus 21.21. that
is, the purchase of his money; if therefore he that employs my servant must pay
me for it, why not for the employment of so much money as did buy him? But this
is more plain. v. 19. Where the maimed person, besides for his healing, was to
be satisfied for the loss of his time: He shall pay for the loss of his time;
in Hebrew it is for his ceasing; i.e. from his work whereby he might have gained
profit. So then Lucrum cessans, (gain ceasing) is to be compensated with money:
The loss of my time is the loss of my money, which must be in equity paid for;
but the absence of my money is the loss of my time, which should be employed
about it.

The profit therefore of loan, (in its most proper sense) being only to the
Borrower, it is the lenders gift of so much, as the profit of the loan comes to:
If therefore (with due cirumstances considered) one can lawfully give his own,
and another as lawfully receive the gift (gift and loan being in effect the
same): Then the contract of lending and borrowing, and by consequence owing
something, is in its own nature lawful.

2. Debt is not only lawful in it self, but it is sometimes even necessary, at
least honestly very expedient, in the way of ordinary Commerce. As,

1. In merchandising (which is buying and selling): This cannot sometimes be
well performed without it; for we have not always the convenience to pay, when
we have the opportunity to buy: Now if every man, to avoid debt, were bound to
forbear buying till he had sufficient money in hand; there would be little
buying, and so the prizes of commodities unreasonably fall, or most of (if not
all) the running cash of a Nation would be imbargo'd to the public damage, as
well as the private loss, by the dead-lying of so much useless money.

2. In things absolutely necessary for life, (as Food. Raiment, and House-room)
if present necessity require them forthwith to be had, and we have a reasonable
prospect of a future capacity to pay for them, what can (in this case) be done
but going on score (which is debt), or borrowing of money for the present
occasion? A Friend in his Journey may come and occasion our lending three
loaves at midnight, Luke 11.5.

3. In small bargains, when we cannot change money, or in such places where
money is scarce, and men are forced to barter: Putting to account (which is
debt) is necessary, till time convenient for stating and ballancing the
accounts.

4. In great bargains, and settling Estates; which cannot be parcelled out just
equal to ones cash, or to pay every debt at the same time: In such cases, we
contract a debt to secure the title, which we honestly pay after by degrees out
of the profits of the bargain or land, as they will arise; which if it should
not be, it would ruin men's trade or Estates.

And therefore, seeing the Scripture is given for men's good, it cannot be
supposed to forbid that which is so necessary and convenient for them.

3. Nay, rather the Scripture gives countenance hereunto, and that in diverse
Particulars. As,

1. The Scripture commands us to lend. Deuteronomy. 15.7. etc. If there be a poor man,
one of thy brethren (i. e. a Jew) thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy
hand from thy poor brother, v. 8. But thou shall open thy hand wide unto him,
and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need. Oh but the Year of release
is drawing near, and I shall lose my money: He Will not pay me till then, and then
he will be quit, (as v. 12.) To prevent this sort of reasoning, it is added, v.
9. Beware, that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, the year of
release is at hand, and thine eye be evil against him, and thou give him
naught, and he cry to the Lord -- and it be sin unto thee. v. 10. Thou shall
surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give him, etc.

Here we may note, That lending is commanded; that giving (the profit of a
loan) and lending is the same; that not only the matter (without excuse) but
the manner (without grudging or grieving) is required; and therefore the
contrary will be sin to him that does it.

As Moses thus taught his Disciples, so does our Savior teach his, Luke 6.35,
36. Sinners lend to sinners to receive as much again; hut love ye your enemies;
do good and lend, hoping for nothing again. Nothing? What not the Principal?
Yea, doubtless the lent Principal might be looked for again, or else it were an
absolute gift, and not lending; but the nothing here signifies nothing of the
profits of the loan, or else it were the usurious contract, and not the
merciful lending here required. Make it not your only motive to lend (as
sinners do) hoping to receive as much again: That is, the like kindness upon
occasion at another time, when they are able to lend and you need to borrow;
but in a Christian Benignity, and in obedience to the command, with expectation
only of Gods future reward, and your reward shall be great; And in a Conformity
to the Commander and Rewarder, and ye shall be the children of the highest, for
he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil; be ye therefore merciful as
your father is merciful.

The scope of this, and that which goes before, is (not to contemn your
propriety, as of no value; not to satisfy the Rapacious, who would soon borrow
all that you have; nor to maintain the idle or Riotous, who would willingly
spend upon others labors, but) to relieve Gods poor, or such as are made poor
by Gods Providence, without their notorious fault; then (tho thy personal
enemies) thou shall help them: If his necessities be great, that he hunger or
thirst, give him meat and drink for his present sustenance in life; if not
altogether so great, then exercise thy Gospel Spirit of kindness and Mercy, by
lending, as his need requires, others known needs considered, and thy Ability
with Christian Prudence will allow.

Hitherto also refer that moderation in taking security required, Deuteronomy. 24.10,
11. Where they are forbidden to enter into the Debtors house for the pledge, but
were to stand without and receive it at his hand. Thus the Scripture (you see)
commands lending.

2. The Scripture that commands lending, commends the Lender, Psalm. 37.26. Of
the Righteous Man it is said, He is merciful and lends, and his seed is
blessed: And in 112.5. A good man shows favor, and lends; he will guide
his affairs with discretion. That is, It Is the Character of a righteous and
good man, that he is merciful and ready to show favor; this he exercises and
manifests in lending; only as in all his affairs, so especially in this matter,
he uses his discretion. This place compared with Matthew. 5.42. From him that
would borrow of thee, turn thou not away; will help to explain it: He is
ever-merciful, tho he does not ever lend; He is always good, and therefore in
hardness of heart never turns away from the Borrower; but yet tho his heart
be open, his discretion may sometimes hold his hand, or direct it to other
objects; with discretion or judgment he shows favor to the distressed.

Now since lending and borrowing are such reciprocal relatives, as never to be
separated; the one (with due circumstances) being commanded and commended, the
other cannot be absolutely disapproved, but is at least allowed if true need
require. Yea,

3. The usurious contract, which has been more questioned, and is called (tho
improperly) lending, (as is before noted) was permitted to be made with a
stranger, Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, but unto
thy brother thou shall not lend upon usury. The reason of this restriction as
to a brother, was (I conceive) especially, that the Jews might be preserved in
their inheritances, the better to distinguish Tribes and Families, whereby the
Genealogy of the Messiah might be cleared; and therefore diverse of the Judicial
Laws looked this way, amongst which this may be reckoned as one. But had usury
been in it self unjust, or unlawful, then to have taken it of a stranger had
crossed other laws, such as forbad to vex or oppress the stranger, Exodus 22.21,
23, 29. Yea, in point of Justice and charity, the same required to a stranger,
as to a Brother, Levit. 19 33, 34. If a stranger sojourn with you in your land,
ye shall not vex him, but the stranger that dwells with you, shall be unto
you as one born among you, and thou shall love him as thy self. A stranger
poor, and fallen to decay, was to be relieved, that he may live with thee, Chap.
25.35. As to matter of justice, whether distributive, or commutative, there was
to be one manner of Law to both Stranger, and home-born, Lev. 24.16, 22. and
Numb. 15.15, 16. Yea the curse was denounced against him that perverted the
Judgment of the stranger, Deuteronomy. 27.19. Had usury been against common equity,
and a thing in it self unjust, it must doubtless have proved a great scandal to
the Gentiles, and a prejudice against the Jewish Religion; yea dishonor to the
God of Israel as partial, as securing by law the interest of his people, and
exposing others to unrighteous dealings. A farther evidence of its being a
judicial law, which condemns it, and peculiar to that Commonwealth, may be
this; That we find it no where faulted in the New Testament; yea, it is not
improbable, that our Saviors Parable of the Talents, gives allowance
thereunto, that I might have received my own with usury. He seems to intimate
not only a common custom but a common right, in that he mentions it without
rebuke; 'twas otherwise in the Parable of the unjust steward: Where tho he
commends his Wisdom, yet he notes his injustice.

Therefore such places (in the Old Testament) as seem to speak against Usury,
are to be understood either of that which was cruel and biting (as the word
imports) or received of the poor, contrary to Exodus 22.25. which seems to be a
moral law; or against the aforementioned, express judicial law, not to take of
a brother. And indeed this seems to be that grievous scandal intimated, Jer.
15.10. I have neither lent upon usury, nor taken upon usury, and yet the people
curse me. Some Jews, it is likely, in his time as well as in Nehemiahs, did
oppress in this kind; so as the poor afflicted cried out upon it, and upon all
persons that had any thing to do therewith, as well the payers, as the
receivers thereof.

Now if this lending for advantage be not unlawful, then much less is the
lending out of love and bounty; and by consequence its necessary correlate, the
answerable borrowing out of need can no wise be blamed, tho perhaps the
occasion of the need may be so.

4. The Apostle himself, who gives the prohibition in the Text, puts himself in
debt by being surety for Onesimus, Philem. 8. If he has wronged thee, or owes
thee ought, put that on mine account. To put it on his account, was to make him
debtor for it until the account should be stated and discharged.

5. Gods People have been bid to borrow; as of the Egyptians, Ex. 2.3. -- 11.2.
In this tho there were something extraordinary, God intending to give them all
that was lent; Yet in that he did not bid them (as he might) privily, or by
what means soever, to get the possession of those Jewels, and take all they
could lay hands on; but only plainly and fairly to borrow them, they (not
knowing the Counsels of God) intending, probably, to restore them again; it
shows the borrowing in it self, and on special occasions, to be neither
dishonest nor dishonorable. So the Woman in 2 Kings 4.3. Was bid to borrow
Vessels, when the Oil was to be multiplied, beyond all those she had in the
House: Go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors, even empty vessels;
Borrow not a few.

6. Gods People have been borrowers without blame; as the Woman last mentioned;
the Israelites of the Egyptians, Exodus 12.35. So the Prophets Sons, concerning
the Axe; Alas, master, for it was borrowed, 2 Kings 6.5. So of the poor Jews,
Nehem. 5.4. There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the Kings
Tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards. They were fain to mortgage
their Estates, which was deplorable, not culpable, their misery but not their
sin.

7. Yea borrowing may be and ordinarily is with design of mutual compensation,
and so is a part of brotherly kindness, and good neighborhood. It Is scarce
possible for any person or family, to be always provided for every occasion;
mutual supply is therefore necessary, and is one of the ends of cohabitation:
Therefore better is a neighbor that is near, than a brother that is far off,
Prove. 27.10. The condition of a person is often such, as needs not a gift, tho
a present supply; in such case borrowing is the most expedite way; which
implies a confidence in our neighbors good will, with a purpose to do him the
like kindness on occasion: And indeed there is often acknowledged a kindness in
a will to be beholding, as well as to oblige.

These things considered will, I think, sufficiently evince, that all kind of
borrowing or owing is not unlawful, or forbidden in the Text. At most, the
thing is in it self but indifferent, and may be circumstantiated to be a
laudable good.

And thus much of lawful, and allowable owing, yea, sometimes eligible, as a
good necessary, or convenient thing.

2. Besides this, there is an evil owing warned against here in this Scripture,
Owe nothing to any man. This should be avoided for that which makes it
blameable, and does too often accompany debts, namely, the evils of sin, and of
sorrow.

1. Sin is frequently the cause and Companion of debt, where the Debtors are
careless treacherous, proud, or presumptuous.

1. The careless Debtor is he, who runs into debt from a heedless
inconsideration of the woeful consequences; he is herein guilty of a double
vice, prodigal Imprudence. Such owing is a wretched disregard of ones Estate
and an ill husbanding the Talents where with God has been pleased to entrust
him yea, a taking those of others into his hands, when he cannot give a good
account of his own. This is found in such foolish and vain persons as do either,

1. Not consider the bounds of their Estates, to compare them prudently with
their Expenses; but are sottishly profuse to satisfy a humor or fancy, never
thinking whether their stock is able decently to afford it.

2. Run into groundless suretyship: I say, groundless; for in this it must be
said (as was of debt) there is a good and an evil suretyship.

To make this appear, we must consider the nature of the thing; suretyship is
an Engagement or Contract, that another shall pay his debt, or we will pay it
for him; or it is an assuming the debt, at least, the hazard upon our selves.
And this is either,

1. Well-grounded; as when we duly weigh all circumstances of our selves, and
the person for whom we compound. And as to both,

1. The Motive or Obligation, which may incline us to do it: Such are drawn
either from near Relation, or equal friendliness in time past shown, or with
good reason expected for the future; or else for some eminent public good.

2. The ability and fidelity of the person for whom we are bound; as also our
own ability well to bear the burden in case it should fall upon us.

Now these things well considered, there may be sometime reason for us to give
to the party, for whom bound, so much as the debt comes to, if need should
require; or the hazard may reasonably be thought so little, that we need not
in a sober Judgment fear it should fall upon us. Of the former sort are
suretyships for a Father, a Brother, or one that has done us a great, real, and
equally valuable kindness; as also Bonds for Apprentices nearly related to us;
or for such a one entering into a profitable office, where the Trust requires a
Security: Of the latter, are Bonds of Recognizance, to appear, or be of the
behavior, for a Person that is not like to break it, or start aside, and so
make a forfeiture; especially if it be of public concern, that the Person for
whom bound, should retain his liberty. These and such like suretyships are not
only allowable, but may be sometimes a necessary duty; especially in some
constitutions of Government, where such securities are frequently required.

And therefore it is unnatural and unchristian to make vows and praeengagements,
to a Wife, or the like, never to be bound for any man (as some have done): And
it were but just, that such a one should be excluded the help of all mankind,
if he should fall under such a necessity, as should require a surety: and truly
neither Faith nor Reason can assure any man to the contrary: He that will have
friends, must be friendly, Prove. 18.24. And thus much for Suretyship as well
grounded.

2. But there is also a groundless suretyship, which is often represented in
Scripture as very blameable, and this under Three Characters.

1. For a friend (or at least one so called by way of excuse) out of a foolish
good nature, without weighing circumstances.

It Is commonly done by such silly persons as are easily coaxed and imposed
upon; or such Prodigals, as are apt to run themselves into a necessity of the
like kindness: Or lastly and most usually, by drunken companions, when their
liquor has laid their discretions asleep. We commonly see that fudling fellows
have their several humors in their cups: some ate maudlins and weep: some are
Hectors, swagger and quarrel; and some are monstrous loving and kind; now these
of the latter sort are the foolish men, that usually do involve themselves by
suretyship. I make bold to call them foolish, because the Scripture does so
too: A man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes a surety in the
presence of his friend, Prove. 17.18. He is taken as a silly bird in a snare,
from which he is advised to get out as soon, and as well as he can, Prove. 6.1,
etc. If thou be surety -- thou art snared, thou art taken with the words of thy
mouth. Do this now, my son, and deliver thy self when thou art come into the
hand of thy friend; go, humble thy self, and make sure of thy friend. Give not
sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids. Deliver thy self as a roe --
and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. The name of Love and Friendship is
the fair bait that allures this heedless bird into the dangerous snare; the
appearance of pleasant and green pasture, that leads the inconsiderate Roe into
the destructive toils: I say the mere name and appearance, for there is no true
love or friendship, but of good men, from good Principles, and upon good
grounds; in all other, courtesy is much craft; and design manages most of the
kindness of the world.

2. For a stranger, where there is neither natural tie, nor sufficient
acquaintance in those things that are necessary to be known in this affair: Of
such a one it is said, He shall smart for it; or (as in the original) be sore
broken, Prove. 11.15. Like the breaking of a bone, which not only disables, but
extremely pains.

It Is not unusual to hear men lament, that their Estates are broken by others
debts, or which they never did eat or drink; and that it should not so much
have troubled them had it been their own The sense and remembrance of their
folly adds to their misery. Thus they think of themselves. Besides which, the
Holy Ghost shows, how others ought to think of them; namely, That they are
people no ways to be trusted. Take his garment, that is surety for a stranger,
and take a pledge of him for a strange woman, Pro. 20.16. The same words are
repeated, chapter 27.13. Not as an oversight of the Penman, but as a thing well to
be remembered. The meaning is, they that are given to Suretyship, and Whoredom,
are no more to be trusted than the wretched Gamesters, who to day are full of
Cash, and to morrow Bankrupt; so uncertain are their estates, that they cannot
be valued, and they may soon undo themselves, and others with them.

3. Custom in these follies renders them worse. There are some wary men, that
at a certain time may be caught; but there are others, who make a common
practice of it. Of being one of these the Scripture cautions, Prove. 22.26, 27.
Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for
debts. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under
thee? What reason have men to run such hazzards as not to have a bed left to
lie upon?

And thus much of the careless debtor so far as concerns himself: But here
something may properly be added concerning the Creditors of such Debtors. Know
therefore, if their debt be their sin, men had need take care how they become
partakers thereof. Lay hands (says the Apostle) suddenly on no man, neither be
thou partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. He cautions
Timothy of partiality and rashness in ordaining men to the Ministry; they
perhaps unfurnished with due qualifications, thrust themselves forward, and
unwarrantably desire to be admitted into the sacred office; this presumption is
their sin; but take thou heed that by thy allowance, and concurrence, thou draw
not some of the guilt upon thy self. So may I say in the present case: Lend
not, give not credit, receive not into Bonds, rashly and inconsiderately, one
who may inconsiderately desire, or rashly yield to be a debtor; lest thou
partake in his sin, and contribute thy helping hand to his ruin; keep thy self
pure in this respect; have nothing to do in this matter: As Jeremiah was
neither lender nor borrower in oppressive usury, so be thou neither lender nor
borrower in foolish and careless debt. He that puts his bottle to his
neighbors mouth, is guilty of his drunkenness; woe unto him, says the
Prophet, Hab. 2 15. He that gives to an idle Beggar nourishes the idleness
more than the man; so he that lends to a careless prodigal cherishes his
prodigality more than him. If you put a sword into a madmans hand, he may kill
himself, but his blood will be required at your hands who gave him the
opportunity. O remember you are your brothers keeper, as to his Estate, as well
as his life. I have heard it said concerning some persons, That they deserved
hanging for lending money, because of the public damage that accrued thereby;
whether these severe Judges were out in their politics, or in their
informations, we need not now farther enquire; however thus far in the general
I am of their minds, That a lender may diverse ways be accessory to all the
mischiefs that follow thereupon; nor will the importunity of the borrower, nor
the love, kindness, and respects pretended by the lender, solve the matter: But
if the loan or credit given, be with design to serve ones own turn, it is an
egregious cheat, the bubling of a cully, and notorious villainy covered over
with courtesy.

I have the rather enlarged on this subject, because the lenders have commonly
more of their heads about them, than the witless borrowers, and therefore are
more obliged to think what they do: Which if men would conscientiously
consider, it might stop the gap on that side of the hedge, and prevent a great
deal of mischief that comes by careless borrowing.

2. Another sinful debtor is the treacherous debtor, who contracts debts with
design to make his own advantage of others loss, or extreme hazard. Such are
the gentiler sort of beggars, who being too proud or ashamed to ask an alms,
call it borrowing of what they never intend to pay: This if it be known or
supposed by the lender, may pass with him only as a proud beggary, and
accordingly repayment is not expected by him. But worse is that of some
Gentlemen, who having their Estates entailed, do draw in, or awe in their
tenants or inferior neighbors, to lend, or be bound for them in such sums as
their annual income for life, compared with the rate of their expenses, is
never like to satisfy. Such also are some traders, who drive their trades only
or chiefly upon Credit, without a true discovery of their conditions to the
Creditor, that so if he lend or trust, he may do it out of friendship, and not
a mistake: This tho it end not always in a loss, yet is always a great hazard
to the real owner, without his consent. Worse again than these are they who
contract as many debts as they can, with design to break and compound, or run
away. Of the same rank are those that embezzle what they are entrusted with; or
such as take to their own use whatever they can lay hand of, and then pretend
borrowing, when they are discovered.

All these may be truly accounted thieves and robbers, rather than debtors,
although perhaps civil laws take not hold of them as such; for it is getting
possession of another goods without the knowing consent of the true owner; and
this is no other than theft in the Court of Conscience, tho the Courts of
Judicature may call it only a cheat. But if men have no conscience to be
awakened by these considerations, let them think of one Motive from their
worldly interest, and that is, That they that defraud others, may expect some
time or other to be defrauded themselves: for if you have not been faithful in
that which is an other man's, who shall give you that which is your own? Luke
16.12.

3. Another sinful Debtor is the proud borrower, who would seem to be richer
than he is, only to live high, and make a bustle in the world. Such scorn their
own condition, wherein Gods Providence has put them, and are discontent with
him for his allowance. But this wicked pompous way of living, by the just
judgment of God, and the righteous sentence of humane laws, commonly (even in
this world) ends in misery; when the ruffler in his youth, shall in, or before
his age, lie and rot in a Goal, and his bones (as it is called) make dice to the
disgrace of his name and memory.

4. The last I shall at present mention is the presumptuous, and covetous
borrower: I put them both together, because they are usually conjoined: These
are such as have stronger fancies than judgments: Vehement inclinations without
due consideration of possible and not altogether improbable events. These
without sufficient reason promise to themselves mountains of advantage, and
therefore stretch their credits to the utmost to satisfy their rapacious
desire, or gratify their humor. Such are the high adventurers either in trade
or game, far above what their stock will bear in case of a disappointment.

These do highly tempt and provoke God; and it is very usual in his holy
Providence to cross such confidences, and blast their great projects and
designs; and to make them see (tho oftentimes too late) their egregious folly;
their folly at least (if there be no knavery in the bottom) in their
all-coveting and all-losing.

Now all these kinds of debt ( careless, treacherous, proud, presumptuous, and
covetous) are sin, and the cause of sin.

1. Sin, either as they tempt God, or wrong men, when there is not care or
intention to pay. The wicked borrows and pays not again Ps. 37.21. The
Providence of God indeed, does by losses extraordinary, sometimes disable an
honest man; but then he always wills and endeavors; and if after enabled, does
actually make full satisfaction.

2. The cause of sin; for debts are often the occasion of lying, boasting,
breach of promise, etc. And sometimes grievous oppression of the poor; the
tears of Widows and Orphans that have been wronged, will rise up in judgment
against some of those debtors.

And thus much for the sin of debt, for which it should be conscientiously
avoided.

2. The sorrow of debt is another evil for which we should studiously avoid it,
and carefully endeavor to owe nothing to any man. The sorrow is commonly on
the account of disgrace and disturbance.

1. Disgrace: It Is a base thing to be a needless debtor: Sometimes it is a kind
of theft (as is before noted) and this is a sin that carries shame along with
it. The thief is ashamed when he is found, Jer. 2.26. So are such debtors when
their broken condition is discovered

Sometimes if it be not theft, borrowing is a beggary, which is also shameful
to an ingenuous mind. It Is but begging the profits of the loan at least; and if
they intend not to pay, it is begging the loan it self. Many such
gentlemen-beggers there are, and some of them are impudent; but tho they put
off modesty, they cannot long keep off shame; when men shall baulk and be as
shy of them, as themselves are of their Creditors.

Besides, there are many odious and infamous vices, that bring men to an
indigent and borrowing condition; unfaithfulness may forfeit a gainful trust;
idleness may waste a fair estate, and profuse prodigality, Riot, Whoredom,
Gaming. etc. may soon absorp and devour great Revenues. Now when men by these
or such like crimes do come to want and borrow; their former wickedness more
than their present want will be taken notice of, and pointed at by the most:
See (say they) this man, that was once in a prosperous condition, and so might
still have continued, had he been wise or honest; see what his ungodly courses
have brought him to. On this account (I conceive) were those Words of the
unjust steward, Luke 16.3. I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. I cannot dig, as
not used to hard labout; to beg, ashamed, lest men should upbraid me with my
former state, and scorn and laugh at my folly. This kind of Poverty (of all
others) is that which verifies the saying of the Poet, -- Nil habet paupertas
Durius in se,
Quam, quod ridiculos Homines faciat --


2. Disturbance of mind and great encumbrance of thoughts, how to save repute,
and discharge obligation; It is so usually in all men, for that debt has in
men the resemblance of guilt; the guilty conscience (for instance of a
murderer) dogs and haunts him wherever he goes, is always afraid of vengeance,
Every one that sinds me, shall slay me (says Cain,) Genesis 4.14. presents to his
imagination, frightful specters, and every man he meets as an avenger of blood.
Very much like this are the debtors thoughts embroiled; he fancies every one
that knocks at door a Creditor; every stranger he meets a bailiff; and if his
cloak hitch accidentally in a Tenter-hook, he presently is ready to cry out (as
the story goes) At whose suit? Yea sin and debt are so near a kin, that the
Holy Ghost (according to the Syrian Idiotism) expresses one by the other,
Matthew. 6.12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, which Luke
records thus, chapter 11.4. Forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that
is indebted to us. Thus in express words sin is called debt. Sometimes in
Parables, as that Matthew. 18.24. etc. Where God is set forth as a great King,
calling his Servants to account; the great sinner as one that ought him ten
thousand talents; the desert of sin, by being bound and sold, v. 25.
Repentance, by falling down, worshipping and prayer, v. 26. Pardon, by loosing
and forgiving him the debt, v. 26. Thus it is to the generality of men a
trouble like the conscience guilty of sin. But more especially is it grievous
and perplexing to ingenuous persons who have any honesty and modesty in them;
they are vexed and ashamed to think that they should live to any others
hindrance or damage; but whether it trouble them or no, it is a lamentable case,
and to be debtors is used in Scripture as an expression of a miserable and
distressed condition; thus David's poor followers are set forth as a sort of
outlawed persons, 1 Samuel 22.2. Every one that was in distress, and every one
that was in debt. They are (not sui juris) scarce Freemen: The borrower is
servant to the lender, Prove. 22.7. To be servant is not eligible Estate; But
says the Apostle, If thou may be made free, use it rather, 1 Cor. 7.21. Add
to this, that the Blessing and the Curse are set forth (as by other opposites,
so) by lending and borrowing; the Blessing, Thou shall lend to many nations,
and thou shall not borrow, Deuteronomy. 15.6. and chap. 28.12. Whereas the curse is,
He shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him; he shall he the head,
and thou shall be the tail, chapter 28.44. Who is this He? Why it is the stranger
that is within thee, v. 43. Who shall get above thee very high, and thou shall
come down very low. See also the poor Woman's complaint, a poor Widow of a godly
Minister, 2 Kings 4.1. A woman of the wives of the Sons of the Prophets cried
to Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou know that thy
servant did fear the Lord; and the creditor is come to take unto him my two
sons to be bondmen. A lamentable case, unto which God sees fit sometimes to
leave his people: Such another complaint we have of the poor Jews, Neh. 5.1.
etc. There was a great cry of the people, and of their wives. What Is the
matter? Alas, they were in debt; they were fain to borrow, to take up corn (on
score) that they might live, their families were so great, and their means so
small; we, our sons and our daughters are many, v 2. And for this to mortgage
their Lands and Vineyards, v. 3. Yea, some borrowed money to pay the Kings
Tribute, and that upon their lands and vineyards, v. 4. Yea, more than that,
They hereby brought their sons and daughters into bondage, nor was it in their
power to redeem them, v. 5.

What we here read is Scripture, it is no more than is confirmed by daily
experience; and those that have lain under the burden of debts do know, that
this discourse is not a bare fancy, or rhetorical harrangue.

And thus I have endeavored to show, in what sense, and for what reasons the
Apostle advises, or rather commands in the name of Christ, to owe nothing to
any man. He advises that no man should in discretion, and commands that no man
should in duty run himself into those perplexities, or continue under those
troubles which by Gods Providence and man's Prudence, may ordinarily be avoided.

It Is not to be doubted, but most men are of opinion, It Is better to be out of
debt than to lie groaning under it. All the Question is, How shall this be
accomplished?

I shall offer a little Advice; first, to those that are in debt, and then to
those that are out of it.

1. Those that are in debt should endeavor with the first opportunity to get
out of it, and pay what you owe. Go, sell the oil and pay thy debt, in that, 2
Kings 4.7. If you have wherewithal to discharge the debt, be just and do it;
and contrive forthwith how with the best convenience: Satisfy not your self
with Wishes, Desires, and Hopes, that you shall one day be out of debt, but see
what at present you can do toward it. If you have real, or personal estate,
sell it, or settle it so as (a humble necessary livelihood deducted) something
considerable may go toward satisfaction of your Creditors, and (as lies in
your power) to make amends for all their damages; the equity is the same with
that Exodus 22.14. If a man borrow ought of his neighbor, and it be hurt -- he
shall surely make it good. If damage comes, the borrower is to bear it; for if
it be through your default, or the Providence of God be against you, why should
another suffer for it? You must if you will be just and at ease, retrench your
expenses, lower your top-sail; tuck up your affairs closer about you; and be
content not to make so much show in the world. I know (durum est descendere)
it is hard to come down; but the difficulty is not insuperable: If your heart be
(as it ought) honest and humble, and compliant with the humbling circumstances
you are under; you will say with him (in Plutarchs Morals) carebo domo, carebo
famulitio, ne debeam. I Will be without house, or servant, that I may be free of
debt. And (as he goes on) Parinde facit, ac si Hydropicus, dicat medico; Ego
gracilis fiam ac Inanis; nam nihil refert, quam gracilis sim, modo sanus. As an
Hydropic man says to his Physician, Let me be made lean and slender, no matter
how slender, so I be sound. Really Friends, it is far more eligible to live in
a low and free condition, than to make a vain ostentation in the world, with
inward gripes and twinges, arising from dishonesty or debt. Dishonesty will
sting Conscience, unless men by Divine Judgment are hardened to destruction; and
(it there be nothing of that in the case) yet the debt it self breeds so many
anxious and disturbing thoughts to a considering mind, that he can have small
comfort in what he does possess, or use, so long as debt, in any sense (yea,
tho it be but the usurious contract) lies upon him.

Experto credas, Thirty Years and more
I fully knew what 'twas to be on Score.


But if you presently cannot make any kind of satisfaction; humble your self
both to God and man; beg of God pardon of sin that brings you into calamity,
and beg of man a reasonable forbearance, His fellow servant fell down at his
feet, and besought him, saying, have patience, and I will pay thee all, Matthew.
18.29. And withal apply your self to more than ordinary industry, or willingly
serve your Creditor to give him satisfaction. Pay what you can, and as fast as
you can; and if you cannot as you would, both God, and good men, will accept
that will for the deed. To such the pledge must be restored; and it is the
character of a good man so to do, Ez. 18.7. Remission of debts has been to men
sometimes a duty, and if ever, surely it is toward such ingenuous debtors. The
use be sure in such cases is forbidden, Lev. 26.35, etc. If thy brother be
waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee -- take thou no usury of him, nor
increase; but fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee. And sometimes
also the Principal must be parted with. When Nehemiah pleaded for the poor Jews
in this respect, their Creditors held their peace and found nothing to answer,
Neh. 5.8. He would have them restore their securities, Restore I pray you to
them, even this day (forthwith) their lands, vineyards, oliveyards, and houses,
which have been mortgaged to you: This I take to be the remission of their
Principal, Also the hundredth part of the money, corn, wine, and oil, that ye
exact of them, v. 11. This is also the interest (the monthly Interest, as some
think) which had been taken of them in their distressed condition, to be paid
back again; or (as some will have it) what was required as a Tax for the
Governors of Provinces: Be it one or other, it was in strictness a debt, which
was now to be remitted. Then said they, we will restore them, and will require
nothing of them, v. 12. To give or forgive to Gods poor, is to lend to the
Lord, Prove. 19.27. Who will become a surer, and a better Play Master. And this
may be as truly called the Lords Release, as that judicial one, in Deuteronomy. 15.2.

This our advice to debtors, does not only concern those debtors that are so by
their own actual borrowing; but others also who are very loath to come under
the rule; Such are Sureties, the Heirs of Debtors and Corporations.

1. Sureties, who are generally loath to pay other men's debts: They that are
frank and forward enough to be obliged, are backward enough when it comes to
bear: But consider, You have made the debt your own, and you must see it paid
with the same conscience, as if your self had been the borrower; for else the
lender may be a loser through your default: Therefore Give not sleep to thine
eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, till thou have made sure of thy friend, in
that Pro. 6.4. Prevail with him if possible to discharge the obligation; and
rather help him with a part, than lie under the encumbrance of the whole.

2. Heirs or Executors of Debtors, are (as to this affair) of two sorts,

1. Such as have Estates left them encumbred with manifest and acknowledged
debt. Those should not shift off matters with short inventories or other
unrighteous devices; nor so much as dream of a fair Estate, by looking on the
sum total of what is left; but account on nothing more than what is free: The
whole should be honestly divided between himself and the Creditors; to whom
their shares do as truly belong, as what is left for himself; and therefore
should be assigned and set out to them, with the first convenience.

2. Such as succeed in Estates by entail, who thereby account themselves free,
and reckon (contrary to the old, and true saying, before mentioned, and never
too often to be remembered, Right never rots) that the debt died, and was
extinguished with the Ancestor. Thus perhaps the Lawyer will tell them,
according to the Municipal Laws of a Land; but the Divine in point of
conscience has somewhat more to say, according to the Law of God; which reaches
not only to persons, but in many cases to families and posterities.

The Children of Israel had a charge not to meddle with the Posterity of Esau;
because I have given Mount Seir to Esau for a possession, Deuteronomy. 2.5. Distress
not the Moabites, v. 9. Not the Amonites, v. 19. Because I have given it unto
the Children of Lot for a possession. It was not the present Edomites,
Moabites, or Amonites, that they were to have respect unto, so much as Gods
Covenant Blessing on their Ancestors many Ages before. So in the matter of the
Gibeonites, Joshua and the Israelites made a Covenant with them, not only with
those persons that came with a deceiful show of a far Country, but their
posterity, Josh. 9. The breach of this was avenged 430 years after in the days
of David, 2 Samuel 21.1. There was a famine in the days of David three years --
and the Lord answered, It is for Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites. The bloody house of Saul, slew the covenanted house of Gibeon.

Now to apply this to the present purpose; Although we have not now such Divine
Entails of Lands, or places of abode, so express upon particular Families as
formerly; yet under the Gospel, Godliness has also the promises of this life,
and believers children are under the merciful Covenant: And therefore I am apt
to think, That a Godly Ancestor, tho he cannot convey Grace to his Posterity;
yet in his Time and Generation by his actual Faith, he obtains a blessing for
them. To how many Generations this Blessing shall extend, I know not; but of
this I am sure, the Edomites for whom God now took care, were near 600 Years,
from Isaac their last known Godly Predecessor; which I thus compute; Jacob who
was born with Esau, lived 147 Years; after Jacobs death Israel was in Egypt 400
Year; to this add the 40 Years in the Wilderness, before this charge concerning
the Edomites; the sum is 587 Years: And the Moabites and Ammonites were a
Generation farther off from Lot. The promises of Temporal Blessings are
recorded in these Scriptures; The generation of the upright shall be blessed,
wealth and riches shall he in his house. Psalm. 112.2, 3. The just man walks
in his integrity; his children are blessed after him, Pro. 20.7. And diverse
more of the same import: From which I am apt to infer, that (tho Dominion and
Propriety as to men, are not founded in Grace; yet) some Families are under
Gods special, Providential care, even as to things of this life, on the account
of the Covenant of Grace, closed with by some one, or more of their Godly
Ancestors.

Now if it come into competition, whether thy Family shall be upheld by virtue
of thy Ancestors Entail; or this Family by virtue of the Covenant Blessing; and
if thou invade their Propriety, and snatch the Stones out of their house to
repair the breaches of thine own; I believe God will otherwise provide for them
in a competency; when you for oppressing the poor, and crushing the needy,
shall be taken away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hooks, Amos 4.1, 2.

But be they thus in Covenant with God or not; the Divine will farther tell
you; that if for fear or through flattery, or by concealment of the Entail, or
by any other indirect course, a Debt or Suretyship is contracted to another
Families hurt or hazard; the case passes from persons to families, especially
where for the Families sake the Payment is denied; and the children of the
other Family to many Generations, will by their complaints through indigence
stir up a righteous Judge to avenge their injury: What you thus keep back by
fraud, cries, and the cries of the oppressed will enter into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath; James 5.4. A curse will be entailed by God, that will hold
stronger than man's entails; that will more surely destroy Families, than these
will preserve: See at large the curse of those that requite evil for good a
cheating trick for helping at a need) and showing no mercy, Psalm. 109. from 5.
to 17. I know this will seem harsh Doctrine to some Heirs, who have gotten the
possession of their Revenues; and many excuses they will make for the holding
fast what they have gotten into their hands.

Oh says one, I am my Grandfathers heir, and not my Fathers: But how come the
Title to you from your Grandfather, but through the loins of your Father?

Yea, but men need not have trusted my Father, seeing the Estate was entailed,
which they might well think, tho they never saw it. It may be so; and if any
knowing it, would choose to run the risque, they may blame themselves; And yet
there might be covert enough to conceal a fraud: Did the Creditor for 100. l.
know how many Hundreds or Thousands, your Father owed to other men? If not, he
might innocently think, that so considerable a Revenue might easily pay so
small a debt as this, and charitably think too, that your Aucestor would
honestly do it, and not leave it unsatisfied, till by death the entail should
become of force: Perhaps he little thought, that your Fathers taking the Bench,
should make him drop between the stools. No, no, until there be a public
Registry of all Debts, Mortgages and Entails, (a thing to be wished for, rather
than hoped) this plea will not in Conscience satisfy the case.

O but (says another) if I should satisfy all my Fathers Creditors, I should
have nothing left for my self: So said the Jay, if every Bird claim his
Feather; I shall be left naked: Be it so; and then your case is as other poor
men's Children are; lower your topsail, and apply your self (as they do) to
industry for a livelihood.

But I am higher bred. I pray consider at whose charges?

'Twas not (it seems) your Fathers money, but other men's in his hand, that thus
set you forth.

But (yet again) why should I suffer fot my Fathers folly?

By as much Reason as you should flourish by your Grandfather, or
great-Grandfathers Wisdom: And by much better reason, than that the Creditors
Children should fuffer for indiscretions or prodigalities of those who to them
are nothing of kin.

Come, come; do not overwean; all other Families were not made to support
yours; they have as direct a line, and as large a Pedigree to Adam and Noah as
yours: blow off the froth of airy titles; and then if there be no liquor in the
bottom, none you can have; possession is no point of Law in the Court of
Conscience: And therefore, as ere you hope to have Gods blessing upon your
Person, Estate and Posterity; or as you think this blessing any thing worth the
having, be just: Consider all circumstances of equity; And to your utmost give
all men due satisfaction.

Families (you see before) as well as persons (and the same may be said of
Cities or other public fisques) may be the subjects of sin, and the objects of
the curse: and indeed as to all, that rule holds, Non tollitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur oblatum. No true repentance or pardon, without restitution: And
therefore,

3. Corporations are herein also concerned.

Some, perhaps, may doubt, how bodies politic, that (properly, and as such)
have no souls, can be subjects of sin, and objects of punishment: But let such
consider, That tho the polity has no soul or conscience, yet the persons that
manage it, have, and in them may be sin; so have the persons that are concerned
in its welfare and to them may be punishment.

As for such bodies, I am fully of the mind of a Reverend Divine of this
Church, in a Sermon upon 1 These. 14.6. That no man go beyond, or defrand his
brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such,
(preached before the Magistracy of our great City, and after printed). That all
unrighteousness of bodies politic will be accounted for in this world; for
that in the other world, there will be none such to be judged: So that the
injustice of Magistrates in their public administrations to which the people
are supposed to concur, does not only contract personal guilt, but also a guilt
and punishment upon the community: Thus all Isuael suffered for Saul's
destroying the Gibeonites, which ('it is said) he sought in his zeal to the
children of Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel 21.2. besides what account Saul gave of it
in his particular judgment: And it is observable, this affliction was in David's
days, after that Saul was dead: Whence we may learn, that the iniquity stuck to
them for whose sake it was done: And that sooner or later, be sure judgment
will awake, where sin is unrepented of, and unpardoned: Especially may this be
expected when the cries of mournful Widows, Orphans, and other distressed
persons, who want what is unjustly taken or detained from them, shall ascend
and sound loud in the ears of the Almighty: And then shall not the judge of all
the earth do right? The Holy Spirit directs Solomon to tell us, that he will,
Eccles. 3.16, 17. I saw under the Sun, the place of judgment, that wickedness
was there, and the place of righteousness that iniquity was there: I said in
heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; and there is a time there
for every purpose, and for every work. There, even under the Sun, where the
wickedness is committed; a time, as well as an eternity, wherein God will
glorify his Justice: I could give many other Instances of this nature, but let
this suffice for the present.

And thus much for those that are in debt, or stand obliged in Conscience to
make satisfaction: Let them do it forthwith to the utmost, and willingly owe
nothing to any man.

2. To those that are out of debt, this Scripture and the Explication thereof
speaks aloud to warn them, that by all honest means, and what in them lies they
endeavor to keep themselves still free thereof: If indeed God by his Holy and
Wise Providence brings you low, and that without any manifest fault or folly of
your own; all men are bound to pity and assist you; as if a man be dropped
overboard, the next man must heave out a halter, and every hand must help to
draw him in; and in reference to God, you your self should humbly submit, couch
under the burden, and with Holy Job, bless his Holy name.

But if it falls within the verge of humane prudence to prevent; set to your
utmost endeavors; it is your duty and wisdom so to do.

And this I conceive (in an ordinary way) may be done (after humble
supplications to the Almighty for pardon and peace, in and through Christ
Jesus) by a serious endeavor to mortify some particular unruly lusts which
commonly do impoverish and embroil; and then to practice their contrary Graces:
Such special lusts are sodomitical sins, excessive Covetousness, and vain
Confidence.

1. The Sodomitical sins, are pride, Idleness, and fullness of bread; which will
of themselves destroy us, tho God withhold his fire from Heaven, or any
immediate severity toward us.

1. Pride is a Prodigal and spending lust; it many ways shows it self, as in
Houses, Habits, Entertainments, Retinues, costly Houses, and Coaches, etc.
above ones state or condition: Also in expensive Recreations, high wagering and
gaming, keeping high company, who are much above our quality: Thus the Toad
swells before the Ox till he burst: Also the proud Prodigal in his humor is
monstrous large and profuse in his gifts, that he may seem bountiful as well as
able, without any respect to reason; and this not to any fit objects of
charity; but commonly, and especially to idle Parasites, and Hangbys, that blow
up his empty swelling self-conceit.

Now to maintain this impertinence and folly, they find themselves often
obliged to keep up their port and state by borrowing, mortgaging, and sometimes
intangling others by suretyship, until the debts at long run, do (like a heavy
load) at last fall upon them, and quite break their backs: But even then their
pride and vanity cannot leave them; for such a one still retaining the bragging
humor when there is nothing else left to work on, will boast even in a Goal
what he has formerly been, what the worship of his Family, what his worthy
Ancestors, before they left their Estates to be spent by a fool.

Thus acts the proud, foppish, and self-undoing Prodigal.

Whereas on the contrary, the humble Christian, prudently considers his own
circumstances, lives within his compass; sets up no more sail than his hull
will safely bear; regards not the contumely of those impertinents, who account
him covetous on no other ground, than that he likes not, nor imitates their
extravagance. He indeed expends and gives only upon just occasions, and that in
due measure; yet he thereby does a great deal of real good while he lives, and
commonly at death leaves his Estate rather improved, than impaired.

2. Idleness neither gets any thing, nor saves what is gotten to his hand:
Through idleness of the hand, the house droppeth through, Eccles. 10.18. And he
becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, Prove. 10.4. Idleness begets
penury, and that soon begets debt: It would of it self eat out an Estate, if it
did not (as it commonly does) expose men to a multitude of temptations and
lusts which are expensive: This ruinous idleness shows it self diverse ways; as,
either in a lazy temper of the mind, loath to consider or take any care;
whether in Youth to get skill in an honest useful and profitable calling or
after, to keep good accounts, to conrive and look after business; or else in an
impertinent business; a vain wandering of the desire, Eccies. 6.9. Like those
idle wanderers from house to house, and not only idle, but tatlers also, and
busybodies, 1 Timothy 5.13. Such are very active, and make much ado in doing
nothing, because nothing to their purpose or concern; such skipping
Grass-hoppers will be in want, when the industrious Be is provided for.

Or lastly, in a lumpish self-pleasing temper when one would rather let all
fly, than trouble himself about any business.

Add the connection of this to pride, which is often a cause of idleness, and
inclines too many to think it scorn for him that has any thing, to do any thing.

But be you (my Friends) as conscientious Christians (after the chief things
that concern Gods Glory, and your own salvation) honestly industrious in your
stations and callings, to provide things honest in the sight of all men.

While you are young, fit your selves for business; and when you are Elder, do
it to effect. Go thorow-stitch with your work, and the diligent hand, by the
ordinary Providence of God, will make you rich, at least to such a competence
as shall free you from such incumbring care and trouble, as debt and penury do
involve men in; keep your shops, and your shops shall keep you; yea, thus you
shall rather have to give to those that want, than borrow of, and be
troublesome, or burdensome to those that have.

3. Fullness of bread, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Carnality, Lechery, and such like
fulsome lusts, are very wastful to Estates. These bring to poverty and want; as
harlotry, for Instance; By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece
of bread, Prove. 6.26. So sensual appetite, with vain and expensive pleasure; he
that loves pleasure shall be a poor man; and he that loves wine and oil,
shall not be rich, Prove. 21.17. To live high, and indulge appetite, will bring
men low; and what then? To beg they may think is below them, or perhaps they
may fear 'twill be to little purpose; they may think likely, they shall rather
be upbraided than relieved: borrowing comes next, and if that will not do, then
to stealing, and so to hanging: You see the place where borrowing naturally
stands, even between begging and stealing, and near neighbor to the Gallows:
Flee therefore from all fleshly lusts; abstain from tippling and idle
company-keeping, which wastes both time and money, and ruins many a trading man
that is in a hopeful way; be always and certain in the way, that business, and
the profits that attends it, may know where to find you: Inure your selves to
temperance and sobriety with redemption of time; so (besides keeping a good
conscience) you may save many a shilling, that others impertinently spend, and
yet want no comfort of this life, that is honestly good for you.

The profit of money saved, may be guessed by the Table of Interest, which I
will suppose is less than may be made thereby, or prudent trading men would
never give it.

Now 1 l. in 30 Years, by compound Interest at 6 p. cent. comes to above 79 l.
10 s. Suppose therefore at the Age of 20 Years, thou have spent 20 s. at some
Game, idle caress, or needless entertainment; and at the Age of 50 for an
occasion thou want 50 l. for which thou must go about sorrowing and
borrowing, to see how and where thou may get it. How much better now had it
been, that thou had saved the 1 l. ^^^tously spent, and improved it as thou
might have done? For then thou would now have had the 50 l. for thy need
(without borrowing) and near 30 l. of ready cash lest in thy Pocket, and so in
Proportion 1 s. gives near 4 l. and 1 d. gives 6 s. 7 d.

I have instanced in this computation, to show how many do foolishly waste in
their Youth, what might do them good service, and save them much trouble in
their age: But if men must once in their life be profuse, they were better
deser it till their age, and then (if they have no more wit) yet their damage
will be less: And thus much for the Sodomitical expensive sins. Add to them,

2. Covetousness, which does (as in the Fable) often crave much, and lose all:
Some designing to get an Estate to themselves by a great trade, have run in
debt beyond their stock, and as far as their credit would stretch: But then
some Providence crossing them, they have failed themselves, and ruined many
others with them; or as a wag expressed it in his news from the Exchange, This
Week the Merchants are like nine pins. one is struck, and he tumbles down 5 or
6 more: This mostly happens when deceitfully men's weakness is concealed from
those that give them credit: Whereas if indeed men's Estates were truly known,
and others will please to trust them on the account of presumed honesty and
industry, and not on a mistaken conceit of their ability; such Creditors run
their own risque, and cannot blame the debtor, if things (without his default)
answer not their expectation; here they are as party adventurers; whereby they
may help up honest young Beginners, and conveniently advantage themselves by
the others care and labor: If thus men trade upon other men's stocks, much good
may be done to the debtors, and no harm is in appearance to ensue, but what the
Creditors are prepared for.

Others there be (as I am told, for I am no Trader) that tho they depend not
much on others stocks, yet they over-trade their own; that so venture their
all, as to reap little profit, even by considerable returns; freight and custom
must be presently paid, and they are out of Cash; then are they forced to
borrow of Bankers at unreasonable rates; and suddenly sell their goods at
under-rates to make them satisfaction: Besides, these high Traders, are often
forced (as it is said) to draw moneys, when the Exchange is to their loss: But I
shall meddle no farther in these things which I do not well understand. Only
thus far I do, that it is best to deal within compass; safer to under-trade,
than over, that you be never put to distress. Crave not greater matters than in
an ordinary way may be easily attained; make not more have than good speed to
be rich; and be content with moderate gains, according to that clear portion
which God has given you.

And if you make conscience of running any man into hazzards for your
advantage, your small profits will be more comfortable to you, than greater,
with so much perplexing care, as usually does accompany men overreaching
themselves, and the unjust endangering of other men's Estates.

3. This of covetousness is usually followed with a vain confidence, and
projects: I knew one of 600 per annum, not given to any known vicc; yet spent
his all, in this way, so as he left not enough to bury him after a mean
fashion, to pay for Grave Clothes, and 10 s. for 6 Foot of Earth, wherein to
lay his Corpse.

How many fine fancies have such men, and how strong are their conceits, that
all shall succeed as they would have it, to their great imaginary advantage;
when alas, all their Fabric (like the childrens Towers of Cards) as soon
puffed down by an unexpected Providence, and then they may see their vanity,
which before they would not think of. Therefore let me advise you to take heed
of building Castles in the Air; presuming on any success, but what in a sober
and religious dependence on Gods Providence, you may with good reason expect.
Always make experiments in little, and never adventure farther in any thing,
than if disappointed, you may in likelihood safely retreat.

Thus you may live comfortably, and freely, without the aforementioned
disgraceful troubles; parvo vivitur been, a little will serve turn to live
well, if men will be so wise as to cut their suit according to their cloth.

And thus much of owing nothing to any man. It follows, But to love one
another; this is a mutual and metaphorical debt, which is of a far more
comfortable and creditable nature.

There are other Metaphorical debts of which we read in Scripture; some of
these we shall briefly mention, as tending to explain this debt of love. One is
of Gods being indebted to men, upon a certain supposition, to him that works
is the reward, not reckoned of graae, but of debt, Romans 4.4. But this condition
is never fulfilled, no works of man can oblige God, or make him any thing a
debtor to us; so that we are always his debtors, but he is never ours.

Another Metaphorical Debt is that which is claimed by corrupt nature, which
yet is not due, and must not be paid; tyrannical lusts exact severely, and hold
many persons in great slavery to them; but we are informed of our liberty in
this respect, We are debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, Romans
8.12. Also in respect of another such like debt; namely, to ceremonious
observances: Every man that is circumcised is a debtor to do the whole law,
Gal. 5.3. But from this Jesus Christ, our great Surety and Lawgiver has made
us free. We read also of a debt of obligation by oath; Whosoever shall swear by
the Gold of the Temple, he is a debtor, Matthew. 23.16. Oaths, if they are
regularly sworn by one that is more sacred than the Gold, even by the God of
the Temple, must be acknowledged a debt to be conscientiously discharged: The
obligation also lies firm in a debt of gratitude, which we must readily and
cheerfully answer as we can get opportunity. It pleased them of Macedonia -- to
make contribution to the poor Saints at Jerusalem; it pleased them verily, and
their debtors they are, Romans 15.26, 27. The Gentiles were Debtors to the Jews
for their Spirituals, and they were well pleased to express their gratitude, by
imparting of their temporals: From all these Metaphoricals, you may see the
import of the Phrase is a necessity of performance; debt must be paid: So it is
in the foregoing proper debt; and so it is in this figurative one that follows,
the mutual debt of love, which the Apostle recommends to us instead of that
other before at large handled.

Only the Obligation in this latter rendes it like the former: But in all other
things it is extremely different.

When a certain Roman Knight died much in debt, and his goods were after
exposed to sale, Caesar Augustus (says Macrobius) sends to buy his pillow; for
said he, it must have some extraordinary virtue in it, that a man so much in
debt could ever sleep thereon: Anxious cares drive away sleep, and proper debt
begets those anxieties; but the debt of love is quite of another nature; that
will never break sleep, or cast reproach upon us, that may well consist with
good husbandry, comfort and repute: It has some strange properties to be
considered, as the more we acknowledge of this debt, the more we shall find
owing to us; and therefore it has in it self a counterballance. The paying
hereof does nothing diminish our ability; but it is like that loan, 1 Samuel
2.20. Samuel, who was asked of God, was received from him, returned to him, and
yet still enjoyed by his Parents; so is this love, which tho it passes
reciprocally from one to another, yet there is no love lost: Yea, which is yet
more, the payment hereof does nothing diminish the debt, for we still owe as
much as we have paid: And this not only (as other debts) amongst mortals here
below: But in the Heavenly Habitations, the Blessed Saints and Angels are ever
loving, and ever owing love unto Eternity.

Love is a charge that never is defraid.
It Is ever paying, and yet never paid.
FINIS.
Books Printed and sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market.
THE Works of the late learned Divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. being several
Discourses upon the Existence and Attributes of God, Vol. 1. to which is added
his Discourse of Divine Providence, Fol.

The Works of the late learned Divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. being several
discourses upon various divine subjects, vol. 2 Fol.

Some Prison Meditations and Directions on several subjects, viz. on the Fall
of Man, the sufferings of Christ, Repentance and Faith, Reproof and Counsel,
The holy Scriptures, Prayer, Love to Mankind, Sincerity, the vanity of the
World, the benefit of afflictions, Heaven and Hell. By Samuel Young, Minister
of the Gospel. Small ^vo.

The Morning Exercisc at Cripplegate of several Cases of Conscience,
practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in Quarto. A Supplemeat to the
Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more cases of Conscience,
practically resolved by suundry Ministers, in 4to.

Speculum Theologiae in Christo: or a View of some Divine Truths which are
either practical exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably deduced from thence; by Edward Polhil of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire
in 4to.

Precious Faith considered, in its nature, working and growth, by Edward
Polhil, Esquire etc. in 4to:


