A Most Cruel and Terrible ENGAGEMENT Between the CONFEDERATES of the Upper and
Lower ALSATIAS, The Palatinate of Dorset-Gardinia: WITH The Confines, and
Territories of Shark-Island, and the Scandalous Sanctuary, on the one side, and
the Posse Com. Luxemburgians, and Tory-Drivers on the other.
THE Quarrel, for it is fit you should know how they fell out, arose from
hence, That John Dutton, living at the Sign of the Sugar Loaf, within
Temple Bar, a mortal Enemy to Shark-Island, lays claim to a certain Castle in
the Upper-Alsatia, in the Possession of George, a Blind-Bear, and Ursula his
Wife, of the Race of the Dragonesses; which Castle formerly known by the Sign
of the Bulls-Head in White-Fryars, now altered to the Sign of the Bear,
deriving its new Name, from the Name of the Beast that lives within. This
Castle Dutton had purchased of a Cruel Landlady, to whom he paid 150 l. Fine,
and 63 l. a Year; all which Rack-Rent he paid for some time, all but 3 l. per
Annum, and then let the whole remaining Term of this Lease to the Bear, for 69
l. per Annum, but to encourage him to pay the Rent Quarterly, and without
trouble, the said Dutton obliged himself, under his Hand and Seal, to abate 9
l. per Annum, provided the Rent were paid duly, and justly within Fourteen Days
after every Quarter. But these Kindnesses did not satisfy the Bear, unless he
might have the Castle for nothing: So that he was run in Arrears by last
Christmas, after all Receipts and Taxes allowed, Besides the Charge of a
former Distress 57 05 04 14 18 0 In all 72 05 04 Which is now due to Dutton,
not reckoning in this last Ladies Quarter, which is near expired, which comes
to 17 05 00 72 5 04 Total 89 10 4 Now to satisfy Dutton, there is nothing left
but the Goods, which are Apprais'd at 45 5 0 So that Dutton is like to get over
the left Shoulder, or according to the Phrase of Alsatia, to be Bobb'd of 44 5 4

This being the Truth and nothing but the Truth, I Appeal to all the World,
except the Alsatians and Shark Islanders, themselves, whether their Alsatians
and Shark-Islanders are not a Company of Canary Birds, to Protect this Bear
from the Justice of the Luxemburgians. I would therefore have 'em to call a
Geneeal Council of their Members of a Pack-Thread Crew, and advise with their
Allies in the Mint-Land, by whom it was Enacted at a General Diet of the
Confederates, that what Goods were brought in should not be Parted with, but
upon very good Terms; but that what was Contracted within for Rent, or
otherwise within should be paid upon pain of Exclusion, or Hanging if able.
This looked like something of Justice, without which there could be no
subsisting among Thieves and Pick-Pockets, and therefore renders the Shark
Islanders the more inexcusible.

Well then the Quarrel being thus begun, Dutton Declared Open War against the
Bear and Ursula his Wife. Upon which the Bear set forth a Manifesto, wherein he
Alleged, that the Potentates of the Posse Com. were not to Assist Dutton
because he is a Roman Catholic. To which Dutton applied in a Declaration, that
so long as he Lived Civilly under the Government, his Religion was no Argument,
why he should not have his Right and Due. Thereupon Dutton having got the Posse
Com. to Muster together, resolved ^o make an Incursion into the Upper Alsatia,
and Land in Shark Island. But first Dutton sent a Summons to the Bear, to
Surrender the Remainder of his Money. To which Ursula the she Bear replied,
that she had a Bill wherewith to Pay what Money was behind beginning, Itum six
Pound for Building a Shop for a Barber, though the whole Charge of that Shop was
but Forty Shillings, and that still unpaid too; by which it was apparent, how
Dutton was like to be satisfied. So that Dutoon seeing there was no good to be
done by fair means, drew up his Men, and gave the Signal of Batteel. Nor did
the Rapparees forbear to make a stout Resistance at first, insomuch that Dutton
being somewhat of the forwardest to encourage his Men, received a slight Shot
in his Right Breast; for which the Rapparees being seized by the Luxemburgians,
Revolted to the Posse Com. and so saved his being taken Prisoner. Upon this the
Shark-Islanders gave Ground, and the Pass Com. Led on by their Commander in
Chief, March forward and Pursued the Enemy to the Pallatinate of Dorset
Gardinia, where the Shark-Islanders being Reinforced with a good number of
Lower Alsatians; and second by some Old Entrenchments, Faced about, and began
to Parley with the Commander in Chief of the Posse Com. and boldly demanded of
him his business: who bid them forthwith to lay down their Arms, or else they
must expect no Quarter. They answered Peremptorily, that if he came to take
away any of their Subjects they would Die upon the Spot, before they would part
with them; and as for Dutton's Goods, he was a Papist, and therefore they hoped
his Worship would not Assist him, but let them have his Goods to add to their
Treasure which was so much Exhausted by the frequent Alarums of Justice,
besides that their Number was much di^^ished, by Hanging and Transportation.

They had also some particular Complaints against Dutton himself: For that when
he was Constable about Six or Seven Years ago, he had put the Laws in
execution; as well against many of their Foreign Benefactors, as Inland
Traders; that is to say, their Sweetners, Traps, Decon Drawers, Diverse,
Buttocks, Files, Country Bess, and Farmer's Wife, etc. and for that he had
carried several of their best Benefactors to the Counters, and Newgate, that
their best Nurseries, called Bawdy-houses, and Receivers of Stolen Goods,
could not rest for him, though they had offered to spend Money at his House,
and tempted him with Presents of Rings, Money, and Watches, to wink at small
Faults, but nothing would do; for he cried still, he could not break his
Constables Oath; So much was he wedded to that same Folly called Honesty. That
his Successors were not of his Opinion, but let 'em do what they listed; the
one a famous Drunken House-Painter, the other a Milk-sop, a Penny
Custard-Maker, who to his Praise be it spoken, when the Posse Com. appeared,
always played, Least in Signt.

The Commander in Chief, having heard their Remonstrances, advised 'em to be
obedient, and submit to the Laws, and so went on with his business, ordering
Dutton to hasten his Workmen; who did as he was ordered, not with standing the
loud Complaints of Ursula, and her two Friends; one discreet Lawyer, the other
a Dissembling Mohammedan, who cried out of Dutton's hard Usage of her Husband,
and fain would have persuaded the Posse Com. Luxemburgians that what Dutton
their Landlord did, was only because her Husband was a Protestant, only by
which means, they thought to have got clear of their Landlord: But this Plot
not taking, they were forced to let go the Goods quietly. Nevertheless, Dutton
was so kind, and far more compassionate to them than they would have been to
him, so that he left the Bear, and Ursula his Wife, their own Bedchamber
furnished. And they that know the Temper of the Beast, well know, that he loves
his ease too well, to lie upon the worst Bed.

Thus the Alsatians, and Shark Islanders, being utterly defeated, the Commander
in Chief of the Posse Com. sounded a Retreat, and Dutton carried off his Bag
and Baggage.

I could enlarge much more upon this Subject, but I shall end with a seasonable
use of Exhortation to these same Lawless Inhabitants of both the Alsattan's,
and Sharks Islanders; Not to to urge Dutton the Landlord too far, for fear he
should be the occasion of Breaking their Pretended Privileges: For they very
well know how I dealt with Morgan ap Morgan, who set up the White-Fryars,
thinking to out-hector me with his Bullys, and the most resolute of all the
Pestilent Gang: But I Dissolved 'em, broke the Knot, Disarmed, and Levelled 'em
in two or three Sessions.

They know that I know the Place full well, as having lived Twelve Years among
them, and have had several that are Landlords in the Place, to know of me what
Methods I took; and I tell 'em, Knaves must be dealt with like Knaves.

Moreover, I advise two Men of White-Fryars, to keep a Good Tongue in their
Heads: The one is Captain W -- ter, a Famous Champion upon Record, for
appearing in Routs and Ryots; the other, Honest Drunken Captain G -- den, who
says, Dutton was a Papist, in one King's Reign, but now goes to Church to save
his Bacon; which Dutton denis. And there is one of the Learned Men of the Law
among them, can testify, That Dutton paid him a Bill for appearing for him,
and making his defense against one Loyn, or Lole an Informer. And therefore
John Dutton owns himself to be a Roman Catholic, as he ever was, and his
Father before him, though very much to his Damage, and Prejudice. So Farewell
till the next Occasion.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1691.


