A Cry, A Cry: A sensible Cry for many Months together has been in my Heart
for the QUAKERS Return out of that Egyptian Darkness they have long lain in, to
the grief of the Souls of the Righteous, and those that truly loved them.
O Ye that were my Friends, I am constrained in bowels of Love, and much
tenderness, to beseech you (who are not stupefied) that you will with all speed
consider seriously what is become of the Talent, I say, that Talent which was
given in to prove you; for the Most High this day calls for an Account of You
unjust Stewards. Oh how excessively do you run headlong, wasting that which was
committed to your charge! Oh be ashamed and blush! But indeed the unjust
Steward will know no shame. Verily the Lord*s Hand is against you, and even a
great Mist, and thick Darkness is fallen upon You, so that you grope at
Noonday: Therefore in the simplicity of my heart I desire you to arise from
your self-conceitedness; for in the Power of Him that is the searcher of all
hearts, I tell You that this is not your Rest, it is polluted, and the Famine
is grievous to behold, for the Corn is wasted, and the Fig Tree does not bear;
yea, the Plague is begun in some of your Houses, and yet You search not
diligently to heal the Wound; it is deep, it is deep. O return, return unto the
LORD, ye fallen Men; how have you betrayed your trust? Have you not put the
Lord of Life to open shame? have you not cried, Crucify him, Crucify him?
have you not spoken loftily against the Lord's Anointed? are you not found in
the Balance of scant measure, yea, scant measure indeed? Therefore I must tell
you, (O that you could feel me in the just balance of Love) for your
Backsliding and Rebellion, to Judgment you must come. A true saying indeed,
They which led thee, caused thee to err.

Woe unto you that are revolted from the Lord; Oppression, Oppression is in the
midst of you, for you are found to deal very treacherously with your Brethren:
Therefore He that searches the Heart and tries the Reins, He it is that has
made you a Contemptible People. Oh consider when you were Children, and little
in your own Eyes, how were you beloved? O seek now the Peace of the City, and
let the Captives return, for it is high time. In the Humility Peace is found.
If a search be made with all your Hearts* then will the Faithful say, Come, and
let us return unto the Lord, for we have polluted his holy Name.

Oh what will become of you that have turned Judgment backward, and have hated
him that reproves in the Gate! and him that speaks uprightly unto you, you
have daily in derision. Does not Cruelty lodge amongst you, O ye backsliding
false-hearted Men? Why do you call your selves the People of the Lord? surely
you must first arise from the dead, before you can assume that weighty and
honorable title; for it belongs not unto you, but to the Children, the Lord's
Heritage.

O you that are fat and full, and very rich too. I must tell you, that it is
the Meek and the Lowly that shall inherit the Kingdom, and not You, because you
are so seated upon the throne of Iniquity, that the Throne of Righteousness can
have no fellowship with you. O when will you cry out unto the Lord and say, My
leanness, my leanness! I pray you now consider (in the cool of the day) how
often the Lord's Love has been handed forth unto you for your everlasting
Redemption; surely He will not always strive with you, ye vain Men; you have
highly provoked Him; yea, your provocations have been very grievous against the
Lord and His little Ones: verily the time is fulfilled which a Servant of the
Lord Prophesied concerning you, That the Sword of the Lord, which is now drawn,
is not to be put up, until you humble your selves and be brought low. O
consider how your Elders and Teachers are found Revolters this day, the beloved
Fruit of whose Womb is as Dung before the Lord. Wherefore be awakened and look
about you, and behold and see how the Cities are shut up, and few amongst you
that mind it; but the Upright-hearted that are separated from you, they lay it
to heart. O when will you speak very Man Truth to his Neighbor, and execute
the Judgment of Truth and Peace in your Gates? If you do this in Truth and
Sincerity as to the Lord, then surely He will not loath your Offerings, for
verily as yet they are Abomination unto His Righteous Soul. O why are you
slidden back, by a perpetual backsliding? And do you not hold fast the deceit
of your corrupt Hearts, and refuse to return to the living God? Nay, have you
not set your Abominations before the eyes of the Just One? Verily you have
forgotten the Lord, and that to the hurt of your own Souls; Therefore now amend
your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of Him that cries for Purity. It
is high time to call for cleansing, a clensing is required this day, yea verily
the Camp of the most High must be clean, there is no room for the running
Issue, nor the Leper.

O that my Counsel might find acceptance with you, then would you break off
your Sins by Righteousness, and turn every one from his evil way, and from the
violence that is in his hands, that there may be a ceasing from innocent blood,
and from all manner of iniquity! Which day has long been looked for by the
Upright-hearted. O have you not been an Assembly of treacherous Men? O return
again and be valiant for the Truth, and proceed no longer from evil to evil:
for why do you refuse to know the Lord? and why are you gone from the Ancient
Paths, and walk in paths not cast up, where the rubbish choaks up the Good old
Way?

Now consider, the Lord knows your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty
Sins, how they afflict the Just, and oppress the poor. Alas! alas! He regards
nor the offering of your fat Beasts; surely if you were the Ministers of the
Lord, there would be found amongst you [in this dismal day] great searching of
Hearts, and a sinking down, saying, What is the matter that we are under so
many Calamities? O why transgress you thus against the Lord? Verily you can
never prosper; Why? because you have forsaken the Lord, and He has forsaken
you.

O bear with me a little, seeing that many amongst you glory and boast
exceedingly after the flesh. I must tell you, Not You that commend your selves,
are approved; but whom the Lord commends, indeed, that is he. But no marvel
that this is come upon you: for Satan himself is crept in amongst you that love
the chiefest Seats in your new Synagogues, and the uppermost places at your
Feasts; who devour Widows houses, and for a show make long Prayers, for which
your Condemnation will be the greater. O what iniquity have you found in the
Just Holy One of Israel, that you are gone so far from Him, and walk after your
own Inventions! O consider, did not the Lord plant Thee a noble Vine, an holy
right Seed? how then art Thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange
Vine? Surely Your own Wickedness shall correct You, and Your Backslidings shall
reprove You.

O search your Hearts with a single Eye, and ponder well what Your Meetings are
for: Are they not to exalt your Selves, and to make You seem more holy than You
are? Can You think they are for the better? nay, You have lost the better part,
which once you had, and instead of that, you have got a custom to utter your
own Imaginations, which indeed are but the words of an imperious whorish Woman,
who sits in the midst of You, decked with filthy polluted Rags, like a
Monstrous Woman with her strange Apparel. O it is time for You to throw out
this Abominable Harlot, if ever You will be Honorable, and without reproof
before the Lord and his faithful Servants.

I must also mind You of your unworthy dealings with a Servant of the Lord, J.
P. how You have rendered him to the Nation, as one of the worst of Men, to be
distracted, instigated by the Devil, and in that spirit that crucified Christ,
etc. intending thereby his utter Ruin and Disgrace. Was not this a
Blood-thirsty spirit? was not this the spirit that murdered the Just in all
Ages? O how can You have the Confidence to look him in the face without
remorse! Who amongst You has he wronged? and yet how have you reviled, and
endeavored (as much as in you lay) to incense the Magistrates and People
against him! witness your Paper, dated the 10th day of the Month called August,
1670, etc. And had not the Magistrates been more merciful than You, he might
have perished through Your Instigation.

Many a time I have wondered in my heart why You should so much despise, revile
and reject J. P. and yet own many amongst You who have been guilty of such
notorious Crimes, that many of those You call [of the World] would detest and
abhor: but it seems Your delight has been to defame a clean and an Upright Man
without cause. Surely the day will come that there will be a searching of
hearts for these things; then every one of You will be sensible of his own
Sore, and feel his own Grief. And the desire of my Soul is that it may be so:
for. I take no delight to mention these things, but that you may see the evil
of your doings, and repent.

Ah! how long shall vain thoughts, and wicked imaginations lodge within You? O
when will Ye cleanse your Hearts from secret Sins? O when shall it once be,
says my Soul? Surely Ye cannot but confess that your Defense is departed from
You: for You have provoked the Lord to cry out, How long will this People
provoke me? how long shall I bear with this evil Generation? O how good was God
unto You while ye were of clean hearts! but now You are so corrupt, that the
Almighty can take no pleasure where you stand. O consider how wickedly you have
acted your parts in the Sanctuary, that was once the Lord's dewlling place, but
now a den of Thieves and Robbers; but you cannot rob God of his Honor in his
Chosen Ones; surely the Lord will not pass by your offenses, until you
acknowledge and return from them. O how long will it be ere you attain to
Innocence! How is my heart enlarged this day to praise the Lord God of my Life!
for his Loving Kindness has been wondrous great toward my Soul, in saving me,
that I did not partake with Your Idolatry: And indeed, it was high time for me
to depart; for I saw You sought after New Gods, whom my Soul abhorred, blessed
be GOD for ever! so that you forsaking the Prince of Peace, War entered into
your Gates, and now Ye sit as Men of War, lording it over the Consciences of
your Brethren. But the Lord will not leave them in your hands: for a Scattering
is begun, and in the Day of his Power there will be a Glorious Manifestation of
the Lord's own begetting; so that there will be no need of running from Sea to
Sea, to hear a Divination of Dead Men among the Tombs: For the Prince of Peace
is come, and coming, gently to lead those that are with young. And though You
have rejected Him, yet the Lord waits to be gracious, if You will accept of his
Appearance in You, and resolve to follow Him fully: if not, he will utterly
reject You, so that you shall have no portion in the Land of the Living: for
you know you have been warned time after time by the Lord's faithful Servants
who came amongst you, because their defense was with them. Oh Praises, Praises
be unto our Father, who has made us to stand fast in that Liberty wherewith He
has made us free, so that we are not now any longer to be ensnared again with
the yoke of Bondage amongst false Brethren.

The time of Joseph's love to his Brethren could no longer be hid, because of
their great distress, but he must make himself known to them, to hasten them to
the Land of Goshan; for the Famine which had been for some years was very sore,
insomuch that there was no Bread left. Oh come, come away and feel me in the
Land of the living. I beseech you, regard now no longer your old rotten stuff,
but come and dwell for evermore in the Lord's Land, where you will want for
nothing that is good. If you will but obey Him, and stand in awe of Him, then
who can withstand the Lord's Mercy toward you?

Oh you that have been faithful unto the Lord, he has chosen you to stand
before Him this day; therefore be faithful in your several places. The day and
hour is come, that we are now no longer to bow to Man, but to every
Manifestation of the Lord God of Life and Power.

Thus in the Sincerity and Simplicity of my Heart I have served you, and in so
doing I have my reward.

A. M.

A Postscript.
VVO, Woe to you that oppress your Brethren! using all Craft and Policy to
stifle their tender Consciences who cannot own you to be their Head; therefore
a Day of Distress, Confusion and Perplexity is come, and coming upon you: and
those evil Reports you have falsely cast upon them, will manifestly appear to be
true of your selves. False Coin shall not always pass for current Money; and
let George Fox, and those that uphold him, remember 'twas Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat that caused Israel to sin, and who did evil above all that were before
him: and as his Name was branded to posterity, even so shall Yours be.

This following was formerly writ by another.
MY Soul says in the bitterness thereof, O what will thou do for thy great
Name? shall it be dishonored, and shall none lay it to heart? shall the
leadings of his Spirit be departed from, and shall none take it to be their
Guide? where are they that are valiant for the Truth, and are steadfastly set
to follow the Lord fully?

Where Is the mind that is so humbled, as to follow Him through all Reproaches?
and where are they who live by Faith, and not at all by sight? where is the
hungerers after the true Bread? and where is the slain mind to all visible
things? where are the often visiters of the Seed? and where are its true and
faithful companions? who suffers with It in its forsaken state, and who joins
to It in all exercises? who are now so upright in heart to Him, as to break off
from all outward fellowships, both in Transgressions and seeming Righteousness,
that the pure Marriage-State they may come to know, even to be of his Flesh,
and of his Bone? This is the Virgin unto whom He is joined, that has put away
all other Lovers, and whose full satisfaction is in the enjoyment of Him alone.
This, this is He who has been sought after in all Forms; and this is He, whose
pure Appearance makes them all vanish before Him. He is come, He is come; but
who can receive Him? The Eye that is abroad cannot see Him; the Mind that is at
ease cannot behold Him: they that are full, see no want of Him; they that
slumber, hear Him not: but the Silent Waiter has joy in his Presence. Even so,
O Lord, let thy Childrens whole delight be in Thee.

I have often heard the voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the
Way of the Lord: and in sadness I have said, Who are preparing for Him? I know
assuredly He will appear, and then will all be ashamed that were at Rest
without Him.

THe Bows of the Mighty Men are broken, and the LORD is the Refuge of his
People.

The Poor has cried, and has been heard; the Humble shall be exalted, and the
Proud brought low.

Trouble, faint-heartedness and weakness is seizing upon the Hypocrite: But
Peace, Courage and Strength is increasing upon the Upright and Simple-hearted.

Deceit is brought to light, the deeds of Darkness discovered, and the Glory of
Righteousness shall shine.

The Boaster is brought to Shame, the strength of the Lofty is become weakness:
shall not the hearts of the Upright rejoice in fear and trembling?

The Warf^re indeed is great, and Temptations many to draw back* but blessed
are they who look not out at hardships, so Peace may be obtained in the End.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1678.


