engraving of two warriors facing one another, with a large crowd in back
ground. one warrior offers the other warrior an olive branch. THE PRESENT STATE
OF SCOTLAND.



Scotiae Indiculum: OR THE Present State OF SCOTLAND.

Together with diverse Reflections Upon the Ancient STATE thereof.

By A. M. Philopatris.

In Magnis voluisse sat est --

LONDON Printed for Jonathan Wilkins at the Star in Cheapside next Mercer's
Chapel. 1682.

To the Highborn, and most Noble Prince, Charles, Duke of Lenox, and Richmond
his Grace, Earl of Darnley and March, Baron of Methwen and Seterington, etc.
and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
My Lord,
THE disadvantages that Dedications have met with of late, by reason of the
Flatteries that have been contained in them, have rendered them suspected of the
same inconveniences, although not in the least intended; That your Grace may
not suffer in this too common a calamity, this Ensuing Treatise offers it self
to come into the critical Censures of the World, under the Auspices of your
Graces Protection: having the Aid and Countenance of so great and Noble a
Personage prefixed, may in some manner take off the hard constructions of a
great many. It is not to be questioned, but some will be apt to esteem it an
audacious Enterprise to undertake to give an account of the Present State of
Scotland, a Monarchy so Ancient, as none in the World can exceed; a Government
so well Established in Church and State, that it seems by serious Reflection,
that the Laws and Statutes of both are inviolable: I say, My Lord, I may be
called into question why so great a Conamen became the Subject of my Studies at
this time, when so many Learned and sagacious Scholars of that Kingdom have
declined so useful an Undertaking: To confess ingeniously, my thoughts have
been perpetually bent to serve my Country in some degree or other, whereby I
might manifest to the World the respect that is due to so Ancient a Kingdom, in
which by a Lawful and Legitimate Descent of the Crown to this present King,
being an Independent Monarchy, and an Imperial Crown; none of the European
Kings can hardly equal. This Design of serving my Country was much prompted,
when none yet have published a Treatise apart concerning the constitutions of
so well a Governed Kingdom: If I shall be so unfortunate as to suffer any way
by endeavoring to satisfy the World what my respects are for so well a
constituted Government, your Grace, I hope, will interpose for me, knowing that
no sinister end was proposed.

My Lord, consider how regularly every Officer, from the highest to the lowest
degree, move in the sphere of their Trust, being ready to execute the Commands
of their Master the King. Consider how piously the Church is governed, in all
things submitting to Lawful Authority: consider their Ecclesiastical
Discipline, that scarce any of the least Enormities in Life, or Errors in
Judgment, can ^scape the severe Execution of the Jurisdiction of the Church.
These things considered, with that due respect they always had and have for
their Kings and the Royal Family, will kindle in your Grace such esteem for
this Kingdom, as those have had, who were your Predecessors of the great
Honors you now enjoy.

My Lord, the Dukes of Lenox, of whom your Grace* only is the Representative,
have been great Lovers of their Country, which they have testified so
demonstrably to the world by the several great Offices they have performed,
that their memory to this day is in great esteem: They had always an immediate
Access to their King, whom they were pleased to inform of the condition of his
Loyal Subjects, and often did Patronize the Affairs, and Espouse the Interest
of His Majesty's good Subjects; which to this day cannot be forgot.

Your Grace needs nothing to render your Name famous in this Kingdom, being you
bear that Honorable Title of Lenox, but an inclination to succeed them in such
like performances; all their Transactions have rendered them and the Successors
of their Dignity Honorable in the Kingdom. Nature seems to warrant a
Prediction of Heroic Actions, which begin to appear in your Grace in these
your greener years. Let then the thoughts of advancing the Interest of this
Kingdom, become as Dear to your Grace, as it was to your Noble Ancestors of the
same Dignity, that when become a Cedar in the Trust of the Affairs of State,
you may gain the same Honor that is due to your Titles.

My Lord, The great Trust His Majesty is pleased to commit to his great
Officers of State, is exceeding honorable, and becoming an aspiring Genius;
most of the Antientest of the Nobility esteeming it a greater honor to have
His Majesty's Commission for such Offices, than to barely enjoy the Dignity of
their Honors. It may justly merit your Graces consideration, that the great
Officers of State have been of the prime of the Nobility, and have been very
faithful in their Trust. It was upon this consideration that I presumed to
offer this Treatise to come into the World with your Graces Name prefixed, that
it might be known that the Family of Lenox is not extinct, which is the great
prudence of our Prince, that so Loyal a Family should not be buried in
Oblivion: And likewise my design was, to give your Gr^^e and the World a
Testimony of the Esteem I have for a Representative of that Noble Family, who
may in all probability acquit himself as becomes one of that Esteem and Dignity.

This small Treatise may afford your Grace an occasion to divert your self
sometimes with the prospect of the things contained in it, and thereby make you
easy to understand the constitution of the Government, and to declare to the
World that this Kingdom is not inferior to any in respect of its Laws and
Statutes, whereby the King's Prerogatives are great, and the Property of the
Subject is fully secured by Law, the People having great Liberties and
Freedoms. If this ^n any way can supply your Grace with an Information of the
Government of Scotland, then I have obtained what I so passionately desired,
being in all sincerity,

Your Graccs most humble, most obedient and most faithful Servant, A. M.

TO THE READER.
IF it were the Custom of the Heroic Spirits of this Age to disapprove every
thing that is not the Soboles of their own Brains, or the result of their own
undertakings, then might I justly be discouraged to appear with this small
demonstration of my Service to my Country; but being otherways persuaded of
the generous Principles of this Age, that nothing which any way tends to the
advancing of Knowledge, is any manner of way dislikt; neither do the Criticisms
of the envious hinder the Publication of Books of this nature; which was the
great encouragement I had to make this Treatise appear in this Juncture. The
earnest instigations of some friends urged it from my pri^^te retirements,
which has ^^en hid for some time. If it do not satisfy the inquisitive and
curious Reader in every point, yet this he may be assured of, that any thing
that has escaped my knowledge, is not very material, as will appear by his
further perusal. Kind Reader, use me discreetly in your censures, being it is
the first undertaking, and if kindly received, may be an encouragement for me
to serve you hereafter, upon some other as necessary occasion. Consider, it may
happen that your own Works may be published, which likewise you would desire to
be received with kind entertainment; Quod ^ihi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris; expecting your good construction of this, will be the greatest
encouragement I can have hereafter to be serviceable to you. Farewell,

A. M.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. Page 1. OF Scotland in general. Of its Name, Climate, Dimensions,
Division, Air, Soil, Commodities, Moneys, Measures, Weights, Buildings, etc.
Chap. 2. Page 16. Of the Laws of Scotland. Of Registers; of Letters of Horning
and Caption, etc. A List of all the Kings of Scotland to His present Majesty.
Of the Descent of the Crown. What a Convention of Estates is. The Prerogatives
of the Crown. Chap. 3. Page 37. Of Succession, of the next Heirs to the Crown
of Scotland. Chap. 4. Page 55. Of the present Princes and Princesses of the
Blood. Chap. 5. Page 72. Of the Chief Officers of State. Of the Parliament. The
Manner of their Election. Of the Riding of Parliament. The Choosing the Lords of
the Articles. A List of all the present Nobility of Scotland. Of the Privy
Counsel; with a List of the present Members thereof. Of the College of
Justice. Of the Justice Court of the Exchequer. Chap. 6. Page 116. Of Inferior
Courts. Of Sheriffdoms. A List of the Shires of Scotland, with the Names of the
present Sheriffs. Of Courts of Regalities. Of a Barons Court. Chap. 7. Page
127. Of the Buroughs of Scotland. Of Buroughs Royal, Buroughs of Regalities,
and Buroughs of Baronies. Chap. 8. Page 135. Of the Court of Admiralty. Of the
Government of the Militia. Chap. 9. Page 141. Of the Church Government. Chap.
10. Page 182. Of Bishops Jurisdiction. Of their Commissaries. Of the Court of
Session. Of Presbyteries. A List of all the Presbyteries of Scotland. Of a
Synod. Of the General Assemblies. Chapter 11, 12, 13, 14. P. 196, etc. Of the
Universities of Scotland.
A List of all the Commissioners that have been in Scotland since King James
the 6th. 252 A Catalogue of the Chancellors of Scotland since the year 1198.
257 Writers of the Scottish History. 260

Books Printed for Jonathan Wilkins, Bookseller, at the Star in Cheapside, next
Mercers-Chapel.
A Philosophic Discourse concerning Man, being the Anatomy both of his Soul
and Body, wherein the Nature, Origin, Union, Immateriality, Immortality,
Extension and Faculties of the one, and the Parts, Humors, Temperaments,
Complexions, Functions, Sexes and Ages respecting the other are concisely
delivered, by S. H. Student in Physic. In 12.

New and Curious Observations on the Art of Curing the Venereal Disease, and
the Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees, Explicated by Natural and
Mechanic Principles, with the Motions, Actions, Effects of Mercury, and its
other Remedies, wherein are discovered on the same Subject, the Errors of some
Authors, and the most notorious Cheats of Ignorant Pretenders: Written in
French by Monsieur de Blegny, Chyrurgion in Ordinary to the French Queen, and
Englished by Walter Harris, Dr. of Physic, lately Fellow of New College in
Oxford. In 80.

Miracles of Art and Nature: Or a Brief Description of the several Varieties of
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants, and Fruits of other Countries: With several
other remarkable things in the World: By R. B Gent. In 80.

The Cities Exaltation by Uprightness: A Sermon preached at Guild Hall Chapel,
on Sunday, June 6 1680. before the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton, Lord
Mayor of the City of London, and the Court of Aldermen: By John Rowley, Rector
of Hemmingford-Abbots, in the County of Huntington.

Modesty Triumphing over Impudence: Or some Notes upon a late Romance,
published by Elizabeth Cellier, Midwife and Lady Errant: Together with the
Depositions of Richard Adams of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire; against her, before His
Majesty, and the Right Honorable, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.

OF SCOTLAND In General.
CHAP. I.
Of its Name, Climate, Dimension, Division, Air, Soil, Commodities, Moneys,
Weights, Measures, and Buildings.

SCotland makes the Northern Part of Great Britain; it has on the East the
German Ocean, on the North the Deucalidon Sea, the West is affronted with
Ireland, and is divid^d from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway, and the
Cheviot hills.

Name. The name of Scots, from which the Kingdom is called Scotland, Originally
is derived from Scota, Daughter to Pharaoh King of Egypt: The Ancient
Histories of the Kingdom by unanimous consent, give this account of the
Inhabitants of this Island, retaining that name unto this day: Scota being
given in Marriage to Gathelus Son of Cecrops, King of Athens, in consideration
of the eminent service, and assistance he performed in a War that Pharaoh had
against the Ethiopians, to whose Valor, and the Grecians that accompanied him,
the King imputed the Victory; Gathelus deserving so we^^, the Kings Daughter
was given to him in Marriage; while Pharaoh l^^^d, Ga^helus was in esteem with
the ^^ople, having increased his reputa^^^^ as well ^^ h^s Lands: shortly
after, Pharaoh dying, his Son of the same name, who so cruelly tormented the
Israelites with Taxes and Bondage, having no regard to Gathelus, or his
Services, began to use him inferior to what might be expected: Notwithstanding
of this hard measure, Gathelus willingly would have afforded this Pharaoh his
Service upon all occurrences; but being warned of the Plagues that should
happen to the Egyptians, he made preparations to remove into some other
Country, which he intended to have been Numidia; but being hindered to land
there, he set Sail, passing through the Streights, taking some valiant Grecians
along with him: he at last landed in a part of Spain, then called Lusitania,
but by reason of his Arriva^* Portgathell, now Portangell. This is said to be
in the Year of the world 2453. After he had conquered this People, he came to
(...) North of Spain, where by reason of ^is abode, there was a Colony of
(...), whom he named Scots from (...) Scota, having two Sons, Hiber and
Himicus, whom he sent to an Island, which he heard was opposite to Spain on the
North, which afterward had its name from Hiber, being called Hibernia, now
Ireland; the People of the Isle being easily conquered, a great many Scots from
Gallicia in Spain, being the name of the Colony where Gathelus first settled,
were sent hither, keeping their name still: After sundry engagements with the
Inhabitants, the Scots in Ireland became the stronger, and greater Party; of
these descended many Valian^ and Noble Men, who came with Fergusius, the first
King of Scotland: to fight against the Picts, who cruelly and barbarously at
that time insulted over some Scots who landed in Albion, being formerly of the
Scots in Ireland.

Fergusius, the first King of Scots (in Albion, now Scotland) Son to Ferqu
hard, King of Ireland, was Crowned in the fatal Marble ^hair, the Year from the
Creation of the World 3641. before the Coming of Christ 330. the first year of
the 112 Olympiad, in the year 421. after the Building of Rome, about the
beginning of the fourth Monarchy; when Alexander the Great vanquished Darius,
the last Monarch of Persia, in the Reign of King Chimarus King of Brittans.

Some conjecture that Scotland had its name from Scoti, or Scitty, or Scythy,
from a People of Germany, over whose Northern Limits the name of Scythia did
extend: of the truth of this there is no manner of ground in History:

^lim. Edinburgh is situated between the degrees of Latitude 56 d. 2 m. of
Longitude 3 d. 0 m. from London West, longest day 17 hours 27 minutes. Aberdeen
57 d. 10 m. of Latitude 2 d. 20 m. Longitude; the most Northerly part of
Scotland, is Dunsby head, whose Latitude is 58 d. 5 minutes.

The longest day in the most Northern part in this place is 18 h. 8 m.

Dimensions. It is in length about 480 miles; it is of a much disproportionable
breadth, there being no place 60 miles distant from the Sea.

Division. The Country is divided according to the Inhabitants, into High-land
and Low-land: The People of the former live upon the Western Coast of Scotland,
or in some out Islands, being a hardy People, much inclinable to War, who are
in a continual readiness, whenever commanded by their Chief, as they love to
call the most eminent Persons of their name or Clanne* Their weapons are
commonly Bow and Arrows; a people that can endure all the hardships of War,
being bred to all manner of cunning in relation thereunto; not much trusted by
the Low-landers: Their Chiefs have a great Authority over them; they pay little
or no Rent for the Lands they hold, being obliged, when their Chief calls them,
to be upon all occasions at his service: It was the custom, when any of the
Chiefs of these Clanns came to Edinburgh, they were attended with a numerous
Train of these their Vassals; which appearing mutinous, was forbidden by an Act
of Council: These Gentlemen being allowed to have the Attendants of their
Menial Servants only; They espouse the quarrel of their Master, being much
given to revenge; and it is observable, that for some generations the private
quarrels of one Family against another, has been pursued with such vigor,
even almost to the ruin of both Parties. The names of these Clanns, are Mck.
Donald, Mck. Naughtoune, Mck. Clean, etc. which reckon their Families to be of
a very old standing in the Kingdom, by several Generals; some of seven hundred
years and upwards, and others more.

The Low-landers bordering on the East, have much of the disposition and
civility of other Countries; their Language like the English; and in their
Habit according to the Fashions from France.

Again Scotland, according to the Situation of its Parts or Provinces, may be
divided into two parts; To wit Southwards of the River Tay; which made the
Ancient Kingdom of the Picts; and Eastwards and Northwards of the River Tay,
which made the Ancient Kingdom of the Scots; besides abundance of little
Islands lying round about.

According to its Ecclesiastical Government, it is divided into two Provinces,
viz. St. Andrews and Glascow; these two Provinces into several Diocesses: It
was long after the Christian Religion was received in Scotland, that the
Ecclesiastical Government was thus divided: For more full satisfaction of the
Affairs of the Church, the inquisitive Reader may consult the most Reverend
Archbishop Spotiswood, in his History of the Church of Scotland. The Christian
Religion in the Year of our Lord 203. which was the fourth year of Donald the
first, was publicly established; the King with his Queen, and many of the
Nobility being then baptized; several years before this public manifestation,
many people were converted to the Christian Faith. Tertullian, who lived some
years before the Coronation of this King, speaking of the Propagations of the
Gospel throughout the whole World, does reckon among other Countries, the Parts
of Britanny, unto which the Romans could not find access: And what these Parts
were, are no doubt that little corner of the Island which the Scots did
inhabit; all the Inland of Britanny being subject to the Romans.

There be Authors of no small credit, who transmit to posterity, that St. Paul
after his Imprisonment at Rome, did visit this Island, and did Preach the
Gospel in the utmost parts thereof.

Nicephorus writes, that Simon Zelotes after he had traveled through Egypt,
Cyrene, Africa, Mauritania, and Lybia, came at last ad occidentalem oceanum
insulasque Britannicas: and there Preached the Gospel: Dorotheus adds, that
he was Crucified in these parts: Others write, as if Pope Victor did send
Preachers, as first promulgers of the Gospel: but this is not very probable,
being this Church, was not fashioned like to that of Rome in its rites,
especially in the observation of Easter.

These foregoing opinions are not grounded upon the surest testimonies of
History; the writers of most credit give place to this conjecture: That when
the Apostle St. John was banished into the Isle Pathmos, some of his Disciples
took their refuge hither, and were the first Preachers of the Gospel: The more
sober are inclinable to give credit to this, because in that contention moved
about Easter, the Christians here for some two hundred years after did retain
the custom of the Oriental Church, maintaining this by the Authority of St.
John, from whom they pleaded to have received the Faith: Others are agreed that
not long after the Ascension of our Lord, whilst the Apostle St. John yet
lived, that the Faith of our Lord was known and embraced in this Kingdom:
Origin says that they are to be numbered inter primitias, among the first
Fruits of the Gentiles gathered unto Christ: This made Petrus Cluniacensis call
the Scots antiquiores Christianos, of greater antiquity than many others.

Air. The Air is mild and temperate: The cold in the Winter toward the North
is very sharp, but there being a great plenty of Wood and other firing, the
Inhabitants do not suffer much by it: The heat in Summer is less scorching than
in some parts of the Continent: There is no need of Stoves in Winter, nor
Grottes in Summer.

Soil. The Soil is very wholesome, abounding with Springs and Streams; there are
some Navigable Rivers very convenient for Trade. Toward the North it is
Mountainous, yet not wanting fruitful Valleys apt for Grain, Corn, or Wood.

Commodities. There is plenty every where of Sheep, Oxen, and Coneys, and in
the North, of fallow Deer: great plenty of Hens, Ducks, Geese, Turkeys and
Pigeons, Partridges, Sea-plover, Pewits, Woodcocks, Snipes, Plovers, Quails,
Larks, and Herons, etc. with great plenty of Salmon, Trouts, Carps and Pikes,
etc. a great abundance of Herrings, Oysters, Cockles, Musles, Scate, Turbots,
Freshling, and Lobsters, etc. there is not wanting Apples, Pears, Plums and
Cherries: It abounds with Wheat, Barley, Rye, Beans, Pease and Oats; as also
Butter and Cheese: There are likewise wild Ducks, wild Geese, etc. and many
sorts of Sea Foul; for Raiment, there is no want of very fine Wool; for the
Country People are clothed with freezes fit to defend them in their work from
the cold: There is likewise plenty of Hemp and Flax; as for linen Cloth it is
inferior to none for its goodness.

For Building it wants not Stone, Slate, Alabaster, Marble, Mortar nor Lime.

For firing, Sea Coal, or Pit Coal almost every where at reasonable rates, and
where this is wanting, in some places Wood, and in others Turfs or Peats.

Moreover Scotland produces a great quantity of Tin, Lead, Copper, Allom,
Salt, Hops with several silver Mines: it is counted to be richer under ground
then above, by reason of the Mines, which when tried, yield much in their
quantities of Ore.

Coyns. As to the Coyns, note that 13 d. sterling. makes a Mark, or 13 Shil. 4 d.
Scottish, 20 d. sterling. is 20 Shil. or a Scottish l. and 20 Shil. sterling. is 18
Scottish Marks.

Measures, and Weights. The Measures for length is the Ell, and is about 4 per
cent. greater than the English Ell.

The liquid Measures are such as are in England but of a double continent: a
Pint being almost two English Quarts, and a Scottish Quart one English Gallon,
and so answerable: Their dry Measures are likewise of a bigger continent than
these in England.

Buildings. The Churches are of solid Stone; most of the Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches demolished, and by what remains of some, may be judged to
have been very ample and magnificent. The first Reformers being more zealous
than prudent, in rasing from the very foundation most of the renowned Abbeys
and Churches: Houses in Cities are built with Stone, and in many places covered
with Slate: The Houses of the Nobility and Gentry are well furnished; being all
built with Stone; not much valuing Tile or Brick.

CHAP. II.
Of the Laws of Scotland: The Names of Kings, the Kings Power and Prerogatives,
how long the Crown has been in the Family of the Stewarts, what a convention
of Estates is.

THE Law of Scotland is made up of the Municipal and Civil Laws: The Municipal
consists either of Acts of Parliament, or of the Custom, and Practices of the
College of Justice; which are held of no less force than Acts of Parliament,
and when neither of these contradicts; the Civil Law is of force: The Lawyers
being generally great Civilians, for they go to Leiden, Poictiers or Bourges to
study the Civil Law, in which some are learned to a high degree.

Registers. The Law of Scotland is easy and regular, by reason of Registers,
which are so full, that Titles are much more easily learned where those
Registers are, than can be done without them; by this means, Men are not
cheated in buying or conveying Estates; which may appear from these following
instances.

1. No man can have a right to any Estate, but by his being seized of it; which
is done by the delivery of Earth, and Stone, upon which an instrument is
formed, called a Sasine, and this must be registered within 60 days: otherwise
it is of no force; by which means all secret conveyances are cut off; for if no
Sasine be past upon them; or if these be not put in the Registers, (which every
one may search) the conveyance is of no force.

2. All Bonds have a clause in them for inserting them in the public
Registers, and they being Registered, without any further action, by a Charge
of six days the Debtor must make payment, otherways, Writs called Letters of
Horning Caption, and Poynding are given out, by the first of which, the party
is under outlawery and Rebellion, and forfeits to the King his Personal Estate:
and if he continues a year under it, the liferent of his real Estate; in which
the Creditor is to be preferred for his interest; the rest goes into the
Exchequer: By the Letters of Caption the party is seized on, and put in Prison;
nor is his House a place of security, but may be searched for him; by the
Letters of poynding the Debtors Goods may be distrained, wherever they can be
found.

A third instance is, that any Creditor may serve a Writ on his Debtor, called
Letters of Inhibition, by which he can make no disposition of his goods, or
Estate, till the party be satisfied; and is null and to no effect that he does
after, if these Letters be returned Registered within 21 days after they are
served; otherways they have no force: thus this ancient Kingdom is governed by
the Civil Law as in many other things might be instanced, by which they
securely enjoy what they have or may purchase.

The Kingdom of Scotland has been governed by Kings, in as long a Succession
as any Nation in the World as by this ensuing Catalogue of the Kings may
appear, each of them lineally succeeding others, since Fergusius, the first
King, in the year from the Creation of the World 3641.

Fergusius. Feritharis. Mainus. Dornadilla. Nothatus. Rutherus. Reutha.
Thereus. Josina. Finnanus. Durstus. Evenus 1. Gillus nothus. Evenus 2. Ederus.
Evenus 3. Metellanus. Caratacus. Corbredus. Dardanus. Corbredus 2. Galdus Cog.
Luctacus. Mogaldus. Conarus. Ethodius 1. Satrael. Donaldus 1. Ethodius 2.
Athirco. Nathalocus. Findochus. Donaldus 2. Donaldus 3. Crathlinthus.
Fincormachus. Romachus. Angusianus. Fethelmachus. Eugenius 1. Fergusius 2.
Eugenius 2. Dongardus. Constantinus 1. Congallus 1. Goranus. Eugenius 3.
Congallus 2. Kinnatollus. Aidanus. Kennethus. Eugenius 4. Ferchardus 1.
Donaldus 4. Ferchardus 2. Malduinus. Eugenius 5. Eugenius 6. Amberkelethus.
Eugenius 7. Mordacus. Etfinus. Eugenius 8. Fergusius 3. Salvathius. Aihajus.
Congallus. Dongallas. Alpinus. Kennethus 2. Donaldus 5. Constantinus 2. Ethus.
Gregorius. Donaldus 6. Constantinus 3. Milcolumbus 1. Indulfus. Duffus.
Culenus. Kennethus 3. Constantinus 4. Cog. Calvus. Grimus. Milcolumbus 2.
Donaldus. Milcolumbus 3. Donaldus Banus. Duncanus. Edgarus. Alexander 1. Cog.
Acer. David 1. Milcolumbus 4. Guilielmus. Alexander 2. Alexander 3. Joannes
Balliolus. Robertus Brussius David 2. Edw. Balliolus. Robertus 2. Robertus 3.
Jacobus 1. Jacobus 2. Jacobus 3. Jacobus 4. Jacobus 5. Henricus Stuartus cum
Maria Stuarta. JACOBUS 6. Carolus 1. Carolus 2.
In all 109.

The King is an absolute and unaccountable Monarch, and (as the Law calls him)
a free Prince of a Sovereign Power, having as great Liberties and Prerogatives
by the Laws of this Realm, and privilege of his Crown and Diadem, as any other
King or Potentate whatsoever; so that is delivered as a maxim in the heads of
our Law.

Thato all jurisdiction stands and consists in the Kings Person, by reason of
his Royal Authority, and Crown, and is competent to no Subject; but flows and
proceeds from the King, having supreme jurisdiction; and is given and committed
by him to his Subjects, as he pleases, which clearly demonstrates his Royal
Prerogative. The Crown descends by Inheritance, the Heir female, not being
excluded; and to this day the undoubted Right to it, has been above three
hundred years in the family of the Stewarts, and is now in the Person of King
Charles the Second: His Majesty's Title is Dei Gratia of Scotland, England,
France, and Ireland, King, defender of the Faith, whom God long preserve in the
Throne of his Ancestors; upon the Death of a King there is no Inter-Regnum; the
next Heir is presently King, the Coronation being only a solemn Instalment, in
that which was his right before: before their Coronation, they hold only
convention of Estates, but no Parliaments before they are Crowned.

A Convention of Estates is made up of the same Members that constitute a
Parliament; but can make no Laws, only they can lay impositions on the
Subjects. They do not sit in State; they have been most used before the Kings
were Crowned: the Lord Chancellor is president in the Convention of Estates as
well as in Parliaments.

When a King is Crowned, he swears the Oath appointed to be taken at the
Coronation: which before the Reformation was no other, than that set down in
the Roman Pontificial, sworn by Kings, for there is no provision made about it
in our Law; but at the Reformation it was enacted, That all Kings at the time
of their Coronation, should make their faithful promise by Oath to govern
according to Law, and maintain the Protestant Religion, etc. which Oath is to
be found in that Act of the first Parlia. Jac. 6. C. 8. Anno 1567.

Prerogatives of the Crown. The Prerogatives of the Crown are great, as Power
of Peace, and War, the Power of raising, and arming the Subjects, the Power of
the Mint, the nomination of all Officers both of State and of War, and of
Justice: (except some Sheriffs that are such by Inheritance) the Power of
calling, adjourning (Prorogation is not in our Law) and dissolving of
Parliaments, the giving the Votes of Parliament, the Authority of Laws, the
executing of the Law, and the pardoning of offenses, are wholly and only in the
Crown.

Church Government. But to these, since His Majesty's Happy Restoration, great
additions has been made: In the Reign of King James the sixth, the Power of
general Assemblies was raised very high by Law, which occasioned the sad
disaster in the Church, and laid a foundation to all the late troubles of the
State, notwithstanding the Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs was always in
the Crown, since the Reformation: yet it was pretended as contrary to Law, for
the King to introduce any thing into the Church, without the consent of the
general Assembly: It was therefore enacted in Parliament, Act 1. 2. Parl. held
by the Duke of Lauderdale: That the external Government and polity of the
Church was wholly in the King's Power; and that his Order sent to the Privy
Council, and published by them, about all Ecclesiastical Matters, Meetings and
Persons were to be obeyed by his Subjects, any Law or practice to the contrary
notwithstanding: So that in all matters that relate to the Church Government,
the King's Power is absolute.

Militia. The second point is concerning the Militia: By the Ancient Laws of
Scotland, all the Kings Subjects were to assist him in Wars; upon which a great
Enlargement of the King's Prerogative was grafted at last, by two Acts of
Parliament. The Kingdom of Scotland offering to the King to Raise and Arm
twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, and to furnish them with forty
days Provision, to march into any of His Majesty's Dominions of Scotland,
England, or Ireland, for suppressing any Foreign Invasions, Intestine Trouble,
or Insurrection, or for any other Service, wherein His Majesty's Honor,
Authority or Greatness may be concerned.

And these Forces by another Act, are to give due Obedience to all such
Directions, as they shall receive from His Majesty's Privy Council.

Trade. A third point is, The ordering and disposing of Trade with Foreign
Nations, and the laying of Restra^nts and Impositions upon Foreign Imported
Commodities, which is declared a Prerogative of the Crown.

With these Sacred Prerogatives is the Crown of Scotland invested; not
inferior to any Crown in Europe for its Dignity and Power.

The King only, and the King alone by His Royal Prerogative, has Power,
without Act of Parliament, to declare War, to make Peace, make Leagues and
Treaties with any Foreign States; give Commissions for levying Men and Arms by
Sea or ^^ Land; yea for pressing Men, (...): The King only, and the King alone,
disposes of all Magazines, Ammunitions, Castles, Fortresses, Ports, Havens, and
public Moneys. The King appoints the Metal, Weight, purity and value of Money;
and by his Proclamation any Foreign Coin may be lawful.

The King by His Royal Prerogative, of His mere will and pleasure, may convoke,
adjourn, remove, and dissolve Parliaments; may to any Act passed in Parliament,
refuse to give, (without rendering any reason) His Royal Assent, without which,
a Bill is a mere Chimera: May at His pleasure increase the number of the
Members of Parliament, as daily experience testifies, by creating more Barons,
and bestowing privileges upon other Towns to send Burgesses to Parliament: Yea
may call to Parliament by Writ whom His Majesty thinks fit, and may refuse to
send His Writ to others that have sat in other Parliaments. His Majesty alone
has the Choice and Nomination of all Magistrates, Counselors, and Officers
of State; of all Bishops, and other High Dignities of the Church; the bestowing
of all Honors, both of the higher and lower Nobility of Scotland. It is in the
power of the King alone to choose, and name all Commanders, and other Officers,
at Sea or Land: The power of determining Rewards for Services, and Punishments
for Misdemeanors.

The King by His Letters Patent may erect new Counties, Bishoprics,
Universities, Cities, Buroughs, Hospitals, Schools, Fairs, Markets, Courts of
Justice, and Free Warants, etc.

The King by His Prerogative has power to enfranchise an Alien; whereby he is
enabled to purchase Houses or Lands, and to bear some Offices: Has power to
grant Letters of Mart, or Reprisal. No Proclamation can be made but by the
King: The King only can give Patents in case of Losses by Fire, to receive the
Charitable Benevolences of the people; without which no man may ask it
publicly.

The King by His Prerogative, is Vltimus Haeres Regni, and is the Receptacle of
all Estates, when no Heir appears: For this cause all Estates for want of
Heirs, or by forfeiture, fall to the King: All Spiritual Benefices, for want of
Presentation by the Bishop, are lapsed at last to the King, all Money, Gold,
Silver, Plate, found (and the owners not known) belongs to the King; so all
Wayfs, Strays, Wrecks, not granted by him or any former Kings, all wast Ground
or Land recovered from the Sea, all ^ands of Aliens before Naturalization, and
all things whereof the property is not known, all Gold and Silver Mines, in
whose Ground soever they are found.

The King's Power in the Church. In the Church the Kings Prerogative is great:
he only has the Patronage of all Bishoprics, none can be chosen, whom he has
not first nominated, none can be consecrated Bishop, or take possession of the
Revenues of the Bishopric, without the King's special Writ or Assent: He is
the nursing Father of the Church, the King has Power to call a National Synod,
and by his Commissioners to make constitutions relating to the Government, and
polity of the Church: This National Synod was styled the General Assembly,
which according to its Constitution and Authority settled in King James the
sixths minority, was made up of two Ministers, Commissioners from every
Presbytery, and one lay Elder, a Commissioner from every Royal Borough, one
from every University, and one from the King: These had the Supreme Authority
about a^l Church Matters: How much trouble this Assembly General bred King
James the sixth, and the pretentions the Church made afterward, the sad
desolations of the Church of Scotland in these times do sufficiently bear
witness: A shadow of this still remains, for the Supreme Ecclesiastical Court
is declared to be a National Synod made of Bishops, and Deans, and two
Ministers from every Presbytery, one of whom is of the Bishops nomination, and
a Commissioner from every University, yet nothing is to be proposed, but by the
King or his Commissioner, nor can any thing that they do, be of force: till it
be ratified by the King; but of this Synod their is no need, being the King's
Supremacy is so large, it is evident, that the King is over all Persons, as
well in Ecclesiastics, as Civil, Supreme.

From the King of Scotland there is no appeal in Ecclesiastical Affairs to the
Bishop of Rome, as it is in other principal Kingdoms of Europe.

There is no appeal in civil Affairs, as in other Dominions of Christendom,
nor, in either Ecclesiastical or Civ^l, to the People, who in themselves, o^ by
their Representatives in Parliament, were ever subordinate to the King.

The King being the only Sovereign, and Supreme Head, is furnished with plenary
Power, Prerogative, and Jurisdiction to render Justice to every Member within
his Dominions: He may be properly called (as all great Princes) Gods Vice
gerent, being so much Majesty and Power is represented by him, whereby the
People have so much the higher esteem, and more reverend awfulness of him; for
if that fails, nothing can be expected but confusion, impiety, and calamity.

The Ancient Christians, out of an high respect to their Christian Kings, and
Emperors, used to attribute the Titles of God, though imperfectly, and
analogically in them, yet essentially and perfectly only in God, and the good
Christians of these times, out of their excess of respect, were wont to swear
by the Majesty of the Emperor (as Joseph once by the life of Pharaoh) some
writers of that Age seem to justify it, as being done only to beget a respect
in these times in the hearts of the People for their Kings.

The King is not subject to Death, because he is a Corporation in himself, that
lives for ever: All Inter-Regna being unknown in Scotland, the same moment
that one King dies, the next Heir is King fully, and absolutely, without any
Coronation, Ceremony, or Act to be done.

The King is every where in all His Courts of Justice, in all His Palaces;
therefore it is that all His Subjects stand bare in the Presence Chamber,
wheresoever the Chair of State is placed, though the King be many miles distant
from thence: By his Prerogative of pardoning whom the Law has condemned, the
King is in a manner invested with Omnipotency, by raising men from Death to
Life: Can create to the highest Dignity, and annihilate the same at pleasure:
All punishments proceed from him in his Courts of Justice, and it is not lawful
for any Subject to revenge himself.

In consideration of these and other transcendent Excellencies, no King in
Christendom, nor other Potentate receives from H^s Subjects more Reverence,
Honor and Respect, than the King of Scotland: All His people at their first
Addresses kneel to him; all persons (not the Prince nor the Heir apparent
excepted) stand bare in the presence of the King, and in the Presence Chamber,
though in the King's absence. The King's only Testimony of any thing done in
his presence, is of as high a nature and credit, as any Record; and in all
Writs sent forth for dispatch, he uses no other Witness but himself; viz.
Test meipso.

CHAP. III.
Of Succession, and the next Heirs to the Crown of Scotland.

THE King of Scotland has Right to the Crown by Inheritance, and the Laws and
Customs of the Ki^gdom; upon the Death of the King the next of kindred, though
born out of the Dominions of Scotland, or born of Parents, not Subjects of
Scotland, is immediately King before any Proclamation, Coronation, publication,
or consent of Peers or people: The Crown descends from Father to Son, and his
Heirs; for want of Sons to the Eldest Daughter, and her Heirs; for want of
Daughters, to the Brother, and his Heirs; and for want of a Brother to the
Sister, and her Heirs. The Salique Law or Custom of France, has here no more
force than it had anciently among the Jews, or in Spain, and other Hereditary
Kingdoms: The Salique Law is of force only among the French, Turks and
Barbarians, and has been so of a long time.

At the Death of the King, die not only the Offices of the Court, but all
Commissions granted to Judges.

In the King's Infancy, a fit person of the Nobility is made choice of in
Parliament, who by nature or alliance has most interest in the preservation of
the Life and Authority of the Infant.

In Scotland the King being absent, by His Majesty's Commission, the Lord High
Commissioner, to whom the King commits the grand and weighty Affairs of the
Kingdom, does by Instructions from His Majesty, regulate the Affairs, and
redresses the Grievances of the Kingdom.

Of the present King of Scotland.
The King now Reigning, is Charles the Second of that name; his name of Baptism
Charles, in the German Tongue signifies one of a masculine strength or virtue.

Surname.
His surname is Stuart, which first, by Office, was given to Walter, Father to
Robert King of Scotland, from whom our present King is descended; he was grand
Senescal, or High Steward, or Stuart of Scotland, as bearing such an Office; by
a long and vulgar error it has so prevailed, that it was accounted the
surname of the Kings of Scotland, and of many Families descended from them.

The Genealogy.
The King, now Reigning, is Son to King Charles the Martyr, and the Princess
Henrietta Maria, Daughter of King Henry the Great of France, from which two
Royal Stocks, he has in his veins all the Royal (...) of ^^rope concentred; he
is descen^^^ ^^neally, and lawfully from Scottish Kings, for almost 2000 years;
the King now Reigning the 109th; so that for Royal Extraction and long line of
just descent, His Majesty now Reigning, excels all the Monarchs of all the
Christian, if not of the whole world.

Birth.
He was born the 29th of May 1630. at the Royal Palace of St. James's; over
which house, the same day at noon, was seen by thousands a Star, and soon after
the Sun suffered an Eclipse; a sad presage, as some then divined, that this
Princes power should for some time be Eclipsed, as it has been, and some
Subject, signified by a Star, should have extraordinary splendour.

Baptized.
Was Christened the 27th of June following, by the then Bishop of London, Dr.
Laud.

Had for his Godfathers, his two Uncles, Lewis the 13th King of France, and
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhein, then called King of Bohemia,
represented by the Duke of Richmond, and Marquis of Hamilton: His Godmother
being then the Queen Mother of France, represented by the Duchess of Richmond.

Had for Governess, Mary Countess of Dorset. In May 1633. he was first
Knighted, and immediately after he was made Knight of the Garter, and installed
at Windsor.

Education.
At the Age of Eight he had for Governor, the Earl, afterward Marquis, now
Duke of Newcastle, and after him the Late Earl of Barkshire; and for Tutor or
Praeceptor Dr. Duppa, then Dean of Christ Church, after Bishop of Salisbury,
and lately of Winchester.

At the Age of Twelve, was with the King his Father at the Battle of Edge Hill;
and soon after, at Oxford was committed to the care of the Marquis of Hertford.

About Fourteen years old, was in the Head of an Army in the West of England:
At the Age of Fifteen a Marriage was proposed between him and the Eldest
Daughter of the King of Portugal, the Infanta Joanna since deceased: Two years
after was from Cornwall transported to the Isle of Scilly, and after to Jersey,
and thence to his Royal Mother to St. Germains, near Paris: At this time the
Parliament in England being at variance with the King.

A little time after, he was at Sea, with some Naval Forces, endeavoring to
rescue the King his Father, then in the Isle of Wight, out of the wicked hands
of his Rebellious Subjects: Not many months after, upon the sad news of the
horrid Murder of his Royal Father, he was in Holland first saluted King, and
soon after proclaimed in Scotland, being not yet nineteen years of Age.

At the Age of Twenty, from Holland he landed in Scotland, June 1650. and in
January following, to the joy of His Loyal Subjects there, he was Crowned at
Scoone, the place where his Ancestors had been Crowned: At his Coronation there
was this Solemnity: A Reverend and Learned Divine, Mr. Robert Douglass,
preaching a Sermon concerning the Dignity and Honor due to Kings; all the
Nobility being present, he was invested with the Regalia. The Crown being put
upon his Royal Head, he was by the joyful Acclamations of his people saluted
King; all of them present with one voice crying out, God save the King, God
save the King, God save the King: These precise times not allowing the ordinary
Rites of Coronation.

The third of September 1651. fought the Battle of Worcester, whence after the
unfortunate loss of his whole Army, wandering in disguise about England for six
weeks, and most wonderfully preserved, he was, at length, transported from a
Creek near Shoram, in Sussex, to Feccam, near Havre de Grace in France; in
which Kingdom, with his Royal Brothers, and diverse Scottish and English
Nobility, Cle^gy and Gentry, he was for some years received, and treated as
King of Scotland and England. Afterward he passed his time in Germany,
Flanders and Spain in the studies and exercises most befitting a Prince, until
the year 1660. at which time being at Brussels in the Spanish Territories,
perceiving a general inclination of his Subjects in England to receive him, he
providently removed himself to Breda, within the Dominions of the United
Provinces, in the Netherlands, and thence in May to the Hague: After a little
abode there, by the humble invitation of his Scottish and English Subjects, he
embarked at Scheveling, the 23 of May 1660. and with a gallant Fleet, and
gentle gale of wind, landed the 25th at Dover, and on the 29th following, being
his Birthday, and then just 30 years of Age, he entered into London, being
attended with most of the Nobility and Gentry of the Three Kingdoms, where he
was received with the greatest and most universal Joy and Acclamations, and
Magnificence, that could possibly be expressed: And on the 23d of April 1661.
was Crowned with great Solemnity and Ceremony at Westminster.

His Majesty's life has been full of wonders: But three passages especially
seem miraculous: First at his Birth, a bright Star seen over him at Noonday, by
many thousands. Secondly, His escape in, and after the Battle of Worcester,
when being in the very heart of England, forsaken by all; a sum of money by
public Act promised to those that should discover him; and penalty of High
Treason to any one that should conceal him, when he was seen, and known by many
persons of all sorts and conditions, whereof diverse were very indigent, and so
very subject to be tempted with the proposed Reward, and diverse of the Female
Sex, and so most unapt to retain a secret: When he was necessitated to wait so
many weeks, and appear in so many places and companies, before a fit
opportunity of Transportation could be found. Thirdly, His Majesty's
Restoration, (quippe impossible fuit filium tot precationum, and tot
lacrymarum, and tot miraculorum periisse) that after so many years
dispossession, his most inve^erate, potent, subtle enemies in full and quiet
possession, on a sudden the desire of him should, like Lightning, or a mighty
Torrent, run over his Kingdoms, in such a manner, that he should be solemnly
invited, magnificently conducted, and triumphantly received, without blood,
blows, bargain, or any obligation to any Foreign Prince or Potentate.

This was the Lord's doing, and must for ever be mavelous in our eyes. Justly
might the Great Turk, hearing of His Majesty's Restoration, declare, if he
were to change his Religion, he would adore, and worship the God of the King of
Great Britain.

Of His Sacred Person, of His Life and Safety, the Laws of Scotland are so
tender, that it is High Treason only to imagine, or intend the Death of the
King: And because by imagining, or conspiring the Death of the King's
Counselors, or great Officers of his Household, the destruction of the King
might ensue, the Law has provided they should be punished with Death: The
King's Person is in so high an esteem, that to offend against those persons
that represent the King, as to kill some of the Crown Officers, or the King's
Judges, or to counterfeit the King's Seal, or his Moneys, is made High Treason,
because, by all these the King's Person is represented; and High Treason is so
horrid, that besides loss of Life and Honor, Real and Personal Estate to the
Criminal: His ^^irs also are to lose the same for ever, and to be ranked
amongst the Peasantry and Ignoble, till the King shall please to restore them.

The Law, by no means, will suffer an Idiot or Lunatic to go unpunished in
case of Treason against the King, (who cannot be said to have any will, and so
cannot offend) who during his Idiocy or Lunacy, shall kill, or go about to kill
the King; he shall be punished as a Traitor; yet being non compos mentis, the
Law holds he cannot commit Felony, or petty Treason, nor other sorts of High
Treason.

Moreover, for the precious regard of the Person of the King, no Physic ought
to be administered to the King, but what his Physicians prepare with their own
hands, and not by the hands of an Apothecary; and to use no Chyrurgions, but
such as are sworn the King's Chyrurg^ons.

All His Subjects, by Oath of Allegiance, are obliged and bound to defend His
Person, in his natural, as well as political capacity, with His own life and
limbs: He is Pater Patriae; and dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori: To lose
life or limb in defending the King from Conspiracies, Rebellions, or Invasions,
or the Execution of His Laws, should seem a pleasant thing to every Loyal
hearted Subject.

The King's Revenue anciently consisted most in Crown Lands, which could not be
alienated, but by Act of Parliament, and in the Wards and Marriages of the
Vassals of the Crown: But most of these have been of late years given away, and
most of the Tenures of Lands are changed, although there has been no general
Law for taking away the Wards: The Revenue is now raised out of the Customs and
Excise: The last is given this King for life; but the former is in the Crown
for ever: The rest is raised out of what remains of the Crown Lands, and the
Wards.

The King of Scotland bears for his Sovereign Ensigns Armorial, as follows,
a double Tressure counterflowered de Lys Or, and a Lion Rampant Gules.

Of the Present Queen of Scotland, England, etc.
Donna Catherina Infanta of Portugal, being Queen Consort of Scotland, England.
etc. and the Second Person in the Kingdoms, was Daughter of Don Juan the fourth
of that Name, King of Portugal, and of Donna Lucia Daughter of Don Guzman El
bueno, a Spaniard, Duke of Medina Sidonia, who was Lineally descended from
Ferdinando de la Cerde, and his Consort Blanch: To whom Lewis King of France,
her Father relinquisht his Right and Title to Spain, descended to him by his
Mother Blanch, Eldest Daughter and Heir of Alphonso, the Spanish King.

The Queen was born the fourteenth of November. 1638. at Villa Vicosa in
Portugal: she was baptized Catherina, signifying in Greek pure: her Father
being then Duke of Briganza (though right Heir of the Crown of Portugal) the
most potent Subject in Europe; for a third part of Portugal was holden of him
then, in Vassallage. The Queen is only Sister, at present, of Don Alphonso, the
sixth of that Name, and twenty third King of Portugal; ^orn 1643. Has another
Brother more called Don Pedro, born 1648. who is now Regent of the Kingdom of
Portugal.

Having been most carefully and piously educated by her Mother, and at the Age
of twenty two, desired in Marriage by King Charles the Second, (the Marriage
not long after concluded by the Negotiation of Don Francisco de Melo Con. de
Ponte Marquis de Saude, and then Extraordinary Ambassador of the King of
Portugal) and solemnized at Lisbon: she embarkt for England upon the twenty
third of April, 1662. and was safely, by the Earl of Sandwich, conducted by a
squadron of Ships, to Portsmouth, where the King first met her, and was
Re-married by the then Bishop of London, who afterward was Archbishop of
Canterbury.

On the 23d. of August 1662. Her Majesty coming by Water from Hampton Court,
was with great pomp and magnificence, first received by the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London, at Chelsey, and thence conducted by Water to Whitehall.

The Portion she brought with her was eight hundred millions of Reas, or two
millions of Crusadoes, being about three hundred thousand pounds sterling,
together with that important place of Tangier upon the the Goast of Africa, and
the Isle of Bombaim, near Goa, in the East Indies; with a privilege that any
Subjects of the King of Great Britain, etc. may Trade freely in the East and
West Indies Plantations, belonging to the Portugues.

The Queen's Jointure, by the Articles of Marriage, is thirty thousand pound
sterling per annum, and the King, out of his great affection toward her, has,
as an Addition, settled upon her 10000 l. per annum more.

The Queen's Arms, as Daughter to the King of Portugal, is Argent, Five
Scutcheons Azure cross-wise; each Scutcheon charged with Five Plates or Besants
Argent saltier-wise, with a Point sable, the Border gules, charged with Six
Castles Or.

Queen Catherine is a Personage of rare perfections, of eminent Piety and
Modesty, and extraordinary Religious and Charitable.

CHAP. IV.
Of the present Princes and Princesses of the Blood: And first of the Duke of
Albany and York.

THE First Prince of the Blood, is the most Illustrious Prince, James Duke of
Albany and York, Second Son to King Charles the Martyr, and only Brother to the
present King our Sovereign.

He was Born October. 14. 1633. the 24th of the same month was Baptized, and
afterward committed to the Government of the then Countess of Dorset. There was
no Ceremony used in England when he was created D. of York, which was the 27.
of July 1643. the iniquity of these times not admitting thereof: Scotland not
being so happy as to have him, or any of the Royal Family at that time among
them.

After the Surrender of Oxford, His Royal Highness was in 1646. conveyed to
London, by the prevailing disloyal Part of the Two Houses of Parliament, and
committed with his Brother Gloucester, and Sister Elizabeth, to the care of the
Earl of Northumberland.

In the year 1648. Aged about Fifteen, was by Colonel Bampfield conveyed in a
disguise, or habit of a Girl beyond Sea; first to his Sister, the Princess
Royal of Orange in Holland, and afterward to the Queen his Mother, then at
Paris; where he was carefully educated in the Religion of the Church of
England, and in all Exercises meet for such a Prince.

About the Age of Twenty, in France he went into the Campaign, and served with
much Gallantry under the great Commander, the then Protestant Marshall de
Turene, for the French King, against the Spanish Forces in Flanders.

Notwithstanding which, upon a Treaty between the French King and Cromwell the
Usurper in 1655. being obliged with all his Retinue to leave the French
Dominions, and invited into Flanders by Don Juan of Austria, he there served
under him, against the French King, then leagued with the English Rebels
against Spain; where his Magnanimity and Dexterity in Martial Affairs though
unsuccessful) were very eminent.

In the year 1660. came over with the King into England, and being, Lord High
Admiral in the year 1665. in the War against the United States of the
Netherlands, commanded in Person the whole Royal Navy, on the Sea, between
England and Holland, where with incomparable valor, and extraordinary hazard
of his own Royal Person; after a most sharp Engagement, he obtained a signal
Victory over the whole Dutch Fleet, commanded by Admiral Opdam, who perished
with his own, and many more Dutch Ships in that Fight.

He married Anne, the Eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon, late Lord
High Chancellor of England, which Lady is deceased; by whom he had a numerous
Issue; whereof are living first the Lady Mary, now Princess of Orange, Born
April 30. 1662. whose Godfather was Prince Rupert, and Godmothers the Duchess
of Buckingham, and Ormond: His Royal Highnesses other Daughter is the Lady
Anne, Born in Feb. 1664. whose Godfather was Gilbert, then Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury: Her Godmothers were the young Lady Mary her Sister, and the
Duchess of Monmouth. This present Duchess has had several Children, but are
all dead: Her Royal Highness is Daughter to the Duke of Modena in Italy.

The Titles of His Royal Highness are Duke of Albany and York, Earl of Vlster,
Lord High Admiral of Scotland, etc.

Of the Prince of Orange.
Next to the Duke of York and his Issue, is William of Nassaw, Prince of
Orange, only Issue of the deceased Princess Royal, Mary, Eldest Daughter to
King Charles the First, and wedded 1641. to William of Nassaw, Commander in
Chief of all the Forces of the States General, both by Land and by Sea.

His Highness the present Prince was Born Nine days after his Father's Death,
on the 14th day of November 1650. had for his Godfathers, the Lords States
General of Holland and Zealand, and the Cities of Delph, Leyden, and Amsterdam.

His Governess was the Lady Stanhop, then Wife to the Here Van Hemvliet: At
Eight years of Age was sent to the University of Leyden.

His yearly Revenue is about 60000 l. sterling, besides Military Advantages: He
is a valorous Prince, and a great example of Valor and Courage; besides, a
great lover of Soldiers.

Of the Princess Henrietra.
The next Heir (after the fore named) to the Crown of Scotland, is the Princess
Henrietta her Issue, who we Born the 16th day of June 1664. at Exeter, during
the heat of the Late Rebellion: After the surrender of Exeter, conveyed to
Oxford, and thence 1646. to London, whence with her Governess the Lady
Dalkeith, she escaped into France, was there educated, as became her high Birth
and Quality; but being left wholly to the care and maintenance of the Queen her
Mother at Paris, embraced the Romish Religion.

At the Age of sixteen was married to the only Brother of the French King, the
Illustrious Prince Philip, then Duke of Aujou, till the death of the Uncle, and
now Duke of Orleans, whose Revenue is 1100000 Livers Tournois, besides his
Appanage.

Her Portion was 40000 l. sterling. her Jointure to be the sa^e with the Duchess
Dowager of Orleans: This Princess had one Daughter who is now married to the
King of Spain.

Of the Prince Elector Palatine.
There being left alive no more of the Offspring of King Charles the First,
the next Heirs of the Crown of Scotland, are the Issue, and Descendants of
Elizabeth, late Queen of Bohemia; only Sister to the said King, who was married
to Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, afterward styled King of Bohemia;
whose Eldest Son was Charles Lodowick, Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine,
commonly called the Palsegrave, from the High Dutch Psaltzgraff, Palatii comes;
was Born the 22d of December. 1617. at Heydelberg, and afterward at the Age of
three or four years conveyed thence into the Countries of Wittenberg and
Brandenburg, then into Holland; and at the Hague, and at the University of
Leyden, was educated in a Princely manner: At the Age of Eighteen years, came
into England, was created Knight of the Garter; about two years after, fought a
Battle at Vlotta in Westphalia.

In the year 1637. passing incognito through France, to take possession of
Brisach upon the Rhine, which the Duke of Saxon Weymar intended to deliver up
unto him; together with the Command of his Army: he was by the quick-sighted
Cardinal Richlieu discovered at Moulins, and thence sent back Prisoner to the
Bois de Vincennes, where after twenty three weeks Imprisonment, he was by the
mediation of the King of Great Britain, set at Liberty.

In the year 1643. he came again into England, and with the King's secret
Consent, (because the King could not continue unto him the wonted Pension,
whilst the Rebels possessed the greatest part of His Majesty's Revenues) made
his Address to, and abode with the disloyal part of the Lords and Commons at
Westminster, until the Murder of the said King, and the Restoration of the
Lower Palatinate, according to the famous Treaty of Munster, for which he was
constrained to quit all his Right to the upper Palatinate, and accept of an
Eighth Electorship, at a juncture of Time, when the King of Great Britain (had
he not been engaged at home by an impious Rebellion) had been the most
considerable of all others at that Treaty, and this Prince, his Nephew, would
have had the greatest Advantages there.

In the year 1650. he espoused the Lady Charlotte, at Cassele Daughter to the
Landgrave of Hessen; he had one Son named Charles, who is now present Prince
Palatine of the Rhine; a hopeful and magnanimous Prince: He had likewise one
Daughter named Charlotte. This being all the Issue he left behind him.

Of Prince Rupert.
Next to the Issue of the Prince Elector Palatine, is Prince Rupert, Born at
Prague the 17th of December 1619. not long before that very unfortunate Battle
there fought, whereby not only all Bohemia was lost, but the Palatine Family,
was for almost thirty years dispossessed of all their possessions in Germany.

At Thirteen years of Age he marched with the then Prince of Orange, to the
Siege of Rhineberg; afterward in England was created Knight of the Garter.

At the Age of Eighteen he Commanded a Regiment of Horse in the German Wars,
and in the Battle of Vlotta 1638. being taken by the Imperialists under the
Command of Count Hatzfield; he continued a Prisoner above three years.

In 1642. returning into England, made General of the Horse to the King's
Fights, and Defeats Colonel Sands near Worcester: Routed the Rebels Horse at
Edgehill; took Cirencester; raised the Siege of Newark; recovered Lichfield,
and Bristol; raised the long Siege before Latham-house; fought the Battle at
Marston-Moor; was created Earl of Holderness, and Duke of Cumberland, after the
extinction of the Male-line of the Cliffords 1643.

Finally, The King's Forces at Land, being totally defeated, he transported
himself into France, and was afterward made Admiral of such Ships of War, as
submitted to King Charles the Second, to whom after several disasters at Sea,
and wonderful preservations, he returned to Paris 1652. where, and in Germany,
sometimes at the Emperor's Court, and sometimes at Heydelberg, he passed his
time in Princely Studies and Exercises, till the Restoration of His Majesty
now Reigning; after which, returning into England, was made a Privy Councillor
in 1662. and in 1666. being joined Admiral with the Duke of Albemarl, first
attackt the whole Dutch Fleet, with his Squadron, in such a bold resolute way,
that he put the enemy soon to flight.

He enjoyes a Pension from His Majesty of 4000 l. per annum.

After Prince Rupert the next Heirs to the Crown of Scotland, are three French
Ladies. Daughters of Prince Edward deceased, who was a younger Son of the Queen
of Bohemia, whose Widow the Princess Dowager, Mother to the said three Ladies,
is Sister to the Late Queen of Poland, Daughter and Coheir to the last Duke of
Nevers in France, amongst which three Daughters, there is a Revenue of about
12000 l. sterling a year.

There was two Daughters of Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who being
unmarried, are deceased.

The last is the Princess Sophia, youngest Daughter to the Queen of Bohemia,
Born at the Hague 1630. and in 1659. wedded to John Duke of Lunenberg, and free
Prince of Germany, Heir to the Duchy of Brunswick, by whom she has Sons and
Daughters; she is said to be one of the most accomplished Ladies in Europe.

Having this particular Account of all the nearest in Blood to the Crown of
Scotland, being the Issue of King James the Sixth, and King Charles the First,
it will not be amiss to relate these that are descended of the Daughter of King
James the Second (since whom, till the Queen of Bohemia, no collateral branch
sprung from the Royal Family of whom any Issue remains.)

James, Lord Hamilton, was married to the Daughter of King James the Second,
and had Issue; first James created Earl of Arran, whose Son was the Duke of
Chastelherault, from whom, by Two Sons, are descended the Families of Hamilton
and Abercorn, and by Two Daughters the Families of Huntley and Lauderdale: And
by an Act of Parliament, signed by all the Three Estates (the Original whereof
is yet extant) in the Reign of Queen Mary. The Duke of Chastelheraults Family
is declared next the Queen and her Issue, the Rightful Heir of the Crown.

The Sister of King James the Third bare likewise to the Lord Hamilton a
Daughter, married to the Earl of Lennox, from whom descended the Family of
Lennox: There is no otther branch of the Royal Family, since it was in the Line
of the Stewarts, except the Earl of Cassils his Family, whose Ancestor the Lord
Kennedy married King James the firsts Sister; from which Marriage that Family
is descended. And so much of the Royal Family.

CHAP. V.
Of the Chief Officers of State, of the Court of Justice. The Manner of
Elections of the Members in Parliament, and Riding of Parlialiament. Of the
Privy Council. Of the Senators of the College of Justice. Of the Justice Court
of the Exchequer.

THE Government of the Kingdom being wholly in the Crown, the King administers
it by his officers of State, and Privy Council. The Officers of State are Eight.

The first is the Lord Chancellor, who is Keeper of the Great Seal, and
President in all Courts, wherever he is: This Office was in the Person of
John, Duke of Rothes, lately deceased.

The Second Officer is the Lord High Treasurer, who governs the Revenue, and
presides in the Exchequer. This Office is now in Commission.

The Third Officer is the Lord Privy Seal, who is at present John Duke of Athol.

These Three take place of all the Nobility.

The Fourth Officer is the Lord Secretary, who keeps the Signet, and is a Lord
by his Office, and takes place of all of his Rank: The Office of Secretary is
executed by the Right Honorable Alexander Earl of Murray.

The Fifth Officer is the Lord Clerk of Registers, who has the charge of all
the public Records, Rolls and Registers, and Names of all the Clerks of
Parliament, and Session, and the Keepers of Public Registers: This Office is
executed by Sir Thomas Murray of Glendoick.

The Sixth Officer is the King's Advocate, who is also called the Lord
Advocate: He is commonly a Judge, except in cases in which the King is
concerned, and in these, he pleads in the King's Name: The present Lord
Advocate is Sir George Mackenzie of Rose-haugh.

The Seventh Officer is the Lord Treasurer Deputy, who is Assistant to the Lord
High Treasurer, and is a check upon him, and presides in the Exchequer in his
absence. This Office is executed by Charles Maitland of Hatton.

The Eighth Officer is the Lord Justice Clerk, who assists the Lord Justice
General in Criminal Causes. The present Justice Clerk is Rich. Maitland Esquire;

All these have the Title of Lord, and the Precedence of all under Noble men,
and their Eldest Sons.

Of the Courts of Justice.
The Chief and Supreme Court of Justice, is the High Court of Parliament; which
is made up of Three Estates.

The first is the Ecclesiastical, that of Old, consisted of Bishops, and
Miter'd Abbots, but since the Reformation, consists only of Archbishops and
Bishops.

The second Estate is the Nobility; who were anciently divided into the greater
Barons, and the lesser: (for every man that holds Lands of the Crown, with a
privilege of holding a Court much like the Lord of a Manor in England, is
called a Baron) and all were obliged to appear personally in Parliament,
(Proxies never being allowed by the Law of Scotland) and give the King Counsel:
This proved a very hard burden to the small Barons, upon which they desired to
be excused from their Attendance in Parliament: And this was granted them as a
favor in King James's the first Reign: And though by that Act they might have
sent two, or three, or more, to represent them, from every Shire, yet they made
no use of that for above 150 years: But King James the Sixth, to balance the
Nobility, got them restored to that Right; so that ever since there are two
sent from every Shire, who are Commissioners of the Shires.

The third Estate is the Buroughs, every one of which chooses one Commissioner
or Burgess, only the City of Edinburgh, as the Metropolis, chooses two.

Elections of Members of Parliament.
The Parliament is summoned by Proclamation, made at the Head Borough of every
Shire, forty days before they meet; upon which the Shires and Buroughs meet
about their Elections: Every one that holds Lands of the Crown, that in the
Rolls of the Taxation (the Ancient Name of Subsidies and Assessments) are
valued at forty shillings Scottish Money of Taxation to the King, which will be
in real value about ten pounds sterling a year, is an Electour, or may be
Elected, so he be rightly vested in the Land, or (according to the Scottish
terms) infeoft, and seized, and be not at the King's Horn (that is, under an
Outlawry.) The Electours subscribe the Commissions they give, and so their
Commissioner is returned; and if there be Cross Elections, the Parliament is
only Judge. In the Buroughs the Common Council of the Town makes the Election.

The Manner of the Riding of the Parliament.
When the day comes in which the first Sessions of each Parliament is to be
held, the Regalia, The Crown, Scepter and Sword of State, which are kept in the
Castle of Edinburgh, are brought down in State to the King's Palace, the Coach
in which they are, being well guarded by a File of Musketeers; every one who
pass the Coach being uncovered; and are carried by three of the Antientest
Earls that are upon the place, bare-headed, before the King or his
Commissioner: In the Great Court, before the King's Palace, all the Members in
Parliament do mount on horseback with foot-cloaths. The Burgesses Ride first,
being allowed one Lackey apiece; two Trumpeters in their Coats bare-headed; two
Pursevants in their Coats bare-headed usher the way; the Commissioners from
Shires Two and Two. The Officers of State, (not Noble men) are next in order.
The Lords and Barons of Parliament; the Bishops, the Viscounts, the Earls, and
the two Archbishops; all of them Two and Two: Next are four Trumpeters in their
Coats, bare-headed, Two and Two and Two; four Pursevants in their Coats,
bare-headed, Two and Two; six Heralds in the^r Coats, bare-headed, Two and Two;
the Gentleman Usher bare headed; Lion King at Arms, with his Coat and Robes,
and Foot-Mantle, and his Battoon in his hand, bare-headed; the Sword of State,
the Scepter and the Crown, carried by three of the Antientest of the Nobility;
on each side the Honors, three Mace bearers bare-headed; a Noble man
bare-headed, with a Purse, and in it, the Lord High Commissioner his
Commiss^on. Then last of all the Lord High Commissioner, with the Dukes and
Marquesses on his Right and Left hand: When the King is present, the Master of
the Horse Rides easy, but a l^ttle aside.

It is ordered there be no shooting, under the highest pains and penalties that
day, neither displaying of Ensigns, nor beating of Drums, during the whole
Cavalcade: The Officers of State (not being Noble men) Ride in their Gowns: The
whole Members Ride covered, except those that carry the Honors. The highest
degree, and the most Honorable of that Degree Ride last.

Every Duke has eight Lackeys, every Marquess six, every Earl four, every
Viscount three, every Lord three, every Commissioner for Shires two, every
Commissioner for Buroughs one, every Noble man to have a Gentleman to hold up
his Train: They may have their Pages also.

The Two Archbishops to have each of them eight Lackeys; every other Bishop
three; and if they please they may have a Gentleman to hold up their Trains.

The Noble men's Lackeys have over their Liveries, short Velvet Coats, with
their Badges, Crests and Motto's, done in Plate or embroidered, on their back
and breast.

The great Officers of State, Ride up from the Abbey, the King's Palace, about
half an hour before the Cavalcade, in their Robes, attended with their friends
on horseback, waiting in the Parliament House: When the Commissioner enters the
House, the Lord Chancellor takes his own Purse, and ushers him from the Bar to
the Throne: When the King is present, the Lord Chance^lor receives His Majesty
at the door of the Parliament House, and ushers him up to the Throne.

The whole Members of Parliament wait on the High Commissioner in the Great
Hall; the Noblemen in their Robes.

They return in the same order back to the Palace; only the Constable and
Marshall Ride on the Commissioners Right and Left hand, with Caps of
Permission: The Lord Chancellor and Lord Privy Seal stay behind, until all
march away, and then return in the same State to the Palace, as they Ride to
the Parliament house.

When the King Rides in Person, the Lord Chancellor Rides, bearing the Great
Seal: but this is not done before a Commissioner.

When the King is present, the Marquesses and Dukes Ride after the Earls; but
if His Majesty's Commissioner be present, they follow him at some distance, or
on his Right and Left hand. After the King or his Commissioner is received by
the Lord Chancellor, he is seated in a Throne, six steps high, with a State
over it: And in the first step under him, in a Bench, sits the Lord Chancellor,
with other Officers of State, on both hands of him: In the next step under
these sit the Lords of Sessions, or Judges: On the Right hand of the Throne is
the Bishops Bench, that rises up in two rows of Benches: On the highest the two
Archbishops sit, and on the lower sit the Bishops, according to the Dignity of
their Sees.

On the Left hand of the Throne there is another great Bench, of three steps,
and rows of Benches, on which sits the Nobility, according to their Precedence.

In the middle of the four there are two Tables; on the one whereof the Regalia
are laid, and in two great Chairs by them, sit the Constable and the Marshall;
at the other Table sits the Lord Clerk of Registers, with his Deputy Clerks,
who are the Clerks of the Parliament.

There are also Forms placed on the Floor; these on the Right side are for the
Commissioners of the Shires; and these on the Left for the Commissioners of the
Buroughs. When all are placed, the Parliament is fenced (as the phrase is) in
the King's Name: Then the King speaks to them, if he be present, in his Robes
with the Crown on his head, all standing up bare headed: But when a
Commissioner represents him, he is in an ordinary Suit, and stands and speaks
also bare-headed (nor is the Commissioner covered when there is pleading at the
Bar, but continues bare-headed as all the Members are) and tells them the
reason for which they are called together, which is enlarged by the Lord
Chancellor.

The next thing to be done, is the Choosing of the Lords of the Articles, which
is a matter of great importance, who are eight of every State, who have been
chosen different ways: Sometimes the Bishops did Choose the Eight Lords; and
sometimes the Nobility the Eight Bishops. At other times the Nobility did Choose
their own Eight, and the Bishops their Eight: But now it is settled by an Act of
Parliament, that the King, or His Commissioner names Eight of the Bishops; the
Lords Choose Eight for themselves; and these Sixteen do Choose Eight
Commissioners for the Shires, and Eight for the Buroughs: These Thirty two are
the Committee of Parliament, to prepare matters: When a Bill is drawn by them,
it is brought into the Parliament: Anciently all these Bills were brought in
the last day of the Parliament, on which, the Members Ride in the same State,
as they do the first, and the Bills being Read, they were put to the Votes of
the Parliament, and then were approved, or not; being approved, were presented
to the King, who by touching them with the Scepter, gives his assent to them,
which is done by his Commissioner in his absence; if he refuse to touch them,
they are of no force: Matters have been fully and freely debated in Parliament:
Sitting all in one House, every one answers distinctly to his Name, and gives
his Vote, which is in these terms, I approve, or not approve; only these who
are not satisfied one way or another, say Non liquet, which is a great ease to
those who are conscientious, and a common refuge to the cunning Politician: The
major Vote carries it: No Dissents or Protests are allowed in public Acts;
these are accounted Treasonable; but in private Acts that relate to men's
Properties and Rights, any one may protest for his Interest. After all business
is ended, the King or his Commissioner makes a Speech to the Parliament
Assembled, after which they are Dissolved.

Sometimes the King His Majesty makes use of a Convention of Estates, which can
make no Laws; only by this Meeting Impositions are laid upon the Subjects: they
do not Sit in State; and have been most in use before the Kings were Crowned.

Whatever Acts are passed in Parliament, or Convention of Estates, are to be
proclaimed soon after the Dissolution, at the public Market-Cross of
Edinburgh, by the Lion King at Arms, with a great deal of State and Ceremony;
after which they are obligatory on the Subjects: And it is Enacted, that none
of the Lieges shall presume to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the Three
Estates, or any of them in time coming, under the pain of Treason; the
Authority of the Parliament being the Supreme Court, it is not impertinent to
give a List of the Nobility of the Kingdom of Scotland, with their Precedence,
which is as follows; with their Surnames.

A List of the Nobility of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
Dukes.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Albany. The Duke of Hamilton; his Surname
Hamilton.


The Duke of Surnames Buccleuch Scot. Lauderdale Maitland. Lenox Lenox. Rothes
Lesley.

Marquesses and their Surnames.
The Marquess of Surnames Huntley Gordone. Douglas Douglas. Montross Grahame.
Athol Murray. The Earls of
Earls Surnames Argile Campbell Crawford Lindsey Errol Hay Marishall Keith
Southerland Southerland Mar Ereskine Airth Grahame Morton Douglass Buchan
Ereskine Glencairn Cunninghame Eglington Montgomery Cassiles Kennedy. Murray
Stewart Caithness Sinclare Nithisdale Maxwell Wintoune Seatoune Linlithgow
Livingstone Home Home Pearth Drummond Dumfermling Seatoune Wigtoun Fleming
Strathmore Lion Abercorn Hamilton. Roxborough Ker Kelly Ereskine Haddington
Hamilton Galloway Stewart Seaforth Mac-kenzy Louthian Ker Kinnoule Hay Loudoun
Campbell Dumfreis Creighton Queensbury Douglass Sterling Alexander Elgine Bruce
Southesk Carnaigy Traquair Stewart Ancram Ker Weimes Weimes Dalhousy Ramsey
Airly Ogilvy Callender Levingstone Carnwath Dalziel Finlator Ogilvy Leven
Lesley Annandale Johnstone Dysert Murray Panmuire Mauld Twedd^le Hay Northesk
Carnaigy Kincardin Bruce Forfar Douglass Balcarres Lindsey Middleton Middleton
Aboyne Gordone Tarras Scot Newburgh Livingstone Kilmarnock Boyd Dundonald
Cochraine Dumbarton Douglass Kintore Keith Broad Albyne Campbell. The Viscounts
of
Viscounts Surnames Faulkland Carey Dumbarr Constable Stormont Murray Kenmure
Gordone Arbuthnet Arbuthnet Frendaret Creightone Kingstone Seatoune Oxenford
Macgill Kilsyth Livingstone Irwing Campbell Dumblane Osborne Preston Grahame
Newhaven Sheene The Lords of
Lords Surnames Forbes Forbes Saltone Frazier Gray Gray Ochiltry Stewart
Cathcart Cathcart Sinclare Sinclare Mordington Douglass Semple Semple
Elphingstone Elphingstone Oliphant Oliphant Lovat Frazier Borthwick Borthwick
Rosse Rosse Torphighen Sandilands Spyne Lindsey Lindoris Lesley Balmerinoch
Elphingstone Blantyre Stewart Cardrosse Ereskine Burghly Balfour Maderty
Drummond Cranstone Cranstone Melvil Melvil Neaper Neaper Cameron Fairfax
Cramond Richardson Rae Macky Forrester Bailzy Petsligo -- Kirkudbright
Mac-cleland Frazier Frazier Bargany Hamilton Bamf Ogilvy Elibank Murray Dunkeld
Galloway Halcarton Falconer Belhaven Hamilton Abercromby Sandilands Carmichael
Carmichael Rollo Rollo Colvil Colvil Duffus Southerland Ruthven Ruthven
Mac-Donald Mackdonald Rutherford Rutherford Balanden Balanden Newark Lesley
Burntisland Weimes

Name.
Nobiles, quasi viri noscibiles, or notabiles: In all Christian Monar chies,
men that have been notable for courage, wisdom, wealth, and have been judged
fit, and worthy to enjoy certain privileges, titles, dignities, honors, etc.
above the common people, have been placed in an higher Orb, and have been as a
shreen between the King, and the inferior Subjects, to defend the one from
Insolences, and the other from Tyranny, to interpose by their Counsel, Courage
and Grandeur, where common persons dare not, ought not be so hardy; to support
the King, and defend the King and Kingdom with their Lives and Fortunes.

The Nobility of Scotland is called the Peerage of Scotland, because they are
all pares Regni, that is, nobilitate pares, though gradu impares.

Degrees.
The Degrees of the Nobility are only five, viz. Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount
and Baron: These are all Peers; but the four first are for State, Privilege,
and Precedence, above and before these who are Barons only.

Duke.
A Duke, in Latin Dux, a ducendo, Noblemen being anciently, either Generals
and Leaders of Armies in time of War, or Wardens of Marches, and Governors of
Provinces in time of Peace; afterward made so so for term of life.

A Duke is created by Patent, cincture of Sword, imposition of a Cap, and
Coronet of Gold on his head, and a Verge of Gold put into his hand.

Marquess.
Marchio, a Marquess, was first so called from the Government of Marches, and
Frontier Countries.

A Marquess is created by a cincture of a Sword, imposition of a Cap of Honor,
with a ^oronet, and delivery of a Charter or Patent.

Earls.
Earls anciently called Comites, because they were wont comitari Regem, to wait
upon the King for Counsel and Advice.

An Earl is created by the cincture of a Sword: A Mantle of State put upon him
by the King himself: A Cap and a Coronet put upon his head, and a Charter in
his hand.

Viscount.
Vice-Comes, quasi vice Comitis, gubernaturus Comitatem; a Viscount is so made
by Patent.

Barons.
The word Baron was used for Vir in the Laws of the Longobards, and of the
Normans; as at this day in the Spanish it is used for the same, so that a Baron
is vir (...), by excellency, or (...), vir notabilis and principalis.

Barons are sometimes made by Writ, when they are called to sit in Parliament,
but most usually by Parliament: All the forementioned Degrees have the title of
Lord: All Honors in Scotland are given by the King, who is the sole Fountain
of Honor.

None of these Honors bestowed on a Family by the King, can be lost, but by
want of Issue, or else by some heinous Crime of Treason, and then that Family
cannot be restored to their Blood but by the King.

The several Degrees of the Nobility, are differenced and distinguished one
from another, by their Titles and Ensigns of Honor.

A Duke has the Title of Grace; and being written unto, may be styled, Most
High, Potent an^ Noble Prince.

A Marquess, Most Noble and Potent Lord; an Earl, Most Noble and Potent Lord; a
Viscount, Right Noble and Potent Lord; and a Baron, Right Noble Lord.

Their Coronets are all different: A Baron has six Pearls upon the Circle: A
Viscount has his Circle of Pearls without number: An Earls Coronet has the
Pearls raised: The Marquess, a Pearl and Strawberry leaf round: And a Dukes
Coronet only Leaves without Pearls.

They are more especially distinguished by their Robes of Parliament, by their
several Guards on their Mantles, or short Cloaks about their shoulders: A Baron
has but two Guards; a Viscount two and a half; an Earl three; a Marquess three
and a half; and a Duke four.

Precedence.
Touching the Places or Precedences among the Nobility of Scotland, it is to be
observed, that Dukes amongst the Nobility have the first place, then
Marquesses, Dukes Eldest Sons, Earls, Marquesses Eldest Sons, Dukes Younger
Sons, Viscounts, Earls Eldest Sons, Marquesses Younger Sons, Barons, Viscounts
Eldest Sons, Earls Younger Sons, Barons Eldest Sons, Viscounts Younger Sons,
Barons Younger Sons. The Princes of the Blood, viz. the Sons, Grandsons,
Brothers, Uncles or Nephews of the King, and no further, having the Precedence
of all the Nobility. Yea, the natural or illegitimate Sons of the King, after
they are acknowledged by the King, take Precedence of all the Nobles under
those of the Blood Royal.

Moreover observe, that all Nobles of the same degree, take place according to
the seniority of their Creation; all Dukes Eldest Sons have the title of Earls;
and the Eldest Son of an Earl, has the title of the Earls Barony, and
sometimes of the Viscountry, according to the Patent.

Of His Majesty's Privy Council in the Kingdom of Scotland.
The Privy Council is chiefly employed about public Affairs, and are Judges of
Riots, and any disturbance given to the Peace of the Kingdom: Anciently the
Lords o^ the Session were the King's Council and so are styled Lords of Counci^
and Session. The Power of the Privy Council has been most raised since King
James got the Crown of England, that by reason of the King's necessary absence
from Scotland, the King has lodged much of His Power with His Privy Council.
Lawyers do plead the Causes of Riots before them; and when sentence is to be
given, every Privy Councillor gives his Vote, and the major Vote carries it.

Lords and others of His Majesty's present Privy Council of SCOTLAND.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Albany, etc. John Duke of Rothes, Lord
Chancellor. Alexander Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate. John Duke of
Athol, Lord Privy Seal. John Duke of Lauderdale, Presid. of the Council.
William Marquess of Douglass. James Marquess of Montross. Alexander Earl of
Murray, Secretary of State. Archbald E. of Argile. John E. of Errol. George E.
of Marischal. Charles E. of Mar. E. of Linlithgow. E. of Pearth. Patrick E. of
Strathmore. Robert E. of Roxburgh E. of Queensbury. E. of Ancram. James E. of
Airly. E. of Balcarras. William E. of Dondonald. E. of Kintore. E. of
Broadalbine. Archbald Lord Lorn. John Lord Livingstone. John Lord Bishop of
Edinburgh. James Lord Elphinstone. John Lord Rosse. Sir Charles Maitland of
Ha^tone Treasurer Deputy. Sir Thomas Murray of Glendoick, L. Clerk Register.
Sir George Mackenzy of Rosehaugh, L. Advocate. Richard Maitland Esquire; L. Justice
Clerk. Sir James Dalrumpell, Lord President of the Sessions. Sir George Gordon
of Haddo. Sir George Mackenzy of Tarbot. John Drummond of Londy. Lieutenant
General Dalziel. Sir George Kinnard of Rossy. Sir John Wachop of Nidry.


Of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
The Supreme Court of Judicature about the Property of the Subject, is called
the College of Justice, or the Session, which was anciently an ambulatory
Court, but was settled as it is now by King James the ^ifth Anno Christi 1532.
to consist of fourteen, (who are called Senators of the College of Justice,
or Lords of Council and Session) and a President; to whom are added the Lord
Chancellor, and four Lords of the Nobility; or as they usually call them, Lords
Extraordinary. The Extraordinary Lords have no Salary, and are not obliged to
Attendance; but when they come they have a Vote: This Court sits from the first
of June, till the last of July; and from the first of November, till
Christmas-Eve; and from the first of January, till the last of February: But
now by Act of Parliament the Summer Sessions are taken away, and in stead
thereof are henceforth to be kept in March: They sit from Nine of the Clock in
the Morning, till Twelve, all the days of the week, except Sunday and Monday.

There is an Outer-house, and an Inner. In the Outer-house there is a Bench,
where one of the Senators sits a week (and all of them except the President,
have their Turns in it,) who hears all Causes originally; and where the case is
clear, he gives sentence: But if it be difficult, or if either party desires
it, he reports it to the rest of the Senators, who either send out their Answer
by him, or if it be very intricate, and the parties, or either of them desire
it, do appoint it to be heard before themselves. This is a Court of great
dispatch. But besides the Judge upon the Bench, there is a side Bar; to which,
one of the Judges comes out by turns weekly, as in the former, and receives and
answers all Petitions and Bills: The Inner-house, where all the rest of the
Senators sit, is a Court of great State and Order: The Senators sit in a
semicircle in Robes; under them sit their Clerks, who write all the most
material heads of all that is pleaded at the Bar, where the pleadings are long,
and very learned. When the the Senators have (after all the parties are
removed) considered their arguments, they give their sentence, and the major
part carries it: Their final sentence determines all business in their Court,
there lying no Appeal from them, only the Parliament as the Supreme Court may
review and repeal their sentence; their decisive sentence are called Decreets,
from the Latin Decreta.

Senators of the present College of Justice.
The Lords Extraordinary,
The Lord Chancellor. The Duke of Athol. The D. of Lauderdale. The Earl of
Murray. The Earl of Argile.
The Lords Ordinary not Noblemen.
Sir James Dalrumpell, Lord President of the Session. Charles Maitland of
Hatton. Sir George Mackenzy of Rosehaugh. Sir Thomas Murray of Glendoick. Sir
James Foulis of Collington. Sir John Lockart of Castlehill. Sir Robert Nairn of
Strathurd. Sir James Foulis of Redford. Sir David Nevoy of Nevoy. Sir David
Balfour of Torret. Sir David Falconer of Newton. Sir John Gordon of Pitmedden.
Sir Roger Hogg of Harcus. Sir Andrew Birny of Saline. Sir George Gorden of
Haddo.
Of the Justice Court.
The next Supreme Court is the Justice Court, where all Criminals are tried: It
consists of a Lord Justice General, and of a Lord Justice Clerk, who is his
Assistant: The Earl of Argile had this Office by Inheritance; but King Charles
the First agreed with the said Earl, and gave him the hereditary Justiciariship
of of the High lands, for which he laid down his pretensions to the other. The
Lord Justice General is not obliged to serve in person, but may do it by
Deputies, and he commonly named two. This Order was changed Anno 1669. and by
Act of Parliament, four Judges were appointed to sit in this Court, with the
Lord Justice General, and the Lord Justice Clerk: All Trials for Life are in
this Court, which sits every Friday in the Time of Session in the Afternoon.
Here all the Subjects, Peers as well as Commons are tried. The difference
between a Peer and Commoner in their Trial in this Court, is this, viz. The
greater part of the Peers Jury (called by the Scottish Law an Assize) must be
Peers: The Jury is made up of 15: The Foreman, who is called the Chancellor of
Assize, gathers and reports the Votes: The major part determins the matter: The
present Justice General is the Earl of Queensbury.

Of the Exchequer.
The next Supreme Court is the Exchequer: That consists of the Lord Treasurer,
(or the Commissioners of the Treasury, when it is in commission) the Lord
Treasurer Deputy, and some Assistants, called the Lords of Exchequer, who have
little power, the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Treasurer Deputy usually carry
all matters in it as they please: Here all the King's Grants, Pensions, Gifts
of Wards, Letters, Patents, and such like are to be passed.

And these are the Supreme Civil Courts.

The Seat of these Courts is Edinburgh, which has been long the chief Seat of
the Government; and though the making of Circuits for giving Justice, has been
often begun, yet the charge it puts the Country to, is found a greater
inconvenience, than the bringing up all their Affairs to Edinburgh.

CHAP. VI.
Of Inferior Courts of the Sheriffdoms. The Names of the Sheriffs who are so
most by Inheritance. The Courts of Regality. A Barons Court.

NExt to these Supreme Courts, there are other Inferior Courts.

And first there are in all the Shires of Scotland, Sheriffs, who are the
Judges in all Matters of of Meum and Tuum, in Thefts, and in all lesser crimes;
as likewise in Murders, if the Murderer be taken in hot blood, as they call
it, when the person is newly slain: But though there lies no Appeal in this
Kingdom in any Court, yet there is somewhat equivalent to it; for the Supreme
Courts by a Writ, called an Advocation, may take any Cause out of the hands of
Inferior Judges, and order to be brought before themselves.

Most of the Sheriffs were anciently so by Inheritance, and it being in this
Kingdom no matter of charge, but of profit, it gave the Hereditary Sheriffs so
great a Power in their Shires, that our King of late has thought fit to agree
with many of these Sheriffs for their Rights, by which it comes to pass that
many of them now are in the King's Gift: The Sheriffs may either sit, and give
Judgment themselves, or do it by a Deputy, which they most commonly do, except
in some great cases: For the more full satisfaction of the Reader, it will not
seem superfluous here to give a List of the Shires or Counties of Scotland and
their Sheriffs.

Shires or Counties of Scotland, and their Sheriffs.
Shires Sheriffs The Shire of Edinburgh contains Middle Lothian. Charles
Maitland. The Shire of Berwick contains Mers. Earl of Home. The Shire of
Peeblis contains Tweddail. Earl of Tweddail. The Shire of Selkirk contains
the Forest of Etterick. -- Murray. The Shire of Roxburgh contains
Tiviotdale, Lidisdale, Eshdail, Eusdail. Duke of Buckleugh. The shire of
Dumfreis contains Nithisdail, and Anandail. E. of Queensbury. The shire of
Wigton contains the West part of Galloway. Sir Patrick Agnew of Lochnaw. The
shire of Air contains Kyle, Carrict, and Cunninghame. E. Dumfreis. The shire
of Renfrew contains the Barony of Renfrew. E. of Eglington. The shire of
Lanerick contains Clidsdail. D. Hamilton. The shire of Dumbritton contains
Lenox. D. of Lenox. The shire of Bute contains the Isles of Bute and Arran.
Sir James Stewart of Bute. The shire of Innerara contains Argile, Lorn,
Kintyre, the most part of the West Isles, all Ila, Jura, Mull, Wyist, Teriff,
Coll, Lismore, etc. E. of Argile. The shire of Perth contains Athol, Goury,
Glenshee, Strath-Ardell, Broad, Albine, Ramach, Balhider, Glenurqhuay,
Stormont, Menteith, and Strath-Yern. D. of Atholl. The shire of Striveling
lies on both sides the River Forth. E. of Mar. The shire of Linlithgow, West
Lothian. John Hope of Hoptoun. The shire of Clackmanan contains a small part
of Fife, lying on the River Forth toward Striveling. Sir D. Bruce of
Clackmanan. The shire of Kinross contains so much of Fife as lies between
Lo^hleiven, and the Ochell Hills. E. of Morton. The shire of C^uper contains
the rest of Fife. D. of Rothes. The shire of Forfar contains Angus, with its
pertinents, as Glen Ila, ^len*Esk, Glen-Prossin. E. of Southesk. The shire of
Kinkardin cont. Mernis. E. Marshall. The shire of Aberdeen contains Mar,
with its pertinents, as Birse, Glentaner, Glen-Muik, Strath-Dee, Strath-Don,
Bray of Mar and Cromar, most part of Buchan, Forumarten, Gareoch, and
Strathbogie-land. E. Dumfermline. The shire of Bamf contains a small part of
Buchan, Strath-Dovern, Boyn, Enzy, Strath-Awin and Balveny. Sir James Baird of
Auchmedden. The shire of Elgine contains the Eastern part of Murray. Robert
Dumbar of -- The shire of Nairn contains the West part of Murray. -- The
shire of Innerness contains Badenoch, Lochabyr and the South part of Ross. E.
of Murray. The shire of Cromarty contains a small part of Ross lying on the
South side of Cromarty Firth. Sir John Vrquart of Cromarty. The shire of Tayne
contains the rest of Ross, with the Isles of Sky, Jews, and Harrigh. E. of
Seaforth. The shire of Dornoch contains Southerland and Strath-Naver. E. of
Southerland. The shire of Weik contains Cathness. E. of Cathness. The shire
of Orkney contains all the Isles of Orkney and Schetland. -- The Constabulary
of Haddington contains East Lothian and Lauderdale. D. of Lauderdale.
Stewartries. Stewards. Strath-Yern. E. of Pearth. Monteith. E. of Monteith
Annandail. E. of Annand. Stewartries Stewards Kirkudbright contains the East
part of Galloway. E. Nithisdail. Baileries. Bailiffs. Kyle. -- Carrict. E. of
Cassiles. Cunninghame. E. Eglington.

Court of Regalities.
There are also many Regalities in the Kingdom, where the Lord of the Regality
has a Royal Jurisdiction within his grounds, and power of Life and Death;
besides many other great immunities and privileges. This began chiefly in
Church lands: for all the Bishops, and most of the Abbots had these Regalities
granted them; some of the ancient and great Peers, got the same power bestowed
upon them; and many more have lately got their Lands erected into Regalities.

The Judge is called the Bailiff of the Regality, who sits as often as there is
cause. Most of the Bailiffs of the Regalities of Bishoprics are so by
inheritance: These being given by the King, a Churchman not being allowed to
give a Commission in causa sanguinis.

A Barons Court.
Besides these, every one that holds a Barony of the King, has a Baron Court,
in which le^^er matters are also judged; and they may fine and distrain.
Anciently these Baron Courts might judge of Life and Death; but now it is not
so. For all the other particulars that relate to the Regalities, Superiorities,
and other things of the Laws of Scotland; such as are curious, may find full
satisfaction in that most learned work of Craigs De Jure Feudali, written in
Latin, and printed at Edinburgh, in Folio.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Buroughs of Scotland.

Of the Buroughs Royal, Buroughs of Regality, and Buroughs of Barony. The
Names of the Free Incorporations or Buroughs Royal.

THE Buroughs of Scotland are of three sorts, either Royal Buroughs;
Buroughs of Regality, or Buroughs of Barony. The former have Commissioners in
Parliament, and besides, are a State apart; for they meet yearly in a
Convention, called the Convention of Buroughs, from which a Commissioner comes
from every one of them: There they make Laws for themselves about Trade, and
other things relating to their Corporations: They hold these Meetings in a
Circu^t, around the Chief, or as they call them, the Head-Burroughs; and at the
end of one Convention, they name the time and place for the next.

In these Buroughs there is a Provost (or Mayor) who has the Chief Power; and
there are four Bailiffs (or Aldermen) that are next to him in the Government:
There is also a Dean of Gild, named among the Romans Aedilis, who is the Chief
Judge among the Merchants; likewise a Treasurer and a Common Council, the one
half of which is chosen usually by the Merchants, the other half by the Trades
men once every year: The Trades men have a Court of their own, in which there
is one from every Trade, who is called the Deacon of the Trade, and they choose
one among themselves, to be President in all their Meetings, and Affairs, who
is called Deacon Conveener; by his Order they are to meet, as their business
requires: These Deacons are chosen yearly by all the Freemen of their Trade,
and have a little jurisdiction over them: There are in most Buroughs, great
and dangerous Animosities and Factions, between the Merchants and Tradesmen
upon the account of precedence, in public days, when they meet.

Buroughs of Regality.
The Buroughs of Regality are the Towns, where these Lords of Regalities hold
their Courts: The Chief Magistrates are named by the Lord, the rest they choose
themselves:

They have also great freedoms, little inferior to the Royal Buroughs; only
they have no Commi^^ioners in Parliament.

Buroughs of Barony.
The Buroughs of Barony are Market Towns; where the Lord of the Barony names
some of the Magistrates; and the Corporation chooses the rest. In all these
Buroughs the Magistracy is no matter of Burden, nor Charge, but of Power and
Advantage; from whence arise great Factions amongst all of them in most of the
Buroughs.

A Catalogue of the Free Corporations, or Royal Bu^roughs in Scotland.
In the Lothians.
Edinburgh Linlithgow Haddington Northberwick Dumbar
In Fife.
Saint Andrews Couper Kirkaldy Crail Anstruther Pittenweeme Dysart Earlesferry
Kinghorn Innerkeithing Burnt Island
In Fife.
Queens-Ferry Dumfermling Culrosse Clackmanan
In Angus.
Dundee Montross Forfar Brichen Arbroath
In Galloway.
Kirkudbright Wigton Withthorn Stranraver
In Clidsdail.
Glasgow Lanerick
In Murray.
Elgin Nairn Forress
In Ranfrowshire.
Ranfrow P^sley Ruglen
In Mar.
Aberdeen Kintore
In Boyn.
Bamf Cullen
In Rosse.
Innerness Tayne
Air in Kyle. Irwing in Cunningham. Rothsay in Bute. Dumbarton in Lenox.
Innerrara in Argile. Jedbu^gh in Tiviotdail. Peebles in Tweddail. Selkirk in
Forrestshire. Striveling upon Forth. Dumblain in Monteith. Dornoch in
Southerland.
In Annandale.
Annand Lochmabane
In Nithisdail.
Dumfreis Sanqhuar
Bervy in Mernis. Innerowry in Gare^ch.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Court of Admiralty, and of the Government of the Militia.

THE Court of Admiralty sits in Leith, the chief Port of this Kingdom, but has
not much business, except in times of War to judge of Prizes. The present High
Admiral is His Royal Highness the Duke of Albany.

The Military Government.
The Military Government in Scotland of every County is not lodged in one
Person; but the Regiments of Foot are commanded by Colonels, and the Troops of
Horse by Captains, named by the King, without any dependence upon one
Lord Lieutenant, nor are there Deputy Lieutenants; yea, the
Lieutenant-Collonels, and other Officers are named by the King, as is usual in
an Army, and perhaps the Militia in this Kingdom are as well governed and
disciplined, as in any other Kingdom; the People of Scotland being naturally
stout and resolute, which make them so much valued beyond Seas; the only School
of War to them since the conjunction of this Island under one King. They are
upon all occasions ready for the Kings Service; naturally being great lovers of
the Royal Family, having so just a r^ght to the Crown, by an uninterrupted
descent for so many Generations, as cannot be paralleled almost in the whole
world; what happen*d in the late Rebellion. Where the Schismatics so highly
deluded with fair promises, and reiterated invitations from England, being as
time Brethr^n in a Solemn League and Covenant, the issue proving solemnly
destructive to the ancient Government, and constitutions of both Kingdoms, and
to the perpetual scandal of Christianity itself, in that the best of Kings was
at last murdered by these hellish contrivances: I say what happened then,
cannot be recorded as an infamy upon the whole Kingdom, being there were ten
thousands in that ancient Kingdom, who never bowed their knee to that Baal, the
Idol of these unhappy times: many of the Ancientest of our Nobility were
sufferers, to the utter ruin of their Estates and Families, a great many lost
their lives under the King's Lord Commissioner, the worthy and valiant Marquess
of Montross, who himself was barbarously murdered, by that wicked, insulting
crew: being it is manifest by the account that all the writers of these times
gives, that it was but a part, and that indeed the scum of the People, who had
taken upon them at that time to shake off their Duty and Loyalty; no man in his
right senses, or understanding, will impute any of those most inhumane
proceedings and practices, to the People of the whole Nation, who in all
emergencies since his Majesty's happy Restoration, have given such clear
demonstrations of their Loyalty upon all occasions; have proved to the
everlasting infamy of that prevailing party in those late confusions, that they
were but an handful, and that the most inconsiderable part of the Kingdom:
whoever therefore will be so foolish, as to evidence his ignorance of the
proceedings of these in that dreadful Rebellion, by imputing their machinations
and cruelties to the general consent of the Kingdom, let him always be
esteemed as one that is overruled by malice and passion, thirsting after
nothing so much, as to make People believe that His Majesty now reigning, has
no Dutiful Subjects in that his most ancient Kingdom; he may be esteemed an
enemy to the Government, who would inveigle into the minds of the People that
His Majesty is not sure of the Dutiful assistance of his Subjects of that
Kingdom, if need require: many times the Loyal Subjects of Scotland, when they
are abroad suffer reproach for the barbarous proceedings of these unhappy
times; but this is much to their comfort, that it is only from the ignorant, and
deluded multitude, and rabble; let none so much as think that the King wanted
assistance of his Loyal Subjects in the time of that Rebellion, and let not the
Kingdom any more suffer an ignominy for the abominable knavery of a few, who to
this day are stigmatized for their roguery, and their posterity rendered
contemptible: it is not necessary to run out in vindication of the Loyalty of
the People of Scotland in this enterprise, their Actions of late when the Kings
service required, have sufficiently given proof to the world of the same; and
at present, the King has at command by Act of Parliament twenty thousand foot,
and two thousand Horse with forty days provision to march into any of His
Majesty's Dominions, if need require.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church.

IN the Year 1660 after a most grievous burden of that insupportable yoke,
which our sins had prepared, and other men's sins had laid on us; after the
Kingdom had groaned nine years under the Tyranny of these Usurpers, who to
complete our miseries, imprisoned, Banished, and miserably butchered the Loyal
Subjects, under the names of Malignants, Traitors, and Rebels; their Estates
and Lands forfeited, and sold, their Houses garrisoned, plundered, and burnt,
and their posterity almost reduced to poverty, and misery; Alas! Our
Plough-shares were metamorphosed into Swords: after all these calamities it
pleased Almighty God to remember us in mercy; and after the Church had suffered
an Eclipse for twenty four years; By the miraculous Restoration of our most
Sacred Sovereign to the Throne of his Ancestors for the good of this Church
and Kingdom, then it pleased God to restore the ancient Hierarchy of the
Church. His Majesty that he might settle his Kingdom, summoned his first
Parliament to meet at Edinburgh, the first of Jan. 1661 giving a Commission
under the great Seal to John, Earl of Middleton, to represent his Person
therein: in the first Session, the Solemn League and Covenant was condemned, as
an unlawful, and wicked Oath, imposed on the Subjects by a prevailing Faction,
contrary to Authority: The pretended Triennial Parliaments from 1640 to 1649,
with the assembly of Glasgow 1638 etc. were annulled, the unjust transactions
at New Castle 1646, and 1647 condemned, Duke Hamiltons engagement 1648
approved, the pretended forfeitures of the Marquesses of Huntley, and Montross,
the E. of Forth, Barrons of Glengarey Haddo, Dunerub, Delgaty, Harthill, and
others who suffered for their Loyalty, and all Acts made in prejudice of Lawful
Authority, were rescinded.

1662. In the second Session, the Ancient Ecclesiastical Government of the
Church was restored, to the exceeding joy and satisfaction of all his Majesty's
good Subjects: This was done by an Almighty Power; the Covenanters having so
wonderfully defaced the Government of the Church, and rendered the Dignity and
Office of a Bishop contemptible in the eyes of the People, that His Majesty's
Restoration being so miraculously without shedding of blood, to be restored to
his own Kingdoms, the Government of the Church with so little, or no
disturbance settled; these things being considered, ought to be kept as
memorials, not written superficially, but with the point of a Diamond in the
hearts of all Loyal Subjects.

Of the Archbishop of St. Andrews.
At this time Dr. James Sharp, Professor of Divinity at St. Andrews (who had
been Professor of Philosophy in St. Leonards College) was preferred Archbishop
of St. Andrews, Primate, and Metropolitan of Scotland, who was murdered after
a most barbarous manner by some Ruffians in May 1679.

Upon his Murder, Alexander Archbishop of Glasgow, was translated to St.
Andrews, who now governs the Sea.

The present Chapter of St. Andrews (the old one being dissolved with the
Priory in the time of the Reformation) had its beginning Anno 1606. by Act of
Parliament in King James's the Sixth Reign, and consists of the persons
following.

The Prior of Portmollock, Dean.
The Archdeacon of St. Andrews.

The Vicar of
St. Andrews. Couper. Crail. Dysert. Kircaldy. Pittenweem. Lewchars. Kinkell.
Dearsie. Fordun. Kennoway.
The Vicar of
Abercromby. Forgund. Foulis. Rossie. Balmerinoch. Longforgund. Eglisgreig, and
others to the number of twenty four.
The Cathedral, which was an ancient and magnificent Fabric, was demolished
with the Priory; since which time the Parish Church serves instead of it.

The Diocese of St. Andrews contains the whole County of Fife, part of
Perthshire, and part of Angus, and Mernis.

The Coat of Arms belonging to the Archiepiscopal See of St. Andrews, is a
Saphir, a Saltier Pearl, being the Cross of St. Andrew the Apostle.

Clergy, their Dignity.
The Spiritual Function, according to the practice of all civilized Nations,
has ever had the preference and precedence of the Laity, and has in all times
been reputed the first of the Three Estates. All Subjects may be divided into
Clergy and La^ty; the Laity subdivided into Nobility and Commonalty.

Names.
The Clergy are so called, because they are Gods, (...), or Portion: For
although all Christians may be styled God's Portion, as well as God's Servants,
yet amongst Christians, these persons, whom God has set apart, and separated
from common use, to his service, to be, as it were, his domestic servants, are
more peculiarly the Lord's Portion; and therefore from the first Age of
Christianity, the persons so set apart, have been called Clerici, Clerks.

Degrees.
As in the State, so in the Church, the Laws and Constitutions of Scotland
would not that there should be a parity and equality of all persons; therefore
it is that all Bishops are Peers of the Realm: The Archbishop of St. Andrews
takes place of all Dukes next to the Blood Royal In writing and speaking to him
is given the Title of Grace (as it is to all Dukes) and Most Reverend Father in
God; as likewise the same Title of Honor is due to the Archbishop of Glasgow:
All the rest of the Bishops take place of Barons: The Archbishop of Glasgow
taking place next to the Lord Chancellor.

All Bishops have one privilege above and beyond all ^ay Lords, viz. That in
whatsoever Christian Princes Dominions they come, their Episcopal Dignity and
Degree is acknowledged; and they may, Quatenus Bishops, confer Orders, etc.
whereas no Lay-Baron, Marquess, or Duke, is in Law acknowledged such, out of
the Dominions of the Prince who conferred these Honors.

The Revenues of the Scottish Clergy at present, are generally very small and
insufficient: Many secret and indirect means have been used to lessen their
Rents, through corrupt Compositions and Compacts: They were most miserably
robbed and spoiled of the greatest part of their Lands, until King James the
Sixth, who after he was come to Age, took particular care in restoring to some
Bishoprics, what was most unjustly kept from them: Yea, at this day, a
Gentleman of 200 l. Land Rent yearly, will not change his worldly estate and
condition with several Bishops: A Shopkeeper, a common Artisan, will hardly
change theirs with ordinary Pastors of the Church.

The great diminution of the Revenues of the Clergy, and the little careof
augmenting and defending the Patrimony of the Church, is the great reproach and
shame of the Scottish Reformation, and will, it is to be feared, prove one day,
the ruin of Church and State.

The Observations of the judicious Mr. Hooker, concerning the English Church,
may be applied to ours: (How the Church was every day robbed of her Dues, and
that it was then an Opinion rife, that to give to the Church smelt of Judaism,
and Popery, and to take from the Church what our Ancestors had given, was
Reformation.) This pious Divine declared, that what Moses says in the 90th
Psalm, was likely to be verified of God's Service and Religion: The Time
thereof may be Threescore years and Ten; if it continue till Fourscore, it will
be but small joy to those that shall then behold the condition of the Church.
The best Historian cannot produce one example of a happy state, where the
Clergy has been exposed to the contempt of the People; which must needs happen
where their Benefices and Maintetenances are scandalous, and their Persons
thereby rendered contemptible and despicable.

It is the last Trick, says St. Gregory, that the Devil has in the world,
when he cannot bring the Word and Sacraments into disgrace by Heresies and
Errors, he inventeth this project, to bring it into contempt, and low esteem;
as it is now in Scotland, where they are accounted by many as the dross and
refuse of the Nation. Men think it a stain to their blood, to place their Sons
in that Function; and Women are ashamed to marry with any of them; whereas
anciently the Function of the Clergy was of so high account and esteem, that
not only the best Gentry and Nobility, but diverse of the Sons and Brothers of
our Scottish Kings, disdained not to enter into holy Orders, and to be
Clergymen; as at this day is practiced in most other Monarchies in
Christendom: While this Policy lasted, the Clergy were judged the fittest
persons to execute most of the chief Offices and Places of the Kingdom, and the
Laity did with much reverence and esteem submit to them. Great was the
Authority of the Clergy in those days; and their memory should now among us be
precious: They were never wanting to the King, by their seasonable Advice and
Counsels.

But above all, we owe a great Reverence to the Bishops, in converting Scotland
to the Christian Religion, and to many of them, in being instrumental in
reforming that Religion, when corrupted: And since that, the Maintenance
thereof against all Romish Writers, and of the Discipline thereof; against all
the Practices and Power of the Schismatics: All this, and more, is owing to
Bishops and Pastors; by the late want of whom to sit at the Stern, how soon was
the Church split upon the Rocks of Anarchy and confusion: Notwithstanding of
their Worthiness and Piety, it is observed by strangers, that the iniquity of
the present Times in Scotland is such, that the Orthodox Clergy are not only
hated by the Romanists, on the one side, and maligned by the Schismatics on
the other side; but also, of all the Christian Clergy of Europe, whether
Romish, Lutheran, or Calvinian, none are so little respected, obeyed, or
rewarded, as the present Pious, Learned, Loyal and Orthodox Clergy of Scotland,
even by those, who have always professed themselves of that Communion.

Having given an account of the Dignity of Bishops, and the respect due to
them; and the esteem they have had even in the Kingdom of Scotland, where, of
late, their Successors have been exposed to contempt and disgrace. The next
Attempt shall be, to be particular in what relates to the rest of the Bishops
and their Sees.

Of the Archbishops of Glasgow.
The first, after the Restitution of the Hierarchy, was Dr. Andrew Fairfoul
Preacher in Dunce, who governed that See little above a year: Upon whose Death
Anno 1664. Alexander Burnet, Bishop of Aberdeen, was translated to Glasgow, and
since that time, to St Andrews: Arthur Bishop of Argile, was translated to
Glasgow, who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral of Glasgow, a very magnificent Structure, was built by Bishop
John Achaian 1135. It owes thanks to the memory of King James the Sixth, for
its preservation from utter Ruin. The Ministers of Glasgow persuaded the
Magistrates to pull it down, and to build two or three Churches with the
materials thereof. The Magistrates condescending, a day was appointed, and
Workmen ready to demolish it: The Tradesmen having notice given them of this
design, convene in Arms, and oppose the Magistrates, threatening to bury the
Workmen under the Ruins of that Ancient Building: Whereupon the matter was
referred to the King and Council, who decided the controversy in the
Trades-men's favors, reproving the Magistrates very sharply.

The Diocese of Glasgow contains the Counties or Shires of Dumbarton, Ranfrow,
Air, Lanerick, Peebles and Selkirk, part of the Shires of Roxburgh and Dumfreis.

The Coat Armorial belonging to the Sea of Glasgow is Argent: St. Ninian
standing full faced, proper, clothed with a Pontificial Robe Purple, on his
head a Miter, and in his dexter hand a Crosier Or.

Of the Bishops of Edinburgh.
The Bishopric of Edinburgh was founded by King Charles the First, of glorious
memory, about the year 1633. and by him amply Endowed.

Anno 1662. George Wishart, Dr. of Divinity, was promoted to this Bishopric.
This worthy Divine was in the year 1638. Preacher at Leith, and for his Loyalty
had very hard measure from the Covenanters, being thrice plundered of all he
had, and thrice imprisoned in a filthy stinking Gaol; being delivered from
thence, he went beyond Sea with the Marquess of Montross 1646. He was a person
of great Integrity, and well seen in History: Upon his Death Alexander Young,
Archdeacon of St. Andrews, was preferred to this Bishopric, and since was
translated to the Sea of Ross: After him John Paterson, Bishop of Galloway, was
translated to Edinburgh, who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral Church is that of St. Giles (of old a Collegiate Church:) a vast
and magnificent Structure; it is at present divided into three partitions;
three whereof are allotted to God's Public Worship.

The Diocese of Edinburgh contains the Shires of Edinburgh, Linlithgow, and
Berwick: The Constabulary of Haddington, and Bailiary of Lauderdale. The Arms
of the Sea of Edinburgh, are Azure, a Saltier Argent, in chief a Miter of the
Second Garnished Or.

Bishops of Galloway.
Anno 1606. The first Bishop of this See, after the Reformation, was Gawin
Hamilton, a worthy person: His Successor Anno 1614. was Will. Couper, a Learned
and Pious Prelate: Afterward was preferred to this See, a Learned, and Worthy
Prelate Thomas Sydserfe; he was put out by the Covenanters 1638. and upon the
Restitution of the Episcopal Estate was translated to Orkney; about which time
James Hamilton, Rector of Cambusnethan, was promoted to the Bishopric; unto
whom succeeded John Paterson, since translated to Edinburgh, in whose place D.
Atkins now governs the Sea

The Diocese of Galloway has under its jurisdiction, the Shire of Wigton,
Stewartry of Kirkudbright, Regality of Glen-Luce, and part of Dumfreis shire.

Bishop of Dunkeld.
About the year 1606. James Nicolson, Parson of Meigle was preferred to the Sea; to whom succeeded Alexander Lindsay, Rector of St. Madoe: This Bishop
being threatened with the Censures of the Assembly at Glasgow, did abjure
Episcopacy, and submit to the Presbyterian Government 1639. and betook himself
to the Charge of a particular Parish.

Anno 1662. George Halyburton, Preacher at Perth, was preferred to the Sea, a
very worthy person, he sat little above two years: Upon his Death Henry Guthry
was promoted to the Bishopric: Now Dr. Bruce governs this See.

The Chapter of Dunkeld consists of the Persons following.
The Rector of
Kinclevin, Dean. Tibbermire, Cantor. Couper, Archdeacon. Lethindy,
Chancellor. Dunkeld, Treasurer. Fungart. Inch-mack, Grannoch. Logio Alachie.
Blair in Athol. Eliot.
The Parson of Rattary Sub-Dean.

The Parsons of
Ruffill. Kepitmack in Athol. Monady.
The Prebendary of
Fearne. Menmure. Aberdaigy.
The Diocese of Dunkeld contains the most part of Perth- shire, part of Angus,
and part of West Lothian.

The Bishops of Aberdeen.
After the Restoration of the Episcopal Government, His most Sacred Majesty,
King Charles the Second preferred David Mitchell (one of the Prebendaries of
Westminster) to the Bishopric of Aberdeen. This worthy man was Anno 1638. one
of the Preachers of Edinburgh; and being thrust out by the Assembly of Glasgow,
retired into England; he lived not a whole year after his Consecration.

To him succeeded Alexander Burnet Rector of -- in Kent, who sat little above
a year, being translated to Glasgow, which was then void, by the death of
Archbishop Fairfoul. Upon his Translation Anno 1664. the Reverend Patrick
Scougal, Parson of Salton, was promoted to the Bishopric of Aberdeen, who
wisely and piously governs the Sea.

The Chapter of Aberdeen consists of the Persons following.

Since the Rectory of St. Machar was annexed to the King's College, the
Principal thereof is Dean.

The Parsons of
Auchterless, Cantor. Rain, Archdeacon. Birse, Chancellor. Daviot, Treasurer.
The Rector of St. Peter's, Subcantor.

The Parson of Kinkell, who is the Patron of 7 Churches, Kinkell, Drumblait,
Monkeigie, Kintor, Kemray, Kinnellar and Dyce.

The Parson of Morthlick.

The Rector of
Monimusk. Kincairden of Neil. Turreff. Belhelveis. Banchory-Devoneif. Logie
Buchan. Coldstane.
The Parson of
Clatt. Methlick. Innernochty. Oyn. Crowdane. Tillinessil. Forbes. Phillorth.
Lonmay.
The Prebendary of
Deir. Ellon.
Several Learned and Worthy men in the Diocese of Aberdeen, were thrust out of
their Livings by the Covenanters. The most considerable were,

John Forbes of Corse, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity in the King's College
of Aberdeen.

Robert Baron, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity in the King's College of
Aberdeen.

Alexander Scrogie, D. D. Minister in Old Aberdeen.

Patrick Dune, Dr. of Physic, Principal of the Marischal College of Aberdeen.

Alexander Rosse, D. D. Parson of St. Nicholas, James Sibbald, D. D. Minister
in Aberdeen, John Forbes, Parson of Auchterless, Andrew Logie, Parson of Rain,
John Ross, Parson of Birse, John Gregory, Rectour of Drummaok, John Log^e,
Rectour of Raphan, Thomas Thoires, Minister at Vdny.

The Cathedral of Aberdeen dedicated to St. Machar, was founded by Bishop
Kinninmouth, who died before the work was raised six cubits high: several other
Bishops were at the charge in carrying on the Building, some whereof laid the
Foundation of the great Steeple, and the two lesser Steeples, others paved the
floor with freestone, another adorned the Chancel with many brave Ornaments:
Bishop Elphingstone did perfect the great Steeple, which was a mark for Sailors
in those days, and furnished it with costly, and tunable Bells 1489. Bishop
Dumbar did perfect the two lesser Steeples cieled the Church, and built the
South-Isle 1522. and his Successor, Bishop Stewart, built the Consistory House,
An. 1539. This glorious structure being near 90 years in Building, did not
remain twenty years in its integrity, when it was almost ruined by a crew of
sacrilegious Church Robbers; for Anno 1560. The Barons of Mernis, accompanied
with some of the Tounsmen of Aberdeen, having demolished the Monasteries of the
Black, and Gray Friars, fell to rob the Cathedral, which they spoiled of all
its costly Ornaments, and Jewels, and demolished the Chancel; having shipped
the Lead, Bells, and other utensils, intending to expose them to Sale in
Holland, all this ill gotten wealth sunk, not far from the Girdleness. The Body
of the Cathedral was preserved from utter ruin by the Earl of Huntley;
afterward An. 1607 the Church was repaired, and covered with State at the
charge of the Parish, and so continues yet in pretty good repair.

The Diocese of Aberdeen contains the Shire of Aberdeen, most part of Bamff
shire, and part of Mernis.

Bishops of Murray.
Anno 1662. Murdack Mackenzie, Rectour of Elgine, was preferred Bishop of
Murray, since translated to Orkney: ^octor Atkins was preferred to this See,
and since translated to Galloway. Mr. Collen, formerly Minister of Steres, was
preferred, and now governs the Sea. His predecessor was John Guthry, one of the
Preachers in Edinburgh, in whose time fell out our second Reformation; most of
the Bishops left their Bishoprics, having wisely withdrawn themselves into
England, to avoid the storm which threatened them; whereas this Bishop staid at
home till his Bishopric left him; being thrust out from his benefice, by the
Covenanters, he retired to his ancient Inheritance of Guthry in Angus, where he
lived very contentedly, and hospitably, exercising his Charity amongst the
Poor: he died much lamented, during our Civil Wars.

The Cathedral of Elgine, founded by Andrew Bishop of Murray 1230, was one of
the rarest Monuments that this Kingdom afforded; equal in length almost to St.
Paul's in London, but surpassing it in breadth: It was demolished at the
Reformation; yet some of the stately Ruins are still to be seen, and admired.

The Parish Church dedicated to St. Peter, was founded by George, the Second
Earl of Huntly, about the year 1490. The Diocese of Murray contains the Shires
of Elgine, Nairn, and part of Ennerness, and Bamf shires.

Bishops of Brichen.
Anno 1662 David Strachan, Parson of Fettercairn, was p^^f^^^ed Bishop of
Brichen; he sat (...) years, and dying 1671. was bu^^^d in the Cathedral; his
Successor was Robert Lawry, Dean of Edinburgh.

Anno 1639. Walter Whitefurd, of the House of Milntoun, Bishop of Brichen, was
outed by the Covenanters, and plundered. The Cathedral Church of Brichen is a
pretty handsome Fabric; it has on the Southside a small Steeple, not unlike
the Monument on Fish street-hill London, save that it is broader at the top,
than at the bottom. The Chancel was demolished by the first Reformers.

The Diocese of Brichen contains part of Angus, and Mernis.

Bishops of Dumblane.
Robert Leighton, Principal of the College of Edinburgh, was promoted Anno
1662 to the Bishopric of Dumblane: He was a man of singular and wonderful
Piety, and of great Learning; and in him, most of the eminent Virtues we admire
in the Primitive Bishops, seemed to be revived: His Life was most exemplary and
severe; he Preached constantly, and by his appearance in time of his Preaching,
he seemed like one in Heaven, being so much touched himself with what he
delivered to others: His humility was astonishing; his meekness and charity
extraordinary; his expense on himself very small; all that he had he laid out
on the Poor: He was very tender of all the concerns of his Clergy: and by his
excellent deportment and heavenly discourses, did much edify and instruct them
all: He studied by the most gentle methods possible, to overcome the
peevishness of the Schismatics; but all was in vain; for they became more
insolent and stubborn: He was translated to Glasgow 1670. who in 1674.
resigning, Alexander Burnet was restored, and he retired from all Public
Offices.

His Predecessor was James Wedderburn, Professor of Divinity in St. Andrews,
and thrust out by the Covenanters.

Upon the Translation of Robert Leighton, James Ramsay Dean of Glasgow, was
preferred to the Sea 1676.

The Bishop of Dumblane is always Dean of the King's Chapel Royal.

The Diocese of Dumblane contains part of Perth, and Strivelingshire.

The Bishops of Ross.
John Paterson, Preacher in Aberdeen, was promoted to the Bishopric of Ross
1662. Upon his Death Alexander Young, Bishop of Edinburgh, was translated to
this See. John Maxwell, one of the Preachers of Edinburgh, a very Learned man,
a great Preacher, and of excellent parts, was Bishop of Ross, and thrust out by
the Covenanters 1639. and afterward much persecuted by them.

The Cathedral of Chancnry, where the Bishop of Ross his Seat is, was
demolished by the first Reformers; some part whereof is lately rebuilt.

The Diocese of Ross has under its Jurisdiction the Shires of Tayn, Cromarty,
and the greater part of Innerness-shire.

The Arms of the Bishopric of Ross are Argent, a Bishop standing on the
Sinister, habited in a long Robe close girt, Purple, Mitred, and holding in his
left hand a Crosier Or, and pointing with the Right to St. Boniface, on the
dext^r side, clothed, and both his hands placed on his Breast, proper.

Bishops of Cathnes.
Upon the Restitution of Hierarchy 1662. Patrick Forbes was preferred to the Sea. John Abernethy, a Learned and worthy Prelate, was promoted to this See,
and thrust out by the Covenanters. Dr. Wood was preferred, and now governs this
See.

The Diocese of Cathnes, whereof Dornoch in Sutherland is the Bishop's Seat,
contains the Shires of Cathnes and Sutherland.

There is not much said of the Cathedral.

Bishops of Orkney.
Thomas Sydserfe, Bishop of Galloway Anno 1662. the only Bishop then alive of
all that had been thrust out by the Covenanters, was translated to Orkney: He
sat but a little time, dying 1663. Unto whom succeeded Andrew Honniman, a
Learned and Pious man, and good Preacher: This Bishop, accompanying the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, received a wound in the Arm by ^istol-shot, aimed at
the Archbishop of St. Andrews* by an obscure fellow, named Mitchel, who
afterward was execu^ed: This Bishop died An. 1676. and was buried at Kirkwall,
in the Cathedral Church. Murdack Makenzie, Bishop of Murray, was translated to
this Bishopric, and now governs the Sea. There was one George Graham, Bishop
of Orkney, being terrified with the censures of the Assembly of Glasgow, did
abjure Episcopacy, submitting to the Presbyterian Government, betaking himself
to the Charge of a particular Parish, 1638.

Hereupon King Charles the First did promote Robert Baron, Doctor, and
Professor of Divinity in the Marischal College of Aberdeen, to the Bishopric.
The Learned and worthy man, having incensed the Covenanters, by expressing his
Loyalty so publicly, in the Disputes between the Doctors of Aberdeen, and Mr.
Henderson, Mr. Dick, and Mr. Cant, the Three great Champions for the Covenant,
was forced to fly to Berwick, where he died shortly after, before his
Consecration.

The Diocese of Orkney has under its Jurisdiction all the Northern Isles of
Orkney and Schetland.

Bishops of Argile.
An. 162 -- was promoted to this See, -- Boyd, who as he was descended from one
of the Noblest Families in the Kingdom, being Brother to the Lord Boyd, so he
was a very extraordinary person: He found his See full of ignorance and
Barbarity; scarce any Churches or Schools in it: And in many places the very
name of Christ was not known: He set himself wholly to the work of the Gospel;
and planted many Churches: He resided constantly in his Diocese, and was a
great example of Piety and Virtue: And for all the prejudices that are in these
parts against that Order, yet he is never named among them to this day, but
with great honor, as an Apostolic person.

James Fairly, sometimes Bishop of Argile, was thrust out by the Covenanters
1638. and afterward renounced his Bishopric, and accepted a private charge.

Anno 1662 -- Fletcher, Rector of -- was preferred to the place, who dying,
Anno 1665. William Scrougy, Parson of Raphan, in Aberdeenshire, was preferred
to the place; he governed the Sea nine years, and died at Dumbarton Anno 1675.
Unto him succeeded Arthur Ross, who since is translated to Glasgow.

The Diocese of Argile contains the Countries of Argile, Lorn, Kintire, and
Lochabyr, with some of the West Isles, such as Lismore, etc.

The Arms of the Sea of Argile, are Azure, Two Crosiers disposed in Saltier,
and in chief a Miter, Or.

Bishops of the Isles.
Since the Restoration of Bishops, Robert Wallace, Rector of Barnwell, in the
Sheriffdom of Air, was made Bishop of this See. Anno 1602. John Lesly was
Bishop of this See, and after was translated to the Bishopric of Rapho, in the
Province of Armagh in Ireland: he lived in King James the Sixth's time, a
consecrated Bishop; and in King Charles the first's time; in the late Rebellion
he was a great sufferer, being sequestered, and plundered; yet he outlived all
this misery, and at the Restoration of Bishops in Ireland he was restored to
his former Bishopric in Rapho: He was the antientest consecrated Bishop in
Christendom: To him Neil Campbell, Rector of -- succeeded 1602. in the
Bishopric of the Isles, who was thrust out by the Covenanters 1638.

A List of the Archbishops and Bishops of Scotland.
The Archbishop of St. Andrews.

The Archbishop of Glasgow.

The Bishops of
Edinburgh. Galloway. Dunkeld. Aberdeen. Murray. Ross. Brichen. Dumblane.
Caithnes. The Isles. Argile. Orkney.
The Bishops of Scotland take their places thus; St. Andrews, Glasgow;
Edinburgh, Galloway; the rest according to the Seniority of their Consecrations.

Here observe that Mr. Colin Faulconer, formerly Minister of Forress, was
preferred to the Bishopric of Murray.

CHAP. X.
Of Bishops Jurisdictions. Of their Commissaries. Of the Court of Session. Of
Presbyteries. A List of the Presbyteries of Scotland. Of Synods. Of the General
Assembly.

HAving given this former Account of the Bishops, according to their
Successions, it will seem convenient to add something concerning their
Jurisdictions, which is committed to their Substitutes.

Every Bishop has under him one Official or Commissary, who is Judge of the
Spiritual Court within his Diocese: Unto this Court are referred matters of
Testaments, Bastardy, Divorce, Tithes, Perjury, etc. and many civil Affairs.

This Court sits at the same time with the Session; and it may likewise sit in
the vacancy of Session, but then the Judges thereof, or party pursuing, must
have a dispensation to decide such a case, from one or two of the Lords of
Session (who are by course, upon Tuesdays and Thursdays each week, during the
time of the vacancy, obliged to attend, for granting of Dispensations, and
several other such business) without which the Decree of the Commissaries is
not valid in Law. The same might have likewise been said of the Sheriff Courts.

Commissaries of Scotland.
Commissaries of Edinburgh,
Sir David Falconer. Henry Foulis. James Deans. J^hn Wishart.
John Lindsey, Official of St. Andrews. Sir William Fleeming, Official of
Glasgow.

John Stewart, Commissary of Dunkeld.

John Scougall, Commissary of Aberdeen.

Alexander Mackenzie, Commissary of Murray.

George Paterson. Com. of Ross.

James Strachan, Com. of Brichen.

James Innes, Official of Cathnes.

Will. Scrougy, Com. of Argile.

The Officials of
Dumblane. Galloway. Orkney. Isles.
Of a Session.
There are 4 Ecclesiastical Courts in Scotland.

For the clearer Method, let us begin with the Lowest Court which is in every
Parish: This Court is called The Session; it consists of the chief and most
grave men of the Parish, who are called Elders, and Deacons. In this small
Court, whereof the Minister is President, all Fornicators, Adulterers,
Blasphemers, Swearers, Prophaners of the Lord's Day, etc. are convented, and
put to public confessions of their sins, and professions of their Repentance,
according to the degree, or hainousness of them: For Fornication, they make
public confess^on in the Church* several Lords Days; in the last of which
they receive Absolution: For Adultery, they make their profess^on of Repentance
for half a year, every Lord's Day; and for six Lords Days they stand in
Sackcloth, at the Church Door, half an hour before Morning-prayers, and then in
the end, receive Absolution: And for other faults they do Penance according to
their several degrees.

The Office of a Deacon and Elder.
The Deacon's Office is, to collect the money for the use of the Poor, to
delate Delinquents, and such like; that of the Elder is to be careful of the
Fabric of the Church, to assist in the censuring scandalous persons, and to
wait on the Minister at the Celebration of the Lords Supper, etc. This Court
sits once a week.

Of a Presbytery.
The next Court is called the Presbytery, consisting of twelve, or twenty
Ministers, more or less: This sits once in two or three weeks; the Moderator,
or President thereof, is chosen by the Bishop: In this Court are discussed
Appeals from Sessions, and other difficult cases: Here are convented all those
who refuse to submit to Church Discipline; and all such as apostatize to
Popery, and Quakerism; who, if they remain obstinate, are prosecuted with the
Censures of the Church. Here also all such as enter into holy Orders, are
examined, and an account taken of their Learning, and other Qualifications, in
a course of many several Trials, as making Homilies, Sermons, and common
places; which hold two or three months; and then they are returned to the
Bishop, well qualified; who upon that proceeds to Ordain them.

Presbyteries of Scotland.
The Presbyteries of
Dunce. Chirnside. Kelso. Ersiltoun. Jedburgh. Melross. Dumbar. Haddingtone.
Dalkeith. Edinburgh. Peebles. Linlithgow. Perth. Dunkeld. Auchterardor.
Striveling. Dumblane. Dumfreis. Penpont. Lochmabane. Midlebie. Wigton.
Kirkudbright. Strannaver. Air. Irwing. Pasly. Dumbarton. Glasgow. Hamilton.
Lanerick. Biggar. Dunnune. Kinloch. Innerary. Kilmoir. Sky. St. Andrews.
Kirkaldy. Couper. Dumfermling. Meigle. Dundee. Arbroath. Thirso. Forfair.
B^ichen. Mernis. Aberdeen. Kincarden. Alford. Gareoch. Deir. Turreff. Fordyce.
Kirkwall. Colmkill. Ellon. Strathbogy. Abernethie. Elgine. Forress. Aberlower.
^hanrie. Tayne. Dingwell. Dornoch. Week. Scalloway.
The Number of Parishes in Scotland is uncertain; they may be reckoned to be
above a thousand.

Of a Synod.
A third Court, whereof the Bishop is President, is the Provincial Assembly, or
Synod: In this Court are discussed all Appeals from Presbyteries, and all other
difficult cases: For hence are issued Warrants for visiting of Churches: Here
also the lives of scandalous Ministers are tried, who if found guilty of crimes
laid to their charge, are either deposed, suspended, or excommunicated.

The Sentence of Excommunication cannot be pronounced against an obstinate
person, but after a long process of near a years continuance, and many
Citations, and much pains to bring the scandalous person (against whom only it
is denounced) to a due sense of his sins, and a willingness to submit to the
Censures of the Church; and then it must be ratified and confirmed by the
Bishop. The Provincial Synod meets twice in the year, in April, and in October.

Of the General Assembly.
The Highest Ecclesiastical Court is the General Assembly; which as its
constitution and authority was settled in King James's minority, was made up of
two Ministers, Commissioners from every Presbytery, and one Lay Elder; a
Commissioner from every Royal Borough, one from every University, and one from
the King: These had the Supreme Authority about all Church Matters: While this
Court was thus constituted, there was nothing but Divisions among these
Commissioners; it was impossible that any happy conclusions could be expected,
when so little respect was given to the Civil Magistrates Commissioner, as does
appear by all their meetings. In a word, it was from the General Assembly thus
subsisting, that so much trouble in the Church was in King James the sixth's
da^es kindled, and in King Charles the first's burnt our Churches almost into
Ashes; when all manner of good Order and Discipline was become a burden, they
desiring to invent new Methods, by which issued nothing but confusion and
desolation: By what you find in this Relation of the Bishops, according to
their Successions; how lamentable a thing is it to understand, how some of
these Pious and Learned men, were thrust out of their Bishoprics, others
plundered, others imprisoned, and others dying in other Kingdoms among
strangers? This was a forerunner of greater miseries; for afterward into what a
sad Chaos did the State fall! The long peace and plenty, which we enjoyed under
the Government of the best of Kings, made us wanton; our prosperity pu^t us up
with pride; we were enemies to our own welfare; weary of our present State; too
much desirous of Revolutions, and greedy of Novelties: Our private discontents
begat jealousies and animosities, which since they could be no longer
smothered, must needs burst out into a flame. We were afraid of we knew not
what, nothing but the preservation of Religion, must be the pretext, and the
Cloak, to cover the knavery which was afterward acted: The great outcry in the
Pulpit was, Remove these Prelates, who intend to bring us under the slavery of
Rome: but it is so well a known maxim, Nullus Episcopus, nullus Rex, that I am
sorry it was by this sad subversion of the Ecclesiastical Government too too
direfully verified. The most subtle trick of the Devil is, when a
well-establisht Government in a Church or State cannot be shaken by other of
his malicious machinations, then it is, that by instruments conformable to his
own genius, under pretext of Relig^on, or at least under a color of reforming
some abuses: (And so by degrees) this Church was of all its watch men robbed,
and Wolves in Sheeps clothing put in their places; who abhorred the name, but
exercised the power of a Bishop, in every one of their respective Parishes. The
best of Princes perceiving this ruin approaching, was pleased that any thing
which might be an offense in the Divine Worship, might be laid aside for a
time, although in it self necessary; and accordingly the Book of Common Prayer,
Book of Canons, and High Commission, were at that time la^d ^side; ye^
notwithstanding, this favor could not engage us to continue in our Duty and
Allegiance: All the fruit of these singular condescentions of His Majesty's,
was nothing but a breathing after a desperate and horrid Rebellion; such as
former Ages could no ways parallel: Then it was, the Son rose up against the
Father, Brother against Brother, Parishes were divided, yea the whole Kingdom
was divided against it self; which way soever we looked, nothing was to be seen,
but that desolation in the Church, and afterward in the State, which would
consume the eyes, and grieve the hearts of all good and Loyal Christians and
Subjects. The Church was rent by Schism; the Bishops, and many of the Reverend
Clergy were thrust out, plundered and banished: Yea the house of Prayer was in
a most literal sense made a Den of Thieves. Nine years did the Kingdom lie
under the Tyranny of Usurpers; till it pleased God to free us from this
bondage, by restoring to us our most Gracious Sovereign: Then was the Church
restored to its Ancient Government, by the most consonant Laws established upon
sure and good Foundations. The great Power of General Assemblies was better
regulated, in which nothing is to be proposed but by the King or His
Commissioner; nor can any thing that they do be of force, till it be ratified
by the King: The Supreme Ecclesiastical Court declared to be a National Synod,
made of Bishops and Deans, and two Members from every Presbytery, one of whom
is nominated by the Bishop of their respective Diocese, and a Commissioner from
every University; and the calling of this Synod to be wholly in the Crown.

CHAP. XI.
The Universities of Scotland.

IN Scotland there are four Universities, from which every year there is a
fresh supply of Learned persons fit for public Employments and Dignities in
Church and State. The four Universities are,

St. Andrews. Aberdeen. Glasgow. Edinburgh.


Of the University of St. Andrews.
This University was founded by Bishop Hen. Wardlaw, An. Christ 1412. it is
endowed with very ample Privileges. The Archbishops of St. Andrews are
perpetual Chancellors thereof. The Rector is chosen yearly; and by the Statutes
of the Universities, he ought to be one of the three Principals: His Power is
the same with that of the Vice Chancellor of Oxford or Cambridge. There are in
this University 3 Colleges; viz. St. Salvators, St. Leonards, and New College.

St. Salvators College.
This College was founded by James Kennedy, Bishop of St. Andrews; he built
the Aedifice, furnished it with costly Ornaments, and provided sufficient
Revenues for the maintenance of the Masters and Professors.

Persons endowed at the Foundation, were, a Doctor, a Bachelor, a Licentiate
of Divinity:

Four Professors of Philosophy, who are called Regents: Eight Poor Scholars,
called Bursars.

Benefactors. I can give little account of the Benefactors. The Earl of Cassils
has founded a Professor of Humanity, to teach the Latin Tongue. George Martyn
ceiled the great Hall. The Arms of St. Salvators College are the Globe, and
St. Salvators Cross.

St. Leonard 's College.
St. Leonards College was founded by John Hepburn, Prior of St. Andrews Anno
152 -- Persons endowed are, a Principal, or Warden; Four Professors of
Philosophy; Eight poor Scholars.

Benefactors. Of these, take this account. The Priory of Portmuck is annexed to
this College; and lately the Personage of Kinkell in Aberdeen-shire.

New College.
New College was founded by James Beaton, Archbishop An. 153 -- The Professors
and Scholars endowed, are of Divinity; for no Philosophy is taught in this
College.

Present Professors.
In St. Salvators College; Dr. Skeen Provost; Mr. Thomson, Mr. Kinnaird, Mr.
Martin, Mr. Minzies, Professors of Philosophy.

Mr. Moncrief, Profes. of Humanity.

In St. Leonards College.
Dr. Weems Provost; Mr. Crockat, Mr. ^arnaigy, Mr. Cunninghame, Mr. Wood,
Professors of Philosophy; Mr. Saunders, Prof. of the Mathematics; Mr. Ker,
Prof of Humanity.

In New College.
Dr. Moor, Arch Deacon.

Dr. Combrie, Dr. Falconer, Professors of Divinity.

There was lately founded in the University of St. Andrews, a Prof. of
Mathematics.

The short and bad Account of this University, is for want of better
Information.

Learned Men and Writers.
John Mayor, Provost of St. Salvators, a person according to the Learning of
those times, very famous: His History of the Scottish Nation is not so much
esteemed, being very short, and in the style and way of writing, Scholastical
and Quodlibetical; he wrote also on the Master of Sentences; he flourished
about the year 1520.

Andrew Melvil, Professor of Divinity in the New College; a man well seen in
the Hebrew Language, and the Rabbinical Writings: he was the first who kindled
the great Confusions in the Church, by introducing the Discipline of Geneva.

John Baron, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity in the New College, was a
person of great worth and Learning, and of great candor; he died in the time
of our late Confusions.

Sir John Wedderburn was a Professor of Philosophy in this University; but that
was too narrow a place for so great a person, who became since so celebrated
for his great Learning and skill in Physic: and though his infirmities, and
great Age, forced him to retire from public practice and business, yet his
fame attracted all the Nation to him: and his noble hospitality and kindness to
all that were learned and virtuous, made his conversation no less loved, than
his advice was desired.

Samuel Rutherfurd, Professor of Divinity in the New College, was very famous
in those times for quickness, and subtilty in disputing and writing: he was
judged to be very devout: he wrote Exercitationes de Gratia, and Disputationes
de Providentia: he was a wonderful asserter of the Superlapsarian Hypothesis:
he wrote also many Books in English; some Controversial, as The Divine Right of
Presbytery, and other pieces of Devotion and Sermons: he wrote also Seditious
Books condemned by Law, about the Power of the King, and the Privilege of the
people, called Lex Rex. He died ^661.

Alexander Colvill, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity in the New College: he
was before Professor at Sedan: he was Learned in the Hebrew, and was a great
Textuary, and well seen in Divinity: He died about the year 1664.

James Wood, Professor of Divinity, and Provost of St. Salvators, was a person
both judicious and wise; as also of considerable Learn^ng; he wrote a Book
against Indepen^ency. He died about the year 1664.

John Johnston, Professor of Divinity in the New College, wrote a Paraphrase
of the Psalms, and other most excellent Poems, and was very much admired for
his skill in the Latin Tongue, and Poesy: He flourished about the year 1610.

David Calderwood, a man of great Reading and Study; but very unhappy in his
way of expressing himself; both which appeared in his Altar Damascenum: He was
at first very factious, and banished the Kingdom by King James the Sixth, yet
was afterward much neglected by that violent party, who judged him too
moderate, though from his Book none would imagine him guilty of it.

James Durham, a Gentleman of a good Family, and Learned; was bred in this
famous University; he wrote a judicious Book of Scandal, with good Learning in
it: There are also Expositions of his upon the Revelation, and on the Song of
Solomon; and the Ten Commandments; all published since his Death.

George Gillespie was also bred here, who was a very pregnant young man, had
great freedom of expression, and much boldness, which raised him to make a very
considerable figure among the Covenanters: He had some good Learning, but was
very factious: He wrote against the Ceremonies, and many pieces against the
Erastians. He died Anno 1649.

James Gregory, Professor of the Mathematics in this University, was a person
of most extraordinary Learning in that Science: He had a strange faculty of
resolving the hardest Problems, and seems to have found a Non plus ultra in
Geometry: He was Fellow of the Royal Society, and much admired both in France,
Italy, and England, where he traveled; but lost both his Eyes, and soon after
died, 1674.

In this University many of the chief Nobility are bred; among whom, none has
done greater honor to St. Leonard's College, where he was bred, than his
Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, to whom, as Learning seemed entailed (his Family
for four Descents, having been most famed for Learning, of any of their
Quality) so he received these impressions in this University; that, being since
much improved, have rendered him so eminent for Learning; of which only my
Subject leading me to speak, I shall say nothing of his other extraordinary
Qualities.

Archbald Napier of Marchistone, was a profound Scholar, and of profound worth:
His Logarithms have rendered him famous throughout the whole world: He wrote
also an Exposition on the Revelation. He died 162 --

Sir Robert Murray, a great promoter, and Fellow of the Royal Society, was a
person of wonderful Abilities, vast Apprehensions, great depth of Judgment, and
universally known in every thing, but more particularly in the Mathematics: He
was a great ornament to the Age he lived in, and an honor to his Country. He
died Anno 1674.

CHAP XII.
The University of Glasgow.

IT was founded Auspiciis, pietate and benignitate, eximii principis Jacobi
Secundi, Scotorum, Regis Serenissimi; indulgentiam faciente, and jus ac
facultatem studii generalis sanciente, Nicolao Quinto, Pontifice Romano, ejus
erectionem, and constitutionem, magno labor, and sumptibus, procurante
Reverendo Antistite Guilielmo Turnbullo, Episcopo Glascuensi. The words of the
Bull are, Vt studium generale vigeat tam in Theologia, ac jure Canonico and
civili quam artibus and qualibet alia facultate; quodque Doctores and Magistri
ibidem omnibus and singulis privilegiis, libertatibus, honoribus,
immunitatibus, exemptionibus per sedem Apostolicam vel alios quomodolibet
Magistros, Doctoribus and Studentibus, in studio nostrae Civitatis Canoniensis
Concessis, gaudeant and utantur.

The persons founded were, a Rector, a Dean of Faculty, a Principal or Warden,
who was to teach Theology: Three Professors to teach Philosophy: Afterward
some Clergymen professed the Laws here, being invited to that profes^^on,
rather by the conv^nience of a Collegiate life, and the immunities of the
University, than by any considerable Salary. King James the Sixth Anno 1577.
did establish Twelve persons in the College, viz a Principal, three Professors
of ^h^losophy, called Regents; four Scholars, called Bursars; an Oeconomus or
Provisor, who furnishes the Table with provisions, the principal Servant; a]
anitor, and a Cook.

Benefactors.
The Kings of Scotland have been great Benefactors to this University.

King James the Second, the Founder of it, did bestow considerable Revenues,
and endowed it with many privileges and immunities. The words of the Letter
under the Great Seal, 12. Kal. Maii 1453. are, Omnes and singulos Rectores, qui
pro tempore fuerint, facultatum Decanos, procuratores Nationum, Regentes,
Magistros and Scholares in hac universitate students, sub nostra firma pace
and custodia, defensione and manutentia suscipimus, eosdemque Rectores, etc. ab
omnibus Tri^utis, exactionibus, Taxationibus, collectis, vigiliis, custodiis
eximimus and postea eximendos statuimus.

The same privileges were confirmed by King James the Third Anno 1472. by King
James the Fourth, 1509. by King James the Fifth, 1522. and by Queen Mary, 1547.

About the time of the Reformation, the University was almost brought to
desolation, and had been ruined, had not King James the 6th in his Minority,
restored it by his Royal bounty and munificence: He confirmed all the
privileges, and bestowed upon it the Tithes of the Church of Govan, Anno 1577.
Afterward he ratified all the former Acts, made in favor of the University,
and made some new Donations, Anno 1617.

King Charles the First did ratify all the old Privileges, and bestowed Money
for repairing the Fabric.

King Charles the Second, by the Advice of the Estates of Parliament, gave also
Money for the same purpose.

Bishop Will. Turnbull, by whose procurement the Popes Bull was obtained, was
very liberal to the College, bestowing upon it both Lands and Revenues; and so
were several of the Bishops, and Archbishops, who succeeded him.

The City of Glasgow were also Benefactors to the College.

The Ground on which the College stands, with a Field adjacent thereunto, was
the Donation of James Lord Hamilton. Since the Reformation, sundry private men
have given considerable sums of Money toward the maintenance of poor Sholars;
as William Struthers, Zachary Boyd, Thomas Crawford, Ministers.

Others have bestowed Money for repairing the Fabric; as Alexander Boyd,
Matthew Wilson, Ministers.

James Law, Archbishop of Glasgow, was very bountiful to the College; for he
much augmented the Revenues thereof, and bestowed many choice Books, which are
in the Library.

Will. Earl of Dundonald, An. 1672. gave about a thousand pounds sterling,
toward the maintenance of Bursars.

John Snell has of late bestowed six thousand Marks Scottish, for enriching
the Library, and adorning the Fabric.

The Archbishops of Glasgow are perpetual Chancellors of the University. The
Rector is chosen once every year. David Cadyow, Canon of Glasgow, was the first
Recotr; and William Elphistoun, Official of Glasgow, afterward Bishop of
Aberdeen, was the first Dean of Faculties.

Principals.
Anno 1454. David Binch first Principal: His Successors are not known, because
the old Records and Registers of the College were either destroyed, or taken
away at the Reformation.

Anno 1577. Andrew Melvill.

Anno 1580. Thomas Smeton.

Anno 1600. Patrick Sharp.

Anno 1615. Rob. Boyd of Trochrig.

Anno 1622. John Cameron.

Anno 1626. John Strange, D. D.

Anno 1650. Robert Ramsey; he lived but a month after his instalment.

Anno 1653. Patrick Gillespie.

Anno 1660. Robert Baily.

Anno 1662. Edward Wright, present Principal.

Professors of Divinity.
Anno 1640. David Dickson.

Anno 1649. Robert Baily.

Anno 1660. John Young.

Anno 1668. Gilbert Burnet.

Anno 1674. David Liddel, present Professor of Divinity.

The Principal taught Theology, till An. 1640. at which time there was a
Sallary settled for maintenance of a Professor of Divinity.

There is no Coat of Arms peculiar to this University; but they use the Arms of
the City of Glasgow.

Present Professors.
Sir Will. Fleeming of Fern, Rector. Doctor Matthew Brisbane, Dean of Faculties.

Edw. Wright, Principal or Warden. David Liddell, Prof. of Theology.

Professors of Philosophy.
William Blair, Tho. Nicolson, John Tran, John Boyd,
Learned Men and Writers.
John Sharp, Doctor and Professor of Divinity; a man well Learned, and a good
Textuary.

John Cameron Principal, of whom I need say no more, but that he was the great
Cameron, so well known to the world, by his excellent prelections on the New
Testament; he acquired so much fame in France, where he was Professor of
Divinity in Sawmer, that King James the 6th brought him to Scotland, hoping
that his Learning and worth would have had some effects upon the Puritans; but
he finding them untractable, went back to France, where he lived and died in
great esteem.

Robert Boyd Principal, was a very excellent person, and of considerable
Learning; he wrote a large Commentary on the Ephesians.

John Strange, D. D. a man of great parts, extraordinary subtle, and of a most
solid reason, as appears by his most excellent Books, De Voluntate Dei in
actibus humanis, and De Scriptura Sacra.

David Dickson, Professor of Divinity; a man wonderfully esteemed and
reverenced for his piety by the Covenanters, not unlearned; he wrote a
Commentary on St. Matthews Gospel on the Psalms, and the Epistles to the
Romans, and Hebrews; also a Book of practical Divinity, called Therapeutica
Sacra, which he wrote in Latin.

Robert Baily, Professor of Divinity, and afterward Principal; a Learned and
modest man: though he published some very violent Writings, yet those flowed
rather from the instigation of other persons, than his own inclinations: He has
left a great Evidence of his Diligence and Learning in his Opus Chronologicum.

Alexander Nisbet, and James Ferguson, two Ministers much esteemed, were bred
in this University; they wrote each of them Commentaries on some of the
Epistles.

George Hutchison was also bred here, who was accounted one of the greatest
Preachers of the Presbyterian party, and was a Learned man: He wrote on the
twelve minor Prophets; on Job, and on the Gospel of St. John. He died Anno 1674.

George Buchanan, of an excellent Wit, and Learn^ng incomparable, was bred in
this College: He was admired of all men who knew him, for ^is Learning and
subtilty: He wrote his Paraphrase on the Psalms, a rare Work, and other Poems,
whilst he stayed in France, where he lived in a long time, and became
acquainted with many Learned men; he applied himself to write the Scottish
History in Latin, which he penned wi^h such Judgment and Eloquence, as no
Country can show a a better: Only in this he is justly blamed, that with the
Factions of the Time, and to justify the proceedings of the Noblemen against
the Queen, he went too far in depressing the Royal Authority of Princes, and
allowing their controulment by Subjects: His bitterness also in writing of the
Queen, and Troubles of these Times all wise men have disliked: He died in a
great Old Age at Edinburgh, and was buried in the common Burying place, without
having any Tomb erected for his memory: But such pompous Monuments as these of
Marble, he was wont in his life time to despise, esteeming it a greater Credit,
as it was said of the Roman Cato, to have it asked why he does lack a Statue,
than to have had one erected, though never so glorious.

CHAP. XIII.
The University of Aberdeen.

IN the Reign of King Alexander the Second, Anno 121 -- there was a Studium
Generale in Collegio Canonicorum; where there were Professors and Doctors of
Divinity, and of the Canon and Civil Laws; and many Learned men have flourished
therein.

King James the Fourth, and Will. Elphinstoun, Bishop of Aberdeen, procured
from Pope Alexander the 6th, the privilege of an University in Aberdeen Anno
1494. It is endowed with as ample privileges as any University in Christendom;
and particularly the Foundation relates to the privileges of Paris and
Bononia; but has no reference to Oxford, or Cambridge, because of the Wars
between Scotland and England at that time: The privileges were afterward
confirmed by Pope Julius the Second, Clement the 7th, Leo the 10th, and Paul
the Second; and by the Successors of K. James the Fourth.

The Bishop of Aberdeen is perpetual Chancellor of this University, and has
power to visit in his own person, and to reform Abuses: And although he be not
a Doctor of Divinity, yet the foundation gives him power to confer that degree.

The Office of Vice Chancellor resides in the Official or Commissary of
Aberdeen.

The Rector, who is chosen yearly, with the Assistance of his Four Assessors,
is to take notice of Abuses, etc. in the University, and to make a return
thereof to the Chancellor: If one of the Masters happen to be Rector, then is
his power devolved upon the Vice Chancellor.

The College was founded by Bishop William Elphinstone An. 1500. and was
called the King's College, because King James the Fourth took upon him and his
Successors, the special protection of it.

Persons endowed were,

A Doctor of
Theology, who was Principal. The Canon Law. The Civil Law. Physic.
A Professor of Humanity to teach the Grammar.

A Sub-principal to teach Philosophy.

A Cantor.

A Sacrist.

Three Students of the Laws.

Three Students of Philosophy.

Six Students of Divinity; An Organist; Five Singing-Boyes, who were Students
of Humanity.

Benefactors.
Bishop Will Ephinstone, the Founder, built most part of the Fabric; furnished
the great Steeple with Ten Bells; gave many costly Ornaments, as Hangings, etc.
and many Books.

King James the Fourth bestowed upon the College the Rents of the Hospital of
St. Germans in Lothian, whereof the Tithes of the Parishes of Aberluthnot in
Mernis, of Glenmuick, and Glengardin in Mar, are a part: As also the Tithes of
the Parish^s of Slanes and Furvie in Buchan.

King James the 6th bestowed upon it the Rents of the Carmelite Friars of Bamf;
the Chaplainries of Westhall and Fallowroul.

King Charles the First gave to the College two parts of the Revenues of the
Bishopric of Aberdeen, so long as the Sea should remain vacant, An. 1641. upon
which Donation, eight Bursars more were endowed, and the University was called
the Caroline University.

King Charles the Second, by the Advice of the Estates of Parliament, did
bestow upon it Anno 1672. the stipends of all these Churches, which should
happen to be vacant within the Diocesses of Aberdeen, Murray, Ross and Cathnes;
and that for seven years, following the Date of the Act.

William Stuart, Bishop of Aberdeen, built the Library, Chapter House,
Vestry-house, a School, and Chambers for the Chaplains.

Gawin Dumbar, Bishop of Aberdeen, built the South-quarter of the College, and
the Houses belonging to the Prebendaries; and did perfect whatsoever Bishop
Elphinstone left undone.

Nicholas Hay, Professor of the Civil Law, and Official of Aberdeen, gave
maintenance for Bursars.

Duncan Sherar, Parson of Clat, gave certain Lands toward the maintenance of
Bursars.

Robert Maitland, Dean of Aberdeen, procured the annexation of the Deanery to
the College Anno 1579.

Walter Stewart Principal, procured the annexation of his Rectory of Methlick
to the College.

Sir Thomas Burnet of Leyis, endowed three Bursars.

James Wat, Rector of Snaith in Yorkshire, gave certain Lands toward the
maintenance of a Student of Divinity.

Alexander Reid, Dr. of Physic, left in Legacy to the College, two hundred
pounds of English money: He also left his Books to the Library.

John Forbes, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity, did purchase two Houses; he
left one for the accommodation of his Successors, Professors of Divinity; and
the other for the use of the Cantor.

The following persons left their Books to the Library;

Alexander Strachan, Doctor and Professor of Divinity.

George Clerk, a Minister.

Thomas Garden.

George Anderson.

Sir Francis Gordon.

Alexander Blackhall, Student of Divinity, Resident at London.

Thomas Mercer, Burgess of Aberd^en.

Principals.
An. 150 -- Hector Boeth, or Boys, (descended from the Boeths of Panbride in
Angus) Born in Dundee, and Bred up in Letters in the University of Paris, was
the first Prinpal: Besides his History of the Scots, he wrote the Lives of the
Bishops of Aberdeen.

Anno 153 -- Will. Hay Sub-principal, was his Successor.

Anno 1552. John Biffait continued six years, and resigned his place, because
of his infirmity proceeding from long sickness, to

Anno 1558. Alexander Anderson, Sub principal, who was also Parson of Tyrie,
and Vicar of Kinkell. This man was a great Scholar, and a subtle Disputant; but
no great friend to the College: For the hatred he bare to the Reformed
Religion, he alienated some of the College Revenues; destroyed many of its
Writings and Evidences, whereby many Lands and other Rents belonging to St.
Germans, are quite lost; sold the Ornaments, Books, and other furniture
belonging to the College. Commendable he was in one thing; for when some of
the Reformers would have taken away the Lead and Bells he beat them away by
violence

He was afterward turned out, and the place conferred upon*

Anno 1569. Alexander Arbuthnot (Brother to the Baron of Arbuthnot) Parson of
Arbuthnot, and Logy Buchan, a most Learned and pious Divine.

Anno 1584. Walter Stewart, Sub-principal, was his Successor, a very hopeful
person, taken away in the thirty sixth year of his Age.

Anno 1593. Upon his Death David Rait (of the House of Hallgreen in the Mernis)
Sub-principal, was preferred to the place: He continued Principal forty two
years.

Anno 1634. To him succeeded William Leslie, D. D. Sub-principal, a man of
great Learning: In his Time, Anno 1634. a storm of Wind beat down the Top of
the great Steeple, which afterward was built more stately, consisting of 4
Arches, supporting a Crown with a Globe and Cross. Principal Leslie was for his
Loyalty thrust out by the Covenanters, and in his room was Elected,

Anno 1640. William Guild, Doctor of Divinity, Minister in Aberdeen, and one of
the Chaplains to King Charles the First, a Learned and worthy person: He built
the Tradesmens Hospital in Aberdeen; left considerable Legacies to the Poor,
and bequeathed his Books to the Library of St. Andrews.

Anno 1649. The General Assembly gave a Commission to some Ministers, and Lay
Elders, to reform the College, and to expel the Malignants.

Persons thrust out.
Dr. Will. Guild, Principal.

Alex. Middleton, Sub-principal.

Professors of Philosophy.
Patrick Gordon, Geo. Middleton,
Persons put in their places.
The Commissioners at that time did not unanimously agree whom to put in; and
considering Winter drawing near, that the College would not be well governed,
unless there were a Principal or Sub-principal; therefore they ordered the
Sub-principal to continue, till his place was supplied by another. Shortly
after, the Masters restored the Principal, in despite of all opposition, to his
place.

Anno 1651. General Monk sent five Colonels to reform the College. Colonel
Fenwick, Moseley, Disburrough, Owen and Smith. At this Reformation, both
Principal, and Sub-principal, were turned out. Gilbert Reule was substituted in
the room of the latter; and the place of the former was conferred upon*

Anno 1652. John Row, an Independent Minister in Aberdeen, a person well seen
in the Latin and Greek Languages, and not ill in the Hebrew. In his Time Anno
1657. was laid the Foundation of the New Work, in the North-East corner of the
College, of six Stories high, consisting of 24 Chambers, with Chimnies, and
conveniences, a School, and a Bulliard-house. The Money that built it was
given by the Masters and other well disposed persons, whose names are written
in a Register called Album Amicorum Collegii Regii Abredonensis. Mr. Row
continued Principal till Anno 1661. At which time William Rait, Minister at
Brichen, was preferred to the place; he stayed only a year, and returned to
Brichen.

Anno 1662. Alex. Middleton, Minist. in old Aberdeen, and Sub-principal, of
whom before, succeeded him.

Professors of Divinity.
The Professor of Divinity was founded by the Bishop, Synod and College of
Aberdeen Anno 162 -- The first Professor was

John Forbes, Doctor of Divinity, a most pious, peaceable and Learned Divine;
he continued till the year 163 -- And being by the Magistrates of Aberdeen
chosen to be one of the Ministers of the Town, he left for his Successor

Anno 1634. Andrew Strachan, Dr. of Divinity, who lived little above a year
after his Instalment.

Anno 1635. Dr. Forbes was chosen Professor again, and continued, till for his
Loyalty, he was thrust out by the Covenanters, Anno 1639. Shortly after he went
into Holland, where he published his Instructiones Historico-Theologicae; and
returning home, died in his house of Corse: Anno 164 -- William Douglass,
Minister at Forgue, succeeded Dr. Forbes: He died Anno 1665.

Anno 1673. Henry Scougall, Parson of Achterless, was after some years vacancy,
preferred to the place.

The Election of the Rector, Dean of Faculties, Professor of the Oriental
Languages, Professors of Philosophy, etc. is by the major part of the Masters:
The Principal, and rest of the Prebendaries, are chosen not only by the major
part, but also by four Procuratores Nationum: In all the Elections the
Foundation gives the Principal one great privilege: Volumus enim ut in hisce
omnibus Electionibus Principalis habeat vocem nominativam, Electivam and
Conclusivam; which seems to be a negative voice inherent to him.

If a place be vacant, a Bursar or Alumnus, is to be preferred before any
other, if he be sufficiently qualified: If a vacant place be not filled within
one month, then it falls to the Chancellor jure devoluto, who presents one for
that time.

The Procuratores Nationum, their having a Voice in the Election, imports the
Like to be in the Scholars, from whom they derive their power of Voting: The
Scholars are divided into four Classes, according to the number of Diocesses,
or Provinces, wherein they live.

The Provinces are these;

1. Provincia Abredonensis, contains the Shires of Aberdeen and Bamf.

2. Provincia Moraviensis, includes all those Countries that lie on the
North-side of the River Spey.

3. Provincia Augusiensis, contains Angus, and Mernis.

4. Provincia Laudoniensis, comprehends, besides Lothian, all the rest of
Scotland.

The Students of each Province, do choose a Procurator, to give up their Votes
in the Election.

Every Michaelmas the Masters convene after the ending of the Ten weeks
Vacation, and a Problema is affixed on the College Gates, inviting young
Scholars to come and dispute for a Burse (which is their maintenance at the
College.) To these are prescribed Exercises or Theams to make, then Latin
Authors in prose and verse to expound, and the first four (for so many Burses
are void at every Commencement) who are reckoned to be the best Scholars, are
preferred.

In October the Students begin to convene: They wear a Scarlet Gown with
hanging Sleeves; and these who are Bursars, a black Gown with a Girdle: Their
time of continuance at the University is four years: They are ranked into four
Classes.

To those of the first Class is taught the Greek Language.

The Students of the second Class learn Logicks and Metaphysics.

Those of the third (who at the years end are Batchelors of Arts) do learn
Ethics and general Physics.

The fourth and highest Class do complete their course with special Physics
and Mathematics.

The time of Commencement of Masters of Arts, is in July: The manner thus, as
in all other of the Universities.

These who are to receive their degrees, do publish their Theses, some days
before the Commencement, inviting all Learned men and Scholars to come and
dispute.

At the day appointed, great preparations are made; the Candidates apparelled
in black, with black Gowns: and at Ten of the Clock all go into the public
School, where the Professor of Philosophy, or Regent, who is to confer the
degree (or in some Colleges the Principal confers the degree) makes a long
Speech, beginning with prayer, to the Auditors; which being ended, the Disputes
begin, and continue till Four or Five of the Clock: Then they take a little
refreshment, and so return to the Graduation or Lauriation.

The following Oath is tendered to the Candidati.

Ego A. B. coram Omniscio and Omnipotenti Deo, Religionem and Fidem, unicam and
solam Orthodoxam, in Ecclesia Scoticana palam propositam, professurum me, and
ab omnibus Pontisiciorum and aliorum quorumcunque haeresibus long abhorrentem,
spondeo, voveo juro: Insuper, Vniversitati huic, almae Parenti, cui hanc
ingenii culturam debeo, liberaliter relaturum me nutritiam quam potero, eadem
fide solenniter promitto: Quod si fidem, sciens and volens, fefellero,
arcanorum cordis recessuum Scrutatorem Deum, ultorem and vindicem non recuso:
Ita me adjuvet Deus. After the Oath, one of the Candidati ascends the Desk; and
the Regent taking into his hand a Hat, or Cap, with these following words, does
give him his Degree.

Ego eadem Authoritate, quam summi ac potentissimi principes Almae huic
Vniversitati amplissimam indulsere Te A. B. in Artibus liberalibus, and
Disciplinis ^hilosophicis Magistrum creo, proclamo, constituo, renuncio,
Tibique potestatem do, legendi, scribendi, omniaque id genus alia committendi,
quae hic, aut ubivis gentium, Artium Magistris concedi solet: Et in signum
manumissionis Tuae: Caput Tuum hoc pileo (putting the Cap on the Scholars head)
adorno, Quod ut Tibi faelix faustumque sit, Deum optimum, maximum precor:
Insuper, librum hunc tibi apertum trado; ut ingenii tui aliquod specimen coram
celebri hoc coetu edas, rogo.

Then the Graduate has a short Speech to the Auditors, and so the Ceremony is
ended, with clapping of hands, sounding of Trumpets, Shoutings, etc. Thus are
all the Candidati graduated one after another.

Present Masters and Professors.
John Menzies, Professor of Divinity in the Marischal College of Aberdeen,
Rector.

Dr. Lewis Gordon, Dean of Faculty.

Alexander Middleton, Dean of Aberdeen, Principal.

Henry Scougall Prof. of Divinity.

Sir Geo Nicolson Prof of The Laws.

Patrick Vrqhuart, Dr. and Professor of Physic.

George Middleton, Sub-principal and Professor of Philosophy.

Patrick Gordon, Prof. of Humanity, and of the Oriental Languages.

Robert Forbes Prof. of Philosophy.

John Buchan Prof. of Philosophy.

Geo. Middleton Prof. of Philosophy.

There are also a Student of Divinity,

15 Bursars of Philosophy: And

A Cantor, who is Master of the Musick-School in the Town.

An Oeconomus.

A Janitor.

A Cook.

A Gardener, and other inferior Servants.

Learned Men and Writers.
Hector Boeth, Principal, according to the Time he lived in, was very
considerable, a great Philosopher, and much commended by Erasmus for his
Eloquence. Buchanan, who could well discern of Learned men, speaking in a
certain place of him, says, Quod non solum artium liberalium cognitione supra
quam illa ferebant tempora insignis erat, sed etiam humanitate and comitate
singulari praeditus. That he was not only notably Learned in the Liberal
Sciences above the condition of those Times; but also of an exceeding
courteous, and humane inclination; yet he is traduced by some of the English
Writers, for a Fabulous and partial Historian: But they who please to peruse
his History, will perceive that that is spoken out of passion and malice, and
not upon any just account.

John Lesley, Canonist in the King's College, and Official of Aberdeen, was a
very worthy person, and of great Learning in those days he lived in: He
suffered much for his Loyalty to his Princess Queen Mary.

John Forbes, Dr. and Professor of Divinity: All that I shall say of this great
man is, that he was one of the best Scholars that ever our Kingdom bred, as
will appear to all that ever read his Instructiones Historico-Theologicae;
which these very unhappy Times suffered him not to finish, to the great regret
of all Learned men: His Irenicum does also show both his Learning, and
Moderation: His piety and devotion was so signal, that his name will be always
remembered there, with great honor.

William Guild, D. D. Principal; he wrote Commentaries on several Books of the
Old Testament, a System of Divinity, and many Treatises against the Papists: He
had a fair Estate, which he left to pious uses.

Arthur Johnson, Doctor of Physic, and Rector of the University, was an
excellent Poet.

William Douglass, Professor of Divinity, a man of great industry; he wrote
some little Treatises.

There were also three Brothers descended from a Noble Family, Duncan, Thomas
and Gilbert Burnet, who were bred here, and were in great esteem. The first was
a Dr. of Physic, and practiced in Norwich; he was Learned, holy, and good. The
second was of the same profession, and likewise in great esteem in Braintrey,
where he practiced Physic. The third was a professor of Philosophy, first at
Basil, then at Montaubon, and was in such esteem there, that a National Synod
of the Protestants in France appointed his Philosophical Writings to be printed
at the expense of the Clergy: But he dying before his Manuscripts were Put in
order, only his Book of Ethics was printed; they all three flourished about
the year 1630.

George Middleton, Dr. of Physic, was once a professor of Philosophy here, a
man of considerable parts, and good Learning, and well skilled in the practice
of Physic.

William Gordon, Dr. and Professor of Physic here, was a very worthy person,
of great judgment, and well seen in that Science: He died Anno 164 --

James Sandilands, Doctor, and Professor of the Laws here, and Official of
Aberdeen, was a Learned man, and a great Civilian: He died Anno 164 --

Many other Learned men have been Professors here, beside those who have had
their Education in this College.

Of the Marischal College of Aberdeen.
The Marischal College of Aberdeen, was founded by George Keith, Earl
Marischal, Anno 1593.

Persons endowed were,

A Principal.

Three Professors of Philosophy.

Since that there has been added,

A Professor of Divinity,

And

A Professor of Mathematics.

A fourth Professor of Philosophy.

Twenty four poor Scholars.

Benefactors.
George Earl Marischal, Founder, gave toward the maintenance of the
Professors, certain Lands, lying near Aberdeen; and at Bervie in Mernis.

The Town of Aberdeen built most part of the Edifice.

Thomas Wood left an Annual Sallary to a Library Keeper.

Bernard Cargill gave a considerable sum of Money toward the maintenance of a
Professor of Mathematics.

Sir Alexander Irwing of Drum, left in Legacy toward the maintenance of poor
Scholars, or Bursars of Philosophy and Divinity, a thousand pound sterling.

King Charles the First bestowed upon the College, the third part of the Rents
of the Bishopric of Aberdeen, so long as the Sea should continue vacant, Anno
1641.

Alexander Reid, Dr. of Physic, left in Legacy to the College, and
Grammar School, two hundred pounds sterling.

Alexander Ross, D. D. Minister in Aberdeen.

William Guild, D. D. Minister in Aberdeen.

Patrick Dun, Dr. of Physic, each of them gave money to maintain Bursars:
Several of the B^nefactors left their Books to the Library.

Principals.
Anno 1593. Robert How, the first Principal.

Anno 159 -- Gilbert Gray.

Anno 160 -- Andrew Aidie.

Anno 161 -- William Forbes, Dr. of Divinity, afterward B. of Edinburgh.

Anno 162 -- Patrick Dun, Dr. of Physic.

Anno 1639. William Moir.

Anno 1663. James Leslie, Dr. of Physic.

Professors of Divinity.
Anno 162 -- Robert Baron, Dr. and Professor of Divinity, afterward B. Elect
of Orkney.

Anno 164 -- John Menzeis.

Present Professors.
Patrick Sibald, Rector.

Robert Paterson, Principal.

Duncan Liddel, Professor of the Mathematics.

George Peacock, Sub-principal, and Professor of Philosophy.

George Paton, Robert Farquar, James Lorimer, Professors of Philosophy. The
Earl Marischal is the only Patron of this College.

Learned Men and Writers.
William Forbes D. D. Principal, was a Person of rare endowments, vast
learning, and a celebrated Preacher: He was the first Bishop of Edinburgh, and
indeed a Holy Person; of whom all that ever knew him, gave this Character: That
they never saw him, but they thought his heart was in Heaven; he was indeed a
fit pattern to all that should come after him.

Robert Baron, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity, was a Person of incomparable
worth, and learning, he had a clear apprehension of things, and a rare faculty
of making the hardest things easily understood, he is well known by his Book,
De objecto formali fidei, and his Metaphysics, and other small Treatises:
there are many other Manuscripts of his, which are not yet Published, and he
bare the greatest part of that famous debate, Anno 1638, between the Doctors
of Aberdeen, and the Covenanters.

Alexander Reid, Doctor of Physic, was bred here, he became very famous in
London, and left a great part of his Estate to pious uses, in and about the
places of his Education.

Duncane Liddel, Doctor of Physic, was bred here, and much esteemed for his
learned Writings, as his Book De febribus, and several other Books which he
wrote.

Sir Alexander Fraser, His Majesty's first Physician, was educated in Aberdeen,
whose learning, and happy practice of Physic, as they raised him to such
esteem, and dignity, so his constant loyalty, and ^^gh generosity did answer
that noble Race of Frasers, from whom he descended,

CHAP. XIV.
The University of Edinburgh.

KIng James the sixth of Blessed Memory, Anno 1580, founded this University,
upon the supplication, and address of the Magistrates of that City, unto His
Majesty for that effect. He granted to them a Charter, under the great Seal,
allowing them the full liberty, and privilege of an University within their
Town. but the foundation was not perfected till Anno 1582. The privileges of
this University are the same with those of any other University in the Kingdom.

The dignity of Chancellor, and Vice Chancellor does reside in the
Magistrates, and Town Council of Edinburgh, who are the only Patrons: neither
was the dignity ever conferred upon any single Person.

The Persons endowed were,

A Principal, or Warden.

A Professor of Divinity.

Four Masters or Regents (for so they are called) of Philosophy, a Professor or
Regent of Humanity (Humaniorum literarum) or Philology.

Since the first Foundation the Town has added a Professor of Hebrew, Anno
1640.

Doctor Conradus Otto, a learned Jew, was the first Professor.

The City of Edinburgh likewise added a Professor of Mathematics, preferring
James Gregory Fellow of the Royal Society to the place, Anno 1674.

Benefactours.
King James the 6th was Founder.

The College was Built, and the Masters, and Bursars are maintained by the
public, and private benevolence of the Citizens of Edinburgh.

The Earl of Tiviot has built several convenient Chambers, being educated in
this College, and left Money for the maintenance of several Bursars.

Several Citizens have built Chambers, and mortified considerable Sums of Money
for the use of the University.

All the Benefactors names are inserted in the Books of the Town-Council, and
in the Register of the Library, and are also drawn in golden letters upon
several places in the walls of the Library, together with their several
donations; and also at the time of the public commencement which is once every
year, they are recited, viva voce, in the hearing of all.

The Library was founded by Clement Little, one of the Officials, or
Commissa^ies of Edinburgh, Anno 1635. since which time, it is much increased
both by Donatives from the Citizens, as also from the Scholars, who are more
in number here, than in any other College in the Kingdom.

There is a gift in this Library, of one Mrs. Scot, to the value of 30 lib. the
more esteemed, because it is from a worthy Matron, and lover of learning, a
good example to all others of her Sex.

Principals.
Anno 1583. Robert Rollock, one of the Ministers of the City; who was likewise
Professor of Divinity (for all the principals here are primarii professores
Theologiae) was the first principal, and Rector of the University.

Anno 1600. Henry Charters.

Anno 1620. Patrick Sands.

Anno 1622. Robert Boyd.

Anno 1625. John Adamson.

Anno 1653. Robert Leightone, who was afterward preferred to be Bishop of
Dumblane.

Anno 1662. William Colvil.

Anno 1675. Andrew Cant.

Professors of Divinity.
Anno 162 -- Andrew Ramsay.

Anno 1630. John Sharp, Doctor of Divinity.

Anno 1650. David Dickson.

Anno 1664. William Keith D. D.

Anno 1675. Lawrence Charters.

Present Professors.
Andrew Cant, Principal.

Lawrence Charters, Professor of Divinity.

Alexander Dickson, Hebrew Professor.

Gilbert Macmurdo, Andrew Massy, Mr. Litherdale, Mr. Cockburn, Professors of
Philosophy.

Alexander Cuninghame, Professor of Humanity.

Alexander Hendersone, keeper of the Library.

Learned Men and Writers-
Robert Rollock, Principal, a Person of great worth and learning, he wrote
Commentaries on the Psalms, and some of the Prophets, some Sermons and pieces
of Devotion were published by him; he was in great esteem with all good men,
for his learning, holiness, and moderation.

Henry Charters, Principal, a Person of great modesty and humility, and well
seen in Theological learning.

Patrick Sands, Doctor of Divinity, Principal, very learned in the Mathematics.

John Adamson, Principal, a man of great learning, and of very quick parts.

Alexander Hendersone, Principal of the University, and one of the Ministers in
the City: the greatest Ringleader of the Covenanters, and often employed by
them in the affairs of Church, and State, both in Scotland and Engl. He was a
Person of great gravity, and composedness, and of considerable learning. That
debate between his late Majesty, and him at Newcastle, 1646. about
Church Government, and the occasions he then had of knowing that blessed
Martyr, wrought much upon him, so that he went back to Scotland much changed in
his principles; and it was believed, that if he had lived, he would have been
very instrumental in the King's Service: He died soon after his return from
England, being the most universally-esteemed man of all that party.

William Colvil Principal, a man of a very moderate temper: He was deposed by
the Covenanters; he never would accept preferment, notwithstanding diverse
Bishoprics were proffered to him: He wrote diverse pieces which are printed in
English, and Ethica Christiana in Latin.

William Keith, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, a man of great Learning who
had diligently studied both the Fathers and Schoolmen, and was a great Master
of Languages; being very well skilled in the Hebrew and Rabinical Learning; he
was wholly mortified, and denied to the world, and led a most severe kind of
life: He died An. 1674.

If there be any mistake in the names of the present Professors of any of the
Universities, it is because they are often soon preferred to some dignity in
the Church; but mistakes of this nature are pardonable, being none are named
who have not been in these public capacities; and according to the best
information, there is but little, or no mistake in their names, that are now
actually in those circumstances above mentioned.

There is no mention made of the Learned Professors, who are yet alive; that
were somewhat of flattery to celebrate their praises to posterity, while they
yet remain with us: But this in general may be said of them all, that they give
as great proofs of their Learning, as any Professors in great Britain, which
is demonstrable by the great number of Graduates every year from their
Universities, who are not inferior to those of other Nations, when their
Learning is questioned abroad.

The Commissioners that have represented our Kings since K. James was settled on
the Throne of England, were as follows,
King James the Sixth.
John Grahame, Earl of Montross, Commissioner 1604.

George Hume, Earl of Dumbar, Commissioner 1606.

George Keith, Earl of Marischal, Commissioner 1609.

Alexander Seaton, Earl of Dumfermlin, Commissioner 1612.

James Hamilton, Marquess of Hamilton, Commissioner 1621.

King Charles the First.
James Hamilton, Marquess of Hamilton, Com. 1638.

John Stewart, Earl of Traquair, Com. 1639.

James Grahame, Marquess of Montross, Governor 1644.

King Charles the Second.
John Middleton, Earl of Middleton, Com. 1660.

John Lesly, Duke of Rothes. Commissioner 1663.

John Maitland, Duke of Lauderdail, Com. 1669.

His Royal Highness, James Duke of Albany and York Com. 1681.

A Catalogue of the Chancellors of the Kingdom, since the year 1198. Collected
out of Histories.
1198. Will. Malvoisin, Bishop of Glasgow. 1220. Will. de Bosco, B. of
Dumblane. 1226. Matthew. Kinninmouth, Bishop of Aberdeen. 1239. Will. Babington,
B. of Glasgow. 1247. -- Abbot of -- 1248. Rich. Innerkeithing Bishop of
Dumblane. 1259. Gamelinus, B. of St. Andrews. 1273. Will. Wishart, B. of
Glasgow. 1280. Will. Frazer, B. of St. Andrews. 1298. Maurice, B. of the Isles.
1363. Adam, Bishop of Brichen. 1380. John Lion, Lord Glammes. 1390. Gilbert
Grimlaw, Bishop of Aberdeen. 1409. Will. Lauder, B. of Glasgow. 1434. John, B.
of Brichen. 1436. Sir Will. Creighton of Creighton. 1444. James Bruce, B. of
Dunkeld. 1448 Patrick Lion, Lord Glammes. 1453. Will. Sinclare, Earl of Orkney.
1463. Geo. Shorswood, B. of Brichen. 1474 John Lang, B. of Glasgow. 1476. Andr.
Stewart, Lord Evendail. 1484. Will. Elphinstone, B. of Aberdeen. 1494. Archbald
Douglass, E. of Angus. 1497. George Gordon, E. of Huntly. 1502. James Stewart,
Archbishop of St. Andrews. 1512. Alex. Stewart, Archbishop of St. Andrews.
1518. James Beaton, Archbishop of Glasgow. 1526. Gawin Dumbar, Archbishop of
Glasgow. 1534. William Stewart, Bishop of Aberdeen. 1539. Cardinal David
Beaton, Archbishop of St. Andrews. 1561. George Gordon, E. of Huntly. 1563.
James Douglas, E. of Morton. 1567. George Gordon, E. of Huntly. 1570. James
Douglas, E. of Morton again. 1572. Archbald Campbell, Earl of Argile. 1575.
John Lion, Lord Glammes. 1578. John Stewart, E. of Athol. 1579. Coline
Campbell, E. of Argile. 1584. James Stewart, E. of Arran. 1591. John Maitland,
L. Thirlstane. 1598. John Grahame, E. of Montross. 1604. Alexander Seatone,
Earl of Dumfermline. 1622. George Hay, E. of Kinnoul. 1635. John Spotiswood,
Archbishop of St. Andrews. 1641. John Campbell, E. of Lowdoun. 1660. William
Cunninghame, Earl of Glencairn. 1665. John Leslie, Duke of Rothes.
Writers of the Scottish History.
Cornelius Hibernicus.

Veremundus, a Spaniard, Archdeacon of St. Andrews, wrote the History of the
Nation from its Original, till the Reign of King Malcolm the Third.

Johannes a Campo-bello, or Campbell.

Turgot Prior of Durham, and B. of St. Andrews, wrote the Lives of King Malcolm
Canmoir, and of his Queen Margaret.

Liber Sconae, a Chronicle written by the Monks of Scoone.

Liber Pasletensis; The Black Book of Paislay, a Chronicle written by the Monks
of Paislay.

Liber Pluscartensis; a Chronicle written by the Monks of Pluscardy.

One Blind Henry wrote the History of Sir William Wallace in Scottish Meeter.

John Harbor, Archdeacon of Aberdeen, did write the Life of King Robert Bruce
in Scottish Meeter.

John Major, Provost of St. Salvator's College in St. Andrews, wrote the
History of the Nation.

William Elphinstone, B. of Aberdeen, wrote a Treatise of the Scottish
Antiquities.

Hector Boeth or Boys, Principal of the King's College of Aberdeen, wrote the
History of the Nation, till the Reign of King James the First, continued till
the Reign of King James the Sixth, by John Ferrerius a Piemontoise, a Monk of
Pluscardy.

John Balenden, Archdeacon of Murray did translate Boys History into English.

George Buchanan, Praeceptor to King James the Sixth, wrote the History of the
Nation till the year 1572.

Robert Johnstone wrote a Continuation of the Scottish History from the year
1572. till the year 1624. in Latin Folio.

John Leslie, Bishop of Ross, wrote the History of the Nation till the year 138
--

Raphael Holinshed, wrote the History of the Nation, till the Reign of King
James the Sixth, continued by Francis Thin.

Will. Cambden wrote a Description of the Kingdom.

John Dempster wrote an Introduction to the Scottish History.

David Chalmer wrote a Treatise of the Scottish Saints.

David Hume of Godscroft did write the History of the Earls of Douglass, and
Angus.

William Drummond of Hawthornden, did write the Lives of the Five King James's

William Sanderson wrote the Lives of Queen Mary, King James the Sixth, and
King Charles the First.

John Spotiswood, Archbishop of St. Andrews, did write the History of the
Church of Scotland, from the first Plantation of the Christian Faith therein,
till the Death of King James the Sixth.

The Office of the Chancellor of State, conferred upon him by that glorious
Martyr King Charles the First, he discharged to the satisfaction of his Royal
Master, and the advantage of the Church: He was a person of rare Ornaments, and
in all things completely qualified for his Employment; yet he did not escape
the hard measure which other Loyal Subjects tasted of; for by the Covenanters
he was forced to retire into England, where he met with entertainment more
suitable to his worth: He ended his days in a good old Age, and was honorably
Interred in Westminster Abbey, Anno 1639. after he had governed the Sea twenty
four years.

George Wishart, Dr. of Divinity, and Bishop of Edinburgh, did write the
Actions of James Marquess of Montross.

Robert Gordon of Stralogh, did write the Theatrum Scotiae, being a description
of the whole Kingdom, with the Maps of every particular Country; Printed by
Janson Bleaw at Amsterdam, a very excellent work: The mercenary Printer did him
a double injury; first in printing with his Book, Buchanan's Seditious Pamphlet
De Jure Regni apud Scotos; it being sufficiently known that the Author was of
no such principle, but always Loyal: Then in dedicating that work to the
Usurper O. Cromwell, whereas the Author sent over to the Printer, a Dedication
of his Book to His most Sacred Majesty, at that time Prince of Wales; and the
Copy of that Dedication written with his own hand, is yet in the Custody of his
Son, the Reverend James Gordon, Parson of Rothimay: This much was necessary to
be said in vindication of that worthy Gentleman, who was one of the most
Learned persons of the Age he lived in.

If any think that this Treatise has not swelled to that bulk, that might be
expected from an undertaking of this nature, having so large a Subject to treat
of; let this suffice for an Answer, that the several calamities that have
happened in this Ancient Kingdom, may justly serve for an Apology, when it is
to be considered, that after the Death of Alexander, the Third of that Name,
King of Scotland, and all his Sons, which in one years space died of a
pestilent Fever, which was never before known in this Kingdom; his Daughter
being Queen of Norway, died in the same year, who left behind her a Daughter,
whom after the Death of the King and his Sons, the Estates sent for; to this
effect Two Ambassadors were dispatched to Norway, to take care of the safe
conveyance of this Young Lady, the only hope the Kingdom relied on: It was not
long after these Gentlemen that were sent to Norway returned, bringing News
that this Lady was dead likewise: Consider what fears and sorrows at the
hearing of these News, did perplex the Subjects of this Kingdom: So many deaths
falling out in the Royal Family, did presage great calamities to ensue: For as
the Loss of so worthy a King was great; so their Fears was no less, because of
the uncertainty of the Succession: Many Competitors (six they were in number)
claiming the Inheritance of the Crown; and all of them, men of power and
friendship: It must needs be supposed that they did divide the Realm, and so
beget a Civil War; yet these who were trusted with the management of Affairs,
during the Inter Reign, did by their Mediation, work them to a Compromise, and
to remit the decision of the Controversy to King Edward the First of England,
a Prince of long Experience, and much respected in that time: For this purpose
diverse Gentlemen were sent to King Edward, who at that time was in France, to
inform him of the inconveniences that were feared to fall out in the Kingdom
of Scotland, and the course they had taken to prevent the same, entreating his
help for quieting the State. King Edward, glad to have an hand in the making of
a King in Scotland, dimitted them with many kind expressions of his kindness to
the Kingdom, assigning a Diet for the Competitors at Norham upon Tweed; at
which Diet the King was present; at this meeting there was no decision; all the
Competitors except two, to wit, John Baliol, and Robert Bruce, were ordered to
cease from their claim: Of Baliol and Bruce an Oath was taken, that they should
abide and stand by the Sentence the King should pronounce. The like Oath was
taken by the Prelates Nobles, and other Commissioners, who swore to accept of
him for their King, that would be tried to have the best Right; and for the
greater assurance, all their Seals were appended to the Compromise.

Five years and some more were spent before the Controversy was brought to an
end: At last K. Edw. returned to Berwick, and calling the Twenty Four, to whom
the important Affairs were committed, they were shut up in the Church, there to
debate the Matter, none being permitted to have access unto them, he himself
now and then went in to know how their proceedings went; and perceiving the
greater part inclined to Bruce his Right, he dealt with him, promising to
invest him in the Kingdom, so as he would hold the same Crown of England: Bruce
answered, that he was not so desirous of Rule, as he would therefore prejudice
the Liberties of the Kingdom, being it was sufficiently known that Scotland
from the first Foundation of the State had been a Free and Independent Kingdom,
and not subject to any other power whatsoever. The like offer he made to the
other, who being more greedy of a Kingdom, than careful of his Honor, did
yield thereunto. Afterward Baliol assisted with the Nobility, did meditate
upon a Revenge of King Edward's proceedings with him in that Juncture of Time,
by forcing Baliol to swear subjection to him, at which the Nobility were so
much displeased.

About this Time King Edward sent to crave a supply of men to be sent him by
virtue of the Late Allegiance sworn by Baliol, which was utterly rejected as
unjust; he having then War with France: Upon this defection of Baliol, King
Edward entered into Scotland with a mighty Army, and prevailed, Baliol being
overthrown.

King Edward his Course for Extirpating the Scots.
And now did the State seem to be wholly ruined; for Edward intending to make
sure his Title, led away captive all that had the least ability to stir, and to
extinguish, if it had been possible, the very memory of the Nation: He
abolished all the Ancient Laws of Scotland; traduced the Ecclesiastical Rites
to the Forms of England; destroyed the Ancient Monuments erected, either by the
Romans, or their own Progenitors; bu^nt all the Registers, with that famous
Library of Restennoth (wherein besides many other Volumes, were reserved the
Books which King Fergus the Second brought with him from Rome) removed the
Marble Chair, in which (as the Vulgar believed) the Fate of the Kingdom did
consist: In fine, left nothing which might incite generous spirits to remember
their former Fortunes, or encourage them in any sort to virtue and worthiness,
which makes any account of the Kingdom as to its Registers the less voluminous:
This is not a place to declare how the English afterward at Banockb^rn, were
wholly defeated, without leaving any to carry the News thereof into England;
but this would be too great a digression.

The next thing to be considered is, What that Monster of Rebellion, Cromwell I
mean, thought fit as a very valuable pledge, to send to the Tower of London,
viz. all the public Registers, Records and Rolls of the Kingdom, which lay
there, till His Majesty's happy Restoration; after which, by the King's
Orders, they were sent down by Sea, to be laid up in the Castle of Edinburgh;
but the Ship that was laden with them, was cast away near the Holy Island; so
they were all irrecoverably lost and sunk. Dempster in his Apparatus to the
Scottish History, promised a great many things to the World, which he never
performed. Some have thought that he only amused the People by the undertaking
he mentions in that Book. Others believed that he knew a great many Manuscripts
beyond Sea, which were carried thither by Monks and Friars at the Reformation.
In most Religious Houses there was a Chronicle written of the Times; some in
Rithme, English and Latin; some in Prose; but there cannot be much made out of
them, they being full of Legends and Stories: There are besides very
considerable Manuscripts in Scotland, that relate to private Families, and give
an account of several public Transactions; as the Histories of the Families of
the Drummonds, Gordons and Duglass's, etc. But they all come far short of what
might have been expected from these Registers that have been lost and
destroyed: Therefore we must rely upon the Credit of our Ancient Historians,
being there are no means left to correct them by.

FINIS.

