A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF A PASSAGE BY THE North Pole TO IAPAN, CHINA, etc.

Pleaded by Three Experiments: And Answers to all Objections that can be urged
against a Passage that way.

As
1. By a Navigation from Amsterdam into the North Pole, and two Degrees beyond
it. 2. By a Navigation from Iapan toward the North Pole. 3. By an Experiment
made by the Czar of Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the Northwards of Nova
Zembla is a free and open Sea as far as Iapan, China, etc.
With a MAP of all the Discovered Lands nearest to the Pole.

By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the King's most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Moxon, and sold at his Shop at the Sign of Atlas on
Ludgate Hill. 1674.

A Brief Discourse of a Passage by the North Pole to Japan, China, etc.
AMong the many Essaies that have been made to find a near Passage to Iapan,
China, etc. the most probable and likely has as yet (in my opinion) been
over-seen, or at least not attempted. And therefore I shall hereby communicate
my Conceptions to Public approbation or censure. It is that a Passage may very
probably be about the North Pole. And the Reason inducing me to conceive so,
is, That we have no certainty from all the Discoveries that have been made of
any Land lying within 8 degrees about the Pole: But on the contrary, that I
have credibly been informed by a Steer-man of a Dutch Greenland Ship, that
there is a free and open Sea under the very Pole, and somewhat beyond it. And I
for my own part give credit to his Relation, and do conceive that any sober
ingenious Man would do the like, did he know in what an honest manner, and by
what an un-interessed accident I happened to hear it; For thus it was: Being
about 22 years ago in Amsterdam, I went into a Drinking-house to drink a cup of
Beer for my thirst, and sitting by the public Fire, among several People there
happened a Seaman to come in, who seeing a Friend of his there, who he knew went
in the Greenland Voyage, wondered to see him, because it was not yet time for
the Greenland Fleet to come home, and asked him what accident brought him home
so soon: His Friend (who was the Steer-man aforesaid in a Greenland Ship that
Summer) told him that their Ship went not out to Fish that Summer, but only to
take in the Lading of the whole Fleet, to bring it to an early Market, etc.
But, said he, before the Fleet had caught Fish enough to lade us, we, by order
of the Greenland Company, Sailed into the North Pole, and came back again.
Whereupon (his Relation being Novel to me) I entered discourse with him, and
seemed to question the truth of what he said. But he did ensure me it was true,
and that the Ship was then in Amsterdam, and many of the Seamen belonging to
her to justify the truth of it: And told me moreover, that they sailed 2
degrees beyond the Pole. I asked him, if they found no Land or Islands about the
Pole? He told me No, there was a free and open Sea; I asked him if they did not
meet with a great deal of Ice? He told me No, they saw no Ice. I asked him what
Weather they had there? He told me fine warm Weather, such as was at Amsterdam
in the Summer time, and as hot. I should have asked him more questions, but that
he was engaged in discourse with his Friend, and I could not in modesty
interrupt them longer. But I believe the Steer-man spoke matter of fact and
truth, for he seemed a plain honest and unaffectatious Person, and one who
could have no design upon me.

But though I believe this story, yet methinks I hear many object against it,
and are apt to urge three seeming Reasons to prove it false, or at least some
particulars of his Relation. And first, That it cannot be warm under the Pole,
because that about Greenland, and many other Parts less Northerly, the Sea is
so full of great Bodies of Ice, that Ships can hardly sail for it. Secondly, Or
if warm, yet not so warm as at Amsterdam in the Summer time, because the
farther Northerly the colder Weather. Thirdly, Or if they were under the Pole,
that they could not tell how to come back, but that they might as well go
farther from, as return nearer to home, because the Needle pointing always
North, they must needs lose themselves in the North Pole, where it must
indifferently respect all points of the Horizon alike.

One Answer may serve to the first and second Objection; That it cannot be warm
under the North Pole, etc. If we consult the Experience of Travelers and
Navigators, we are told that between the Tropicks, nay under the Equinoctial is
generally as moderate Weather as here in England in Summer time. Why may it not
then be as warm under the Pole, as here or at Amsterdam in the Summer time? The
small height the Sun has there can be no exception, for then we having the Sun
in its Summer Solstice in lesser Altitude than between the Tropicks, it must
needs be much colder here, which is contradicted. But one Reason why it is as
warm here as between the Tropicks, is, because between the Tropicks the Sun
remains scarce above 12 hours of 24 above the Horizon to warm it, when as here
it remains almost 17 hours of 24 above the Horizon, and therefore leaves a
greater impression of heat upon it: And the farther Northward we go the longer
it remains above the Horizon, and less under the Horizon every 24 hours, till
we come within the Arctick Circle, where the Sun remains for half a year
together, viz. all the Summer above the Horizon, and never sets: And therefore
though his beams are not so perpendicular yet they must needs cause a great
degree of heat upon the Horizon.

And if it be argued that it is so cold about Greenland, etc. and the Seas so
full of Ice that Ships can hardly sail for it, yet cannot that Argument prove
that it is so about the Pole: Because the Ice is made about shoars of Land, but
never in open Sea, and comes there only by strength of Currents, or high Winds,
which does indeed carry it some small distance from the shore. But as this
Relator said there is under the Pole a free and open Sea, etc. and consequently
void of Ice, in Summer time at least. Besides, experience tells us, that all
Land-briezes are colder than those that come from Sea, and therefore it may be
cold about Greenland, because of the Land, and yet warm under the Pole, where
the Sea is open, etc.

The third Objection is, that if they were under the Pole, they could not tell
how to come back, because of the indifferency the Needle should bear to every
point of the Horizon.

I examined not my Relator upon this Argument, though when I was parted from
him I was sorry I did not. But it is easy to apprehend how to guide a Ship
either forward or backward by an Observation of the Sun a little before you
enter the Pole: for by finding in or near what Meridian it is, or upon what
part of the Ship it bears, whether on Head or Stern, on Starboard or Larboard,
you may measure Time near enough with a Glass, to know several days after in
or near what Meridian the Sun is at any known or estimate time, and
consequently know how to proceed forwards, or come back with your Ship. Or if
the Moon have North Latitude you may do the same by the Moon. But if the Pole
were Traded, in short time it might be found by Variation of the Needle, for
there is doubtless Variation in it, and in all the Meridians about it several
Variations.

Thus far it appears there is a free and open Sea in Summer time (at least)
about the North Pole. But I shall add another Relation of one James Ben, whose
Father lived about five years ago in Crown-Court in Russel Street in Covent
Garden, and himself lives now in Wapping. This Mr. Ben sailed to Iapan with the
Dutch as a Carpenter of the Ship, and he told me that that Year, viz. 1668. he
was newly come home from Iapan: I asked him how long they were under way home
from thence? He told me he could not well tell, because when they set out from
Iapan the Captain commanded the Steer-man to sail due North, and they did sail
from thence about 400 Dutch Miles, which is almost 27 degrees due North. I asked
him whether they met with no Land or Islands? as I had done before the Dutch
Greenland Steer-man: He told me No, they saw no Land, but that there was a free
and open Sea so far as they Sailed, nor any sign of Land appeared. I asked him
why they sailed so far Northward? He told me he could not tell, only the
Captain commanded it, etc. But I suppose the East India Company commanded the
Captain either to make a Discovery of Land to increase Trade, or to satisfy
themselves with the knowledge of an open Sea, that when they saw Reason they
might expedite their Voyages between Holland and those parts that way. I was
thus Inquisitive with him, because ever since I heard the former Relation of
the Greenland Steer-man, I harped at a Passage through or about the North Pole
to Iapan, China, etc. and by these two Discoveries it appears very probable
that there is so, and that it is passable in Summer time.

I come to a third Relation, not only of the probability, but of the certainty
of a Passage found by the Russians this last year, as it came to the hands of
the Secretary of the Royal Society from Amsterdam, by a Correspondent of his;
which in Transact. Numb. 101. run in these words:

A Letter, and Map, not long since sent to the Publisher, by an Experienced
Person residing at Amsterdam, containing a true Description of Nova Zembla,
together with an intimation of the advantage of its shape and position.
SIR,
I Herewith send you what I have received out of Muscovy, which is a New Mapp
of Nova Zembla and Weigats, as it has been discovered by the express order of
the Czar; and drawn by a Painter, called Panelapoetski, who sent it me from
Mosco for a Present: by which it appears, That Nova Zembla is not an Island, as
hitherto it has been believed to be; and that the Mare glaciale is not a Sea,
but a Sinus or Bay, the waters whereof are sweet, which is the same with what
the Tartars do also assure us, who have tasted those waters in the very midst
of the Sinus. The Samojeds as well as the Tartars do unanimously affirm, that
passing on the back of Nova Zembla, at a considerable distance from the shore,
Navigators may well pass as far as Iapan. And it is a great fault in the English
and Dutch, that seeking to get to Iapan on the South Side of Nova Zembla, they
have almost always passed the Weigats. The letter O in the great River Oby
marks the place of a Cataract or Fall of waters. The letter K denotes the
conjunction of Zembla with the Continent. The River marked L, runs toward
China, called Kitaie: which is not every where navigable, by reason of the
rocks and other inconveniences that obstruct the passing of Vessels. Weigats
it self is very difficult to pass, because of the great quantity of Ice,
conrinually falling into it out of the River Oby, whereby that strait passage
is stopped up. The Samajeds go every year a fishing upon the said sweet Sea and
that on Nova Zembla's side. This Map of Nova Zembla is here omitted, because
here is set forth a Map of all the Lands nearest about the North Pole.


FINIS.

