A TESTIMONY Against Periwigs and Periwig-Making, and Playing on Instruments of
Music among CHRISTIANS, or any other in the days of the Gospel.

Being several Reasons against those things, By one, who for Good Conscience
sake has denied and forsaken them, John Mulliner.

But God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ
by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world Gal. 6.14.

But she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6

Woe to the Crown of Pride, Isa. 38.1. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion. and
trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations to whom
the house of Israel came. Pass ye unto Calneh and see and from thence go ye to
Hemath the great; then go down to Gath of the Philistines, be they better then
these kingdoms? or their border greater then your border? Ye that put far away
the evil day and cause the seat of violence to come near: That lie upon beds of
ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches and eat the lambs out of the
flock and the calves out of the midst of the stall: That chaunt to the sound of
the viol and invent to themselves instruments of music like David: That drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Amos 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

It is better to go to the House of Mourning then to go the House of Feasting;
for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart. Sorrow is
better then Laughter, for by the sadness of the Countenance, the heart is made
better, Eccles. 7.2, 3.

Printed in (...) Year 1677

The Reasons why John Mulliner Barber in Northampton, left off his Employment
of Borders and Periwigmaking, and how it was with him, as to his Inward
Condition before he Joined with the People of God, in scorn called Quakers; as
also his Testimony for them, and his earnest Desires to his Neighbors and
Acquaintance of the Town of Northampton, that they would as well as himself, be
reconciled to the Principle of God in their Conscience, now after this Judgment
of God that has been upon this Town by Fire
Loving Neighbors and Acquaintance,
SInce I have left off my Employment of making Borders and Periwigs, it has
occasioned several of you to speak hardly of me, and many Reports there are and
have been concerning of it, insomuch that I have been told, I have made my self
a Town and Country-talk. Now for the clearing of my self and the Truth of God
in which I am concerned, and your Understandings, it has been much in my Mind
to acquaint you with the Reasons why I left it, which I would fain have
avoided, and not to appeared so openly amongst you, for I have sent several
Letters to some Persons whom I have been concerned with, in Town and Country,
to let them know why I left them; but this would not satisfy me, but as I have
been a public Professor of this Employment for many years, I found I could not
be clear in the sight of God and man, till I had publicly given my Reason why
I left it off; and likewise how it was with me, as to my inward Codition,
before I joined with this People of God, who are in Scorn called Quakers.

Ever since I was about ten or twelve years of age, that I began to think that
there was a God, it has been my earnest Breathing desire, to know Peace with
him; and often when I was walking in the field, I have thought, that the very
Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field were in a better Condition then I
was, if I did not know Peace with God when my Days were at an End: And it has
been my earnest Cry to God, in the time of my Apprentiship and since, as I have
been walking in the Field and other Places, as I have been in private by
myself, that I had rather have my HELL, or Sorrrw and Trouble here in this
life, then to endure the Everlasting DISPLEASVRE of the God of Heaven
hereafter; and in order to this good desire, which was begotten in me by the
Lord, I did love to wirte Sermons, and to hear the best of Teachers as I
thought then, which I have gone two Miles to hear, in the time of my
Apprentiship, rather then I would have gone to sport or play my time away; and
at that time, as I have been going, I have cried and begged of God, That I
might not miss of something that might be for my Soul's good, when my days
were at an End: And after this manner have I gone out in those days; and since
I came to the Town of Northampton to set up for my Trade, I was a great Hearer
of Simon Ford, who belonged to the Parish of Albollows; and I have writ his
Sermons, and after I had done, I have come home and locked my self in, and took
my Bible and read the Scriptures, and after I have read his Sermons, and have
laid them before me, and have kneeled down and cried and prayed to God, that if
there was any thing in them, whereby I might come to the Knowledge of God's
Everlasting Truth, that he would not Withhold himself from me, that I ^^ght
have an Understanding of it; For Lord (I have said) thou know my Desire is
before thee, and that I did not beg for any thing in this life, but for my
Soul's Peace with thee, when my days were at an End: And the more I prayed and
cried, the more Trouble I had; so that I knew not what to do I was so much
distressed; but I thought to go to Simon Ford, who was my Teacher, in hopes he
would have satisfied me, but finding that I could not declare my Condition, as
I had felt it upon my Spirit for some time, I took a sheet of Paper and writ my
Condition, and read it to him, how that I was in great trouble night and day,
so that I could not tell what to do, though I had writ his Sermons, and laid
them before me, and cried and prayed to God, that he would give me a true
Understanding of his way, that I might have my Soul saved when my days were at
an End: And much more I did write to this Purpose, which writing some of my
Neighbors at that time did see, as I showed it to them: So he confessed, these
were good desires, and could say little against me, but after pretty much
discourse to this Purpose, he advised me to read a Book, which I did get and
read it; but no Comfort could I get from him nor the Book neither though I went
to him and several more of that Coat, several times, before I joined with this
People called Quakers: And I was satisfied that there was that in me that time,
that no man could satisfy, except the God of Heaven appear in h m: And
sometimes I have seen this People, when they have come amongst us, when I was a
Hearer of Simon Ford, into the very Assemblies, and though they have said very
little, what a Confusion was there among the Teachers and Hearers! And
sometimes I have seen them, two or three that came into this Place, which was
suffered by the Judgment through Fire to be laid waste, that they have come
into the Assembly at Alballows, with Sackcloth and Ashes upon their Heads,
barefoot and bare-headed, which I did at that very time, very much strange at:
And another time I saw ano her come into the School, when they were acting
their pa ts in strange Dresses, and wished them, to train up their Children in
the Fear of the Lord; and they did lay violently upon him with their Sticks, so
that I was much troubled to see it: And several times I have cried and prayed
to God to know why was it so, that this People came amongst us after this
manner; what is the matter with them? notwithstanding though it be so, and they
are never so uncomely, yet if this be thy People, give me an Understanding
concerning of it; for thou know what my soul travels after: And before I
joined with them, it was very hard for me to deny my self and become a Fool, by
reason of my great Acquaintance and Business, in way of my Trade: I thought I
did not care if I had been of any Religion so I had not been of that: Many of
my Acquaintance would make a Mock at me; so one time I purposed to go to Halson
Horse Race, about two Miles off Northampton, and then if went thither, I
thought they would not take notice of me for such an one; but as soon as I come
I thought they took notice of me, and said, What, we hear you are turned
Quaker: but the Lord knew what Pain my soul was in at that time; but I thought
long to get by my self to cry and pray to God; and comeing home my Brother M.
came with me; for I know his very heart was concerned for me at that time; but
there was such a Load and Pain fell upon me at that time that made me cry out
with many tears running down my Cheeks, Lord God of Heaven have Mercy upon me,
what shall I do to be saved? Lord God of Heaven have Mercy upon me, what shall
I do to be saved? ^o he fell a crying to me and said, What ayleth thee Brother
the Lord will have Mercy upon thee: And I knew not any one living in all the
world that could afford me any Comfort, except the God of Heaven did.
Neighbors and Acquaintance, I write no Lie to you this day, God is my witness;
and so long (I do believe) as my Brother has Life and Sense, he will not
forget that time, as he has told me since: And about this time there were
several of this People carried out dead out of the County Goal, which lay in
the Dungeon, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS; which I know not, but might be by
Reason of the Straitness of the Place as they were confined in and for want of
common Air: And then I began to enquire what was the matter, and I could not
understand that any thing was laid to their Charge, except it was as concerning
the worship of their God; and then I wished, if they suffered for God's sake
and for Righteousness sake, that I might suffer with them too; for I did not
care if they burned me, if I was sure it was for God's sake; but all the
Business was to know whether I should be sure of it: So J discoursed with some
of my Neighbors and Acquaintance, and they said it was a Fancy and a Whimsie,
Bewitching and Delusion; and after this rate they talked; but the Lord knew my
heart, was it a Whimsie, and Delusion, and Bewitching, to cry and pray to God
to have Mercy upon my soul, when my days were at an End? The Lord knew, this
was and is the very intent and breathing of my soul, and if this was Delusion,
I will be deluded more; for I am sure God has promised, Seek and you shall
find, knock and it shall be opened; and do they say, this is but a Fancy and a
Whimsie. And many times I have gone into the field, and I have got into a Land
of Corn in private, when no Eye or Ear has seen or heard me, and there have I
kneeled down, and prayed and cried to God, and pleaded with him, as I was
created, and he my Creator, and I had a soul to be saved, that he would not
withhold himself from me; for I knew not any one living upon the Face of the
whole Earth that I could have any Comfort in, if thou, O thou God of Heaven and
Earth did not help me; and whither should I go, or how should I pray; for
thou O God of Heaven and Earth. Have the Words of Eternal Life, and I shall not
let thee rest till thou have Mercy upon me; for I cannot trust my Salvation
upon this man's Faith, or the other man's Faith, but upon thee, O thou God of
Heaven and Earth alone; and after this manner J went on.

And J was a great lover of Music, and many times as J have been thinking of
God, and of the Condition that J was in, it would have brought trouble upon me;
so that many times I have took my Cittern, or Treble Viol, or any instrument as
I had most Delight in, thinking to drive away these Thoughts, and I have been
so troubled, as I have been playing, that J have laid my instrument down, and
have reasoned with my self after this manner, and fell a crying to God, it is
true I love this Music, but what good can these sounds do me when my soul
wants Peace with God; and this does but stir up Laughter, and Lightness of
Spirit, to make me forget my Maker and this will I last but a little while, and
I had better seek my Peace with God, and then, At his Right Hand there is
Pleasures for evermore; and these thoughts I had then: So that my Music began
to be a Burden to me, and J would fain have sold them, my Intruments, but that
I had not Freedom in my Mind to do; for if J did, those who bought them would
have made use of them as I did, and J thought J would not be the Cause of it;
so J took as many as I suppose cost forty Shilling, and BURNED THEM, and had
great Peace in my mind in doing of it, which is more to me then all the
Pleasures in this world: And often I have cried to God and said as the
Scriptures say, Thou art no Respecter of Persons, though I am but a poor simple
man, why may not I know as much of thee, as to my Salvation as another man,
since my Since^ity is before thee, and thou see what my Heart earnestly
breaths after; for it was not this Name, or that Name that I minded, but Peace
with God, when my days were at an End.

Then as to my Employment of Periwig making; it is more then twelve years since
I began to make them and much might be said for the making of them by some, yet
much questioning, and reasoning have I had within my self for some years; so
that at some times I have been troubled when I have been making of them, and I
could not tell what was the Reason of my Trouble, except that was; and
sometimes when I have seen some of my Friends come in I have been ready to put
them out of my sight, and could not go on with any Content, but Trouble, so
long as they were looking on me, and some have spoke to me, and told me, They
thought I did not do well in making of them; and to this purpose they have
spoken, and many times I have reasoned with my self after this manner, what
need I make such ado and be so much concerned, there is hardly any man but is
desirous of a good Head of Hair, and if Nature does not afford it, if there be
an Art to make a Decent Wig or Border, what harm is that*

Object. But are there not several of thy Friends, who wear Borders, and are
accounted honest men?

Answ. As for those whose Hair is wasted, fallen and gone off their Heads
through infirmity of Body, and for want of it do find that their health is
impaired, or lessened, if such do wear short Borders so their health sake, and
for no other End or Cause whatsoever, I judge them not; but let none make a
pretense that they wear Borders or Wigs for their Health, when in Reallity,
another thing is the Cause, for God the Righteous Judge sees in Secret, and he
hates Pride and Hypocrisy, the spirit of which is judged, and for ever to be
judged with all its fruits by the Lord and his People And let all those who
have Hair growing upon their heads, sufficient to serve them, I mean what is
really needful or useful, be content therewith, and not find fault with their
own Hair, and cut it off, and lust after and put on others Hair.

And further, thus I reasoned, is there not some of thy Friends who make them;
and sell Hair for the making of them, and drive a great Trade and what, do J
not think that they have not as much Care to go to Heaven as J have, and what
need J make such ado, and be so concerned? But all this would not do, but here
lay that which was very near me, that was, if God should call me to account at
this very time, while J am reasoning after this manner, whether or no J could
stand clear in his sight and make them; for if J stood condemned in God's
sight, it was not this man's making of them, nor the other man's wearing of
them, that would justify me in God's sight; for if God condemns me in my
Conscience, J know no man living, who can justify or take away that Guilt: And
here J stood in this Condition for some time; and the Lord knew the travel of
my soul in these things, and J knew not what J should do to be cleared of them,
so that J have been almost out of Hopes, sometime, and said within my self, and
cried, J am afraid, J shall dye with this upon my Conscience, and then what
will become of me hereafter, and how can J stand clear in the sight of God,
that am condemned for it in my Conscience? But my Prayers and Cries were, for
God to deliver me; for J could not deliver my self out of it, but here J lay
one day after another crying to God to be delivered: So suddenly after our
dreadful fire, in which J was wi h the rest of my Neighbors a Partaker of that
Judgment, then J was more concerned then before; so that J knew not what to do,
to get over it, it lay so hard upon me to bear: But still this cursed Enemy of
my Soul, this SELF-END Spirit, began to work with me again, and reason with me
after this manner; what, am I resolved to ruin my self, and turn away all; if J
do leave this, J must expect to lose a great deal of my Trimming Trade and J
had better leave off that, then leave off this Periwig-making; it fits so well
with me in the Condition J am in, by Reason of my Lameness: J had a
considerable Trade in it with several of my Acquaintance in Town and Country,
and some of them are Persons of Quality, and wish me very well, and if J leave
that J shall disoblige them much, and what will J do then? am J minded to undo
my self? But still there was an inward Cry in me, Lord save my soul; for that
lies at stake, and it is that J plead for, and J care not what J go through, so
my soul may have Peace with thee, when my days are at an End; for my soul is
for Everlasting, but this Trouble cannot last long: These things stuck very
hard with me, that made me cry out night and day, Lord deliver me, and help me
over this Weight and Pain that is upon my Spirit, and J care not what J do so J
may be clear of them: So through much TROUBLE OF SPIRIT J was willing to leave
them: But this would not clear me, but as I had been a public Professor of
this Employment for some time, I must bear my Testimony against them; and that
was, I should send for my two men, as I had instructed in that way, and tell
them how I was troubled, and take a Wig and burn it before them, as a Testimony
for God against them: But this was very hard, but no Peace could I have before
I did it, and much Pain and Sorrow I had before I did it: and no Comfort, but
Torment of mind I had till I had given up to do it; so according to the Pain
and Sorrow that lay hard upon me I gave up to do it, and I thank God, I have
much Ease and Comfort of Mind since I have done it for the Lord has not put me
upon any thing, but what he has given me strength to go through, and he is not
a hard Master, and I have great Peace and Comfort in what I have done, which is
more to me then all the Perishing, Fading things in this world: And whoever he
be that does expect Peace with God in himself, he must know a Cross to his own
Will, to cross his sinful thoughts, Words and Actions; and whatever he knows
God requires of him, he must do it, though it be a great Cross to him, though
it is very hard to Flesh and Blood; Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven; but a man must be born again: And as truly it is witnessed, as ever
it was writ in the Scripture; God's People this day do know this spiritual
Birth, Blessed be God for ever; and they travel in Spirit till God gives
Increase and delivers them: And I am sure, and can speak by Experience, I never
met with a better Friend in all my Life, then the Spirit of God; for it never
crosses that which is according to God's Will, but if God's Will be not done,
this Spirit brings Pain and Trouble upon the Soul, if it be minded.

So I would desire any ingenuous sober Reader, without Prejudice to judge, if
it had been their own Case, whether they would not have left off this
Employment of Periwig-making, rather then to have went on with so much
Condemnation in themselves; and these be the Reasons and Occasions why I left
them off: And now, you my loving Neighbors and Acquaintance, I would not have
you think, that how I have denied my self, and took up this Cross, as to come
among his poor scorned People, and left off my Music which was a great Delight
to me; and likewise this Employment of Periwig-making, which I have told you
was so hard for me to part with, that now I think my self safe enough; No, God
is my witness this day, from whom I have my Breath and Being, I have as much
need of keeping my Mind staid upon God, as ever I had in all my days: And
whatever I have done, it is no more but my Duty to God, to answer his
Requirings in my Conscience; and here I lie still upon the Free Mercies of God,
through his Grace in his Son Christ Jesus my Savior to be saved; and I care
not what I go through for Christ's sake: And here I find a Pressing forward to
the Mark of the Price of the high Calling which is in Christ Jesus: And at the
end I do not question, as I keep faithful to God, I shall obtain the Salvation
of my Soul, and that is enough.

And whereas there is most dreadful speeches cast against this poor, scorned
and scoffed People of God, who are called Quakers, as if they had their very
Principle from the darkest Hell; and some have told me, They come from the
Jesuits and Papists; and very ha^dly people have spoken concering them: But
truly Neighbors and Acquaintance, I would entreat you to let me speak in this
matter, and I hope I have not behaved my self so badly amongst you, for almost
this twenty years, but I may have a little C^edit for what I say: So long as I
have come amongst them, which I think is 13 or 14 years I never understood any
such thing, but the very main Aim that they have and do drive at, is to have
People be faithful to God in what they know in themselves; and this is that
plain down right way they have drove at and do, and God has prospered them and
will do: let all those that are Opposers of this Principle of God, do what they
can: They can as well stop the Sun from shining, the Rain from falling as
hinder this spiritual work from prospering in the Hearts of his People; for it
is beyond the strength of man to hinder it: They were not set up by man nor can
man pull them down. And as for the Jesuits and Papists, I know not what they
are as to their Principles, neither indeed do I desire to know, but those that
are not as they should be, I desire the Lord may make them so. But as to my own
part, I will tell you what my Faith is, and what I do believe, call me what you
please, nor I never desired to believe otherwise: That is I do believe in God,
who is the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth and in Jesus Christ his
only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the holy Ghost; born of the Virgin
Mary; and that he did suffer under Pontius Pilate, and the third day he rose
again from the dead, and sits at the Right Hand of God his Father, who shall
judge both the quick and the dead; and I do believe, that God has a Church,
where there is the Communion of Saints in his Spirit and Power; and I do
believe The Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and Everlasting
Life, according to the Testimony recorded in the holy Scriptures: but indeed, I
do not believe thar at your public Places of Worship, that this is the Church
of God, nor your Assemblies are the Communion of Saints; for it is not the
Saints Life, to live in Cursing and Swearing, in Pride and Drunkenness, in Envy
and Malice, Hatred and Covetousness, etc. but in the Spirit of Truth, which
leads into all Truth: But alas! what of all these Evils is there not committed
in this age amongst those that do assemble themselves together, in your Public
Assemblies, where there is so many Prayers of, Good Lord deliver us from them;
which I say, I am a witness for God, he stands ready to deliver you, if you
will come to him; But you will not come to him that you may have Life, John
5.39. And again, the Saints do not believe, that Christ Jesus the Son of the
living God, did pray to his Father to put his poor Creatures upon those things
which were impossible to be done; for when he wished his Disciples to pray, he
said to them, Pray thus, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name,
thy Kingdom com, thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, and so forth.
Now some among you say, God's Will cannot be done here, we must live in sin so
long as we live [There is no Freedom from sin on this side the Grave, no Peace
with God to be known here] Oh! what a damnable Doctrine is this; if men would
but plead for God's Kingdom, as they do for the Devil's, and would but believe
that God was as able through the Light and Life of his Son Christ Jesus, Romans
5.10: For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the Death of
his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. To save
them from their sins, as the Devil was to keep them in their sins, we should
have brave living; and yet all will say, God is above the Devil.

For the Lord sake, Neighbors and Acquaintance, consider these things; for God
is my witness this day, I plead not with you for your silver nor your gold, nor
for any thing that you have in this world, but beseech you to be reconciled to
the Principle of God in your Conscience: And how many Scriptures is there to
persuade you to a Holy Life, as Without Holiness none shall see God. Heb.
12.10. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own Pleasure,
but he for our Profit, that we might be Partakers of his Holiness. Except a man
be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. John 3.3. We know
that whosoever is born of God, sins not: But he that is begotten of God,
keeps himself, and that Wicked one touches him not. Be ye therefore Perfect,
even as your Father which is in Heaven is Perfect Mat 5.18. And many more
Places to this purpose, and yet you say, the Scripture must be your rule, see
how contrary you walk to it, and say it is impossible to be done; and Christ he
said, Mat. 7.14. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which
leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. The Saints they were
persecuted and imprisoned, and Christ said, For if they do these things in a
green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23.31. If they persecuted me,
they will persecute you also; if they regarded not my Sayings, they will not
regard yours: I pray you do but look back, which look more like Saints, those
as assemble themselves together in your Assemblies, or these whom Christ spoke
of, who are persecuted for Righteousness sake; and truly I look upon these to
be Real Saints, and had rather take my Portion among such in this day, if it be
in Persecution, then to enjoy the Pleasures of sin for a season. And when I
came amongst this People at first; what a strangeness did it Cause amongst my
very Relations and Acquaintance, insomuch that my nearest Relations were
stirred up, in Env^ and Bitterness against me, some signifying as if I had not
been fit to live upon the Earth; and the Lord knows, I had no other Desire in
my Heart, but to do that which my Godfathers and Godmothers, as they call
them, promised I should do, as is the Custom now adays, which People talk of;
but if they come to do it, they rise up as an Army against them, Father against
the Son, and Daughter against the Mother, and All Evildoers against Christ's
Appearances spiritually, so that in effect they say, They will not have this
man to rule over us: and whoever he be that is a true spiritual Traveller, will
find these things to be true: And that was, That I should forsake the Devil and
all his works, the vain Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world, the sinful
lusts of the flesh, and so forth; but as long as I could talk of these things,
and not do them, no notice was took of me, as to be offended with me; but when
I came to do these things, what a do was here, and whath strangeness did it
beget amomgst my very familiar Acquaintance! And God is my witness, at this
time it is the very end of my Travel in Spirit* To make my Peace with God when
my days are at an end.

And now Neighbors and Acquaint^^^^, I being one that have had hard speeches
cast upon me by some of you, I thought I could not be clear in the sight of God
and man, till I had acquainted you how it was with me from a Child to this day,
which I hope will give no occasion of Offense to any; but could heartily wish,
that you may not be always Professors, but Possessors of that Life which is
beyond all the Profession in the world; and that you may know the Lord's will
to be done in your hearts, as it is in Heaven, and then you will pray as you
should do, and know what to pray for: And truly my loving Neighbors and
Acquaintance, if it had been possible for you to have seen the inside of me, I
have told you the very Travel of my soul in these things, and what I have here
will I have had the Experience of; and do not think it is a Whimsie, or a Fancy
and a Delusion to serve God: it is your Concern as well as mine, your souls lie
in danger of Ruin as well as mine has done, and therefore for the Lord's sake
consider these things, which belong to your everlasting peace, before they be
hid from your Eyes; for here is but a little while before your days be at an
End, and we shall see man no more, and what is all this world worth then? it is
not all the words of earthly wisemen, though called Teaches of this age or any
man that can justify you, if God condemn you by his Light and Spirit in your
own hearts; therefore for the Lord's sake, think not that God will be mocked,
nor make not sleight of these things; for such as you sow you must reap: Your
souls lie in danger of everlasting Misery, an^ it is an inward Reformation, a
new heart, a ri^ht spirit as God looks for of us all: and it is the earnest
Breathing of my soul, you may seek after it, as well as myself.

And now, you my loving Neighbors and Acquaintance of this Town of
Northampton, where among you I have drawn my first breath, how has my heart
been pained, to behold the Ruins of this poor Town, and I have and do from my
very soul desire, that this Affliction which God has sent amongst us may be
for the better, and not for the worse: And it is not long since there was
another warning by Thunder, Lightning and Hail-storm, such that in all my day,
I do not know I have heard or seen the like; what Dread and Fear were the poor
Inhabitants in at that time? Oh that you would have kept your minds exercised
as I do believe some did, and had some Sense of the Dread (...) Fear of this
Terrible God, that can shake terribly the Earth, (...) make the Inhabitants
fear before him! I say what Fear were they in at that time, running up and
down, thinking that the Town had been fired by Reason of the Lightning that was
at that time? The Lord grant that you may be of that Principle or Religion, as
it has been my desire from a Child to be of that Religion which would endure a
Thunderclap, that is, if God should have called me or you to Judgment at that
very time, we might be ready with Oil in our Lamps; and not Put it off to buy
when the Bridgroom comes; for blessed be God, at that very time, I do not speak
it for any Praise among you, God is my witness, but as I felt it upon my Spirit
at that very time; I could sing for Joy in my Spirit, when others were running
up and down in Dread and Fear; and for ever my soul shall trust in this God,
who is mighty to save, and mighty to destroy, God blessed forever: And the very
Inhabitants themselves could not but at that time confess, that God had sent
another Judgment amongst them, in my hearing; but yet for all this, what
blasPheming the Name of God is here, and Drunkenness and all manner of
Wickedness almost, committed, Envy, Malice and Hatred, and what not, insomuch
that some have told me several times, that you think in your Conscience, you
are a great deal worse then you were before the Fire, and why is it so with
you, for the Lord's sake consider, what will become of you that go on in this
resolute way; God will not always strive with you; put not ( I beseech you)
this day of the Lord afar off, but while it ts to day, harden not your Hearts:
I would entreat you that you would look back, for about this twenty years, what
have this poor, scorned People of God called Quakers preached amongst you, but
this principle, to have People mind God in their Conscience, and to be faithful
to what they know of God; and what hard measure have they met with? how have
they been stocked and stoned, and whipped and imprisoned, their Goods rended
from them, and for nothing but for God's sake, to keep their Conscience clear
in his sight? And how have some sealed it with their Blood, and still are
ready, though patient Suffering in his Power, God be magnified for it, with
their Lives given up, and if God should suffer them to be brought to the stake
for the Testimony of Jesus: And let the Rain fall, and the Wind blow; and the
Storms beat, they are anchored upon that Rock Christ Jesus, which the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against: And do not think, that this Pearl of great price,
which they have sold all for, they will part with for nothing, or for the Glory
of this World, which perishes: and this I say of them, that are faithful to
God in what they know, they are the People of God, and there is no more
required of any of us, but to be faithful to what we know, be it much or
little. So this is my Testimony for this people, if I should write no more; for
I wait for my Dissolution, nor I know not how few my days may be amongst you.

And now, you my loving Neighbors and Acqaintance, since it has been the Good
Pleasure of the God of Heaven* to send this Affliction of Lameness upon me, so
that in the prime of my age, my strength is taken from me; I Care not charge
God with Injustice; nor murmr against him; he is Just and Righteous in all
his ways, and if he had not sent this Affliction upon me, I know not whether I
should have been conformable to his Heavenly Will; but in Love and Tenderness
to my soul has he suffered this Exercise to come upon me, and I have for ever
Cause to bless his Name, that ever he has dealt with me after this manner, if
he never restore me to my former strength again, his Will be done, though to
look at it, it is very hard, and I know, I am an Object of Pity to many of you;
but why should I murmur at it? Shall the Pot say to the Potter why have thou
made me thus? No I shall not, but bless his Name, that ever he has spared me
to this day, that I should answer what he required of this poor weak Body of
mine; and this is the greatest Joy and Comfort of my Soul, that as I have found
my strength go from me outwardly, my Faith, and Hope, and Strength has renewed
in God inwardly: And here I have great Cause of Joy and Comfort, and to God let
the Honor and Praise be, who is worthy overall blessed for ever, and for
evermore faith my soul.

And one thing more I would desire of you, to have a Care of speaking
slightingly of the Spirit of God and Christ, and making a Mock thereat, as some
have done, as saying, What the Spirit will not let you do this or that? Let me
prevail with you, to have a Care what you say, as to this thing, lest you sin
the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. I have wondered when some men have
spoke to me after this manner, who profess to be Wise and Religious, should
offer to speak so slightingly of this Spiritual Appearance of Christ; for if
ever you know God, you must know him Spiritually; For God is a Spirit, and they
that worshlp him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: And do you not read,
how The Spirit wars against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit: And to
be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, but to be carnally minded is Death.
And again. Quench not the Spirit; Grieve not the Holy Spirit, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. And it shall come to pass
afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions Joel 2.28 And several more Scriptures there are that we may
read, concerning their spiritual Conditions; but this spiritual Appearance of
Christ is so mocked and scorned at, that when any of God's People are brought
before some, you are ready to say, what, you are troubled with he Spirit, you
cannot swear, you cannot give us Respect* you must come with theeing and
thouing in your mouths, and be brought before whom you will all is one to you:
Blessed be God that it is so, that there is a, People have more regard to
please God, then to please any man living as to these things: Some time I have
had concerns wi h some of you, that rather then I would have come before you
with my hat on, if I could have been clear in God's sight, I had rather have
lain at your Feet; but at any time, if I did not stand faithful to this small
thing as you count of, what Pain and Sorrow have I had quickly after it in my
Conscience, that I knew I had not done well in it, and it has caused me to cry
sometimes to God, surely I shall take more care next time.

Now if you would but keep to your rule the Scriptures, as you reckon them,
methinks you need not be so much offended, whenas the Scriptures speak against
having men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage; He that respects men's
Persons commits sin: Christ says, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly, and you
shall find rest to your souls; Who learns Lowliness of him will not take
Offense at those who in Obedience to him, speak his Language [ Thee and Thou to
a single Person, and who wear their Hats upon their Heads, for which they were
made. If men would but truly come to serve the Lord their God in their Hearts,
it would teach them better manners one to another, then a few dissembling
Titles of Honor; and worshipful with the Cap and Knee; I pray you what do they
all signify, but to make men proud, amd there is too much of that already? But
this let them do, Do-justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with their God, and
then there will be no Offense taken. And why should you take Occasion at Thee
or Thou? in the Scripture you may plentifully see, that when the Servants of
God went to declare his Word to the Kings, they went and said, Thou O King,
hear the Word of the L rd; and in your very Prayers when you pray to God, do
you not say, Thou Lord, or Thou God? And what, do you expect better Language
then you give to the God of Heaven, which if you should say [You] it would be
Nonsense, and People would think such were not in their wits, as should say
[You Lord] or [You God.]

Then again this Rule says, that formerly it was said in the time of the Law,
Thou shall not forswear thy self; but Christ, Who is the end of the Law for
Righteousness sake, to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.) says, Swear not
at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, Mat. 5.34. And James
says, Above all things my Brethren, swear not, Jam. 5.12. And now you can make
some by your Law, pay for swearing, and others have got money by swearing, and
others you would force contrary to the Command of Christ, and their Conscience,
to swear; and because they would not swear, they have been imprisoned, some
until death, and I pray you do but see what Confusion here is amongst you. Much
more might be said from several Places of the holy Sc iptures, as to the
pressing of you to a holy, godly living, but many o you will not, but even Hate
to be reformed. I verily think, there may be some that are tender hearted, that
have a Love for God, but yet to leave all the Glory and Vanities of the world,
and deny themselves to Follow him, appears to them very hard; but this you must
do, fever you know Peace with God: And as sure as ever the Scriptures declare
of it; for as Christ said, He that loves any thing more then me, is not worthy
of me: For verily, I do look upon it to be man's greatest Happiness and
Felicity to be a true Servant of Gold, and the most Honourablest Title in the
World, to be a true Christian; for their Name is had in everlasting
Remembrance, when the Name of the wicked shall not: and therefore let them mock
and scorn if they will, the day will come that God will clear the Innocence of
his people, and think not that it is impossible to know God as his People did
formerly, when it was said, that they Did taste and see how good the Lord was;
and they Tasted and Handled of the Good Word of Life: And do not think it is
enough to believe as Your Church believes, and because your Ancesto s went in
this way, you may; and what should you trouble your selves any further; and
truly, if I could have been satisfied here my self, I would willingly have went
along with you, but I could not, though many times with Tears I have cried to
God and said, why cannot I be satisfied to do as such, who are esteemed wise,
understanding men, that I must separate from them, and become a Scoff and a
Scorn to them, but blessed be God, he has made known himself spiritually to a
little Remnant, who have followed him through the great Tribulations; and
blessed be his Name for ever, he has confirmed the Truth of it to this poor
People under his hand and seal, as it were, by his eternal Spirit; so that they
do taste and handle of this good Word of Life, as they keep faithful to him in
what they know; for no more God requires of me nor you: for if it but one
Talent, if we keep faithful and improve it, it was said, Well done, faithful
Servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much;
enter thou into the Joy of the Lord: So it is Unfaithfulness to God as is
cursed in the inward parts.

The Lord give you an Understanding of these things is my earnest Desire; for
God is my witness, I have no ill will to any of you* but my earnest Desire is
for you as for my own self, to pray and beseech you to be reconciled to God,
and not to grieve and quench his Holy Spirit in your Consciences, by living in
known sin and transgression; for who ever they be that will not accept of
Mercy, they must expect Judgment; for God is Just and Righteous in all his
ways, and he will and has been clear of the Blood of all People in a^l Ages
and Generations that are gone: And therefore for the Lord's sake and our own
souls sake, let us not slight Christ's spiritual Appearance in our Conscience,
but be persuaded to let him have the whole Heart; for it is an inside work: And
whoever he be, if he has never so eloquent a Declaration at preaching, let him
profess what he will, if it be the Truth it self, let him preach and pray, sing
Psalms and Hymns; if they be not spirtual, they are as if they cut of a Dog's
Neck, and as sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbal in the sight of God and no
Profit in them at all.

So this is my Testimony for God, that he does appear as he is Spiritualy and
does more and more appear by the Light of his Son Christ Jesus in the He^rts of
this poor scorned People called Quakers, as sure as ever Christ did appear
Personally upon the Earth to his Disciples, according to the Holy Scriptures of
Truth; And therefore sligh^ not this spiritual Appearance of Christ I beseech
you, that which condemns you for sin in your Consciences, as you ten^e^ the
welfare of your immortal souls, and though this come from a simple Instrument,
yet I would entreat you to bear with me; for it is in Love to you all.

And before ever I set Pen to paper to write this, I have in the very secret of
my soul desired, that I might have lain in a Cave in the ground and have cried
out these few days I have here upon the Earth, to the Lord, rather then I
would have appeared so openly amongst you, but I could not be clear till I had
signified my mind to you; and so I do appeal to the Principle of God in all
your Consciences; I being one that have had my being amongst you almost all my
days, what damnable Practice or Principle have any of you seen by me, that
makes you talk at this rate? Except you call this damnable which checks and
reproves you when you do not well; and which of you all dare to say, he has it
not in him? which is the great Love of God unto Mankind, which does either
excuse, or accuse, if they do good or evil; and this is that Witness that God
has not left himself without, in the hearts of all Mankind.

And certainly, if there had been any thing in your Teachers Doctrines,
Reasons, Uses and Applications; if Crying and Tears, Sighs and Groans would
afforded me any Comfort in them, the Lord would have satisfied me in them; but
I could not get Peace in them, though the Lord knows it was my daily Prayers
from a Child, to be satisfied: And therefore, having dealt plainly wtih you,
and having told you how it was with me from my Childhood, do you think that I
am deluded, and do you think that I with many more that have known this
spiritual Travel, will be scoffed and scorned out of this experienced Principle
of God in our Consciences? my God be blessed, we know better things: And though
you may Goliath like, come in defiance against this Host of the Living God, yet
be it known to you, You are but men, and not Gods, and though we are but poor
Striplings, and simple. Mecanick, poor Tradesmen, and some coming from their
flocks and herds: We do not encounter with you, with Swords or Spears; but in
the Name of the Lord we go on, and here the Lord has given strength and
patience to suffer, whatever has come upon his poor People, for the trial of
their Faith: So that They are more then Conquerers, through him that has loved
them, as above twenty Years Experience can witness, since the Lord first
brought them forth, out of this Northern Part of this Nation; and this is that
Lamb's Spirit in which we war, of which God has said, Shall have the Victory,

And do not think it is Excommunication, or rending our Goods from us, or
Banishment, or any other thing, that shall be ever able To separate us from the
Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: And, if Christ be not In Us, we
are Reprobates; and if it were not that this Principle of God were in us, and
if we did not know and enjoy something that was above this world, we were of
all people, as the Scripture says, Of all men in the World, the most
miserable: For indeed, the Case is God's, as we are concerned in, and if he
does not carry it on in us, we cannot go any further; and this is that City
that God has set on a Hill, which cannot he hid: For alas, Our Profession is
as empty as any Profession, if we find not this Principle of God in our
Consciences, to prosper, which teaches us to deny all Ungodliness: and if it
be but a Sigh, or a Groan, a Cry, or a Tear, that comes from an Honest Heart,
God has regard to it; for alas, though there may be tricks that men may shufle
or cut one with another, we cannot deal so with this Alseeing God, with whom we
have to do; for alas, without God we can do nothing, therefore it is to this
Principle in your Consciences I direct you; for no further then you find me
plead for God, no longer own me.

My Neighbors and Acquaintance of this Town of Northampton, I pray you, do you
but a little consider what Condition were you in suddenly after this Judgment
of God that was amongst us by Fire, at which time we met one another, several
with Tears in their Eyes, telling one another of their Losses by this sad
Judgment! Oh what a tender Frame of Spirit were many of you in then! O that you
had kept to that! and it would have been greatly for your good: for then you
would have gone forward in that which is good, till you had found
Reconciliation and Establishment with your Maker, and you would have remembered
his Judgments and Mercy, and have spoken of them to his Praise; but how little
is this minded now! So that many live as if there were no God! To hear the
great Abominations that are committed in your streets is a grief to he upright
now as such things were a grief to the upright in all ages. Oh that these
things may be considered, laid to heart and amended therefore it be too late;
for our days are swiftly passing over, as a Weavers Shuttle, and as a tale that
is told. The Lord grant that unto this Humble, tender Frame of Spirit you may
come, and not let those former Afflictions slip out of your Remembrance; for
God has promised, he will Not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking
Flax, but if your Sins were as Scarlet, he would make them as wool, if as
Crimson, he would make them as Snow, and this is the Lord's doing, and it is
marvelous in our Eye; and this is that humble way that my soul has found
Favor with him, and for ever my soul shall praise him. And I know not how few
my days may be amongst you yet this is my Testimony and my Belief concerning
this People, those of them as are faithful, I could wish I could say so for all
as are called so, that they are the People of God. So whether you will be
reconciled to this Princip e of God in your Conscience or no, I am clear in my
self concerning you.

Who am a Well-wisher to your immortal Souls, John Mulliner.

THE END.

