A TRUE INTERPRETATJON Of the VVitch of Endor.

Spoken of in 1 Samuel 28. begin. at the 11. Verse; Showing,

1. How She and all other Witches do beget or produce that familiar spirit they
deal with, and what a familiar spirit is, and how those Voices are procured,
and Shapes appear unto them, whereby the ignorant and unbelieving people are
deceived by them.

It is clearly made appear in this Treatise, that no spirit can be raised
without its body, neither can any spirit assume any body after death; for if
the spirit does walk, the body must walk also.

3. An Interpretation all those Scriptures, that does seem as if spirits might
go out of men's bodies when they die, and subsist in some place or other without
bodies.

Lastly, Several other things needful for the mind of man to know; which
whoever does understand it will be great satisfaction.

By LODOWICK MUGGLETON.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1669.

TO THE Reader.
I Have been desired by several Friends to set forth the In^^^pretation
concerning the Witch of Endor, and King Saul, how it may be understood how she
raised Samuel, and how familiar spirits came to be procured, and with what
power they do such strange things; Many Enemies also have objected this place,
to prove that spirits may be raised without Bodies, and that spirits may walk,
or be happy or miserable without bodies: though I have given Answer in
discourse to these Doubts and Questions, but few can retain in their memory
what is spoken in Discourse; therefore I thought it convenient and necessary to
set it forth in Print, for the Information and Satisfaction of many friends who
desire it, and for the Convincement of all Gainsayers; and let them seriously
read it over without prejudice, and they may see this Point clearly opened,
which has layn hid this many hundred years, with other Places of Scriptures
opened, which man^ have objected against this Interpretation, and all th se
places of Scripture that is commonly brought, or does most seem to hold forth
that spirits may he without bodies, are likewise opened and expounded in short
in this Treatise, as follows.

I. SAM. XXVIII. from the 11, to the 18. Verse.
I Shall give the Interpretation, what is meant by that familiar spirit the
Witch of Endor did raise Samuel by, so much spoken of in the book of Samuel and
o her places of Scripture, and so much objected by many to prove that spirits
may be raised without bodies, and may appear unto people in what shape they
please.

The belief of this lying principle, it did proceed out of the imagination of
reason, the devil -- the Imagination that does arise or proceed from the seed
of reason in man, is that familiar spirit that Witches deal with, and that
familiar spirit it proceeds from no spirit or devil without a man, but from
the seed of reason within man; for look what evil thoughts does arise out of
the heart of man, it proceeds out of the seed of reason in man, and not from
any thing without man; for the imagination of the heart, it is placed in the
seed of reason, therefore it is said in Scripture, That the imaginations of
man's heart was evil, and that every imaginations of the thoughts of his heart
was only evil continually, as in Genesis 6.5. so that there is no other devil, or
spirit, or familiar spirit for Witches to deal withal, or to work any
Enchantments by, but their own imagination, there the familiar spirit is
produced from whence it came; and there it ceases to be when they are put to
death; or overpowered by the knowledge and power of faith in other men; then
the familiar spirit centers in the imagination again, it being overpowered by
the power of faith; so likewise the good thoughts that does proceed out of the
heart of man, they do arise or proceed from the seed of faith, concerning the
true God, or any heavenly secret, or temporal judgments, or temporal
blessings, if the foreknowledge of these things does arise or be foretold by
the revelation of the seed of faith, they are and may be called the Spirit of
God.

Because they were foretold and declared by the revelation of the seed of
faith, which seed of faith is the seed of God, it being of Gods own Nature,
therefore called the Spirit of God, and so foretold and declared by the Spirit
of God; so likewise what foreknowledge or declaration of things, that are above
that which is common to the seed of reason, (as raising of spirits and such
like;) I say, they do proceed from the imagination of reason the devil; and
this strong imagination from the seed of of reason, is that familiar spirit by
which Witches do divine or foretell things; so that the strong imagination of
reason being exercised about things that are beyond Trades and Sciences, that
are necessary needful and lawful, so it becomes a familiar spirit because it
proceeds from the imagination of reason, and the seed of reason being the
devil, and the devil being the fallen Angel; for the devil is man and woman,
and the seed of reason is their seed: and that eed of reason it came from that
serpent that beguiled Eve, and that serpent was an Angel, and his seed was
reason, and this reason in man is the devil, and the imagination of reason is
the father of that familiar spirit by which a man or woman does divine,
soothsay, raise shapes, or hear voices, or any such thing of that nature, they
all proceed from the imagination of reason in man, and the original being of
this seed of reason; it came from that Serpent-Angel, that was cast down from
Heaven unto this Earth, who deceived our first Parents, as I have abundantly
showed in Rev. 11. and in the interpretation of the whole Book of the
Revelation.

Now I have laid a Foundation for the Reader, that he may the better understand
the Foundation, from whence these familiar spirits that Witches have, do
proceed, and how they are procured, and what power they have over the ignorant
mind of man, Therefore to satisfy the thoughts of many, who has desired and
requested of me that I would interpret some chief sayings in the Scriptures,
that speaks of Witchcraft, and familiar spirits and such like, which sayings
are very strange and hard to be understood, so that most people are very much
unsatisfied in these things, though clear in their Judgments in many other
things that are of more concernment; and as I have given the Interpretation of
the whole Book of the Revelation, with many other places of Scripture, to the
great comfort and satisfaction of many, so I shall add the Interpretation of
this thing also.

The first place of Scripture I shall insist upon is, that in 1 Samuel 28.
beginning at the 11. verse, concerning the Witch of Endor; this is commonly the
place that most people fetch to prove that spirits may be raised in what shape
the Witch please by their familiar spirits; therefore let the Reader mind the
discourse that follows.

The words are these, Then said the Woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? and
he said, bring me up Samuel; and in the 12. verse; And when the Woman saw
Samuel; she cried with a loud voice, and the Woman spoke to Saul, saying, why
have thou deceived me, for thou art Saul; and in the 13. verse, And the King
said unto her, be not afraid, for what saw thou? and the Woman said unto
Saul, I saw Gods ascending out of the Earth; the 14. verse, And he said unto
her, what form is he of? and she said, an old man comes up, and he is covered
with a mantle, and Saul perceived it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face
to the ground, and bowed himself, the 15. verse, And Samuel said to Saul, why
have thou disquieted me to bring me up; And Saul answered, I am sore
distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from
me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophet, nor by Dreams; therefore I
have called thee that thou may make known unto me what I shall do; verse 16.
Then said Samuel, Wherefore then do thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is
departed from thee, and is become thine enemy; verse 17. And the Lord has
done to him, as he spoke by me, for the Lord has rent the Kingdom out of thine
hand, and given it to thy neighbor, even to David; verse 18. because thou
obeyest not the Voice of the Lord, nor executed his fierce wrath upon Amalek,
therefore has the Lord done this thing unto thee this day.

CHAP. II.
THis familiar spirit the Witch of Endor and other Witches have, whereby they
do such things, it is the imagination of reason, the devil in themselves; that
is, they set themselves apart with the thoughts of the imaginations of their
hearts, to dive into the diabolical power, that is, that they might know the
depths of Satan, their imagination conceiving that the devil is a spirit flying
in the air, and that this spirit can assume or take up any shape it please; so
that the imagination of the heart has produced an evil spirit in it self, so
that this familiar spirit is begotten out of the womb of reason; for the seed
of reason in man is the womb or the mother; and the imagination of the heart is
the father that begets this familiar spirit, and this familiar spirit is the
son of imagination; so that all thoughts of the heart, and that wonderful
knowledge declared, by them it is revealed through this son the familiar spirit
begotten in themselves by the seed of reason the mother, and imagination the
father; so that there is no devil nor familias spirit without them, as people
do vainly imagine, but the devil and ^^^^liar spirit is all within them, and no
where else; yet all people fear a devil without them, but he is no where to be
found but in man and woman, this I do certainly know to be true.

Again, these Witches does suppose the true God to be an infi^ite spirit,
without any body or substance, as all people a^ do; and that the devil is a
spirit that can assumeth bodies, or what shape he pleases, or what shape or
form the Witch shall call for this, is the opinion of most people in the
world, as well as Witches, yea, even of the most of the greatest learned men;
darkness has overspread the minds of all learned men in the world, so that
they cannot find out what the true God is, nor where he is, nor what the right
devil is, nor where he is; yea, man himself is he that cannot find out
himself; But no more of this now.

To the matter in hand, the Witches they do not know any divine being, or
power, or form of God; but what their imagination does conceive to be God, for
they have full faith in this knowledge of theirs, to be the true knowledge of
God; only the Laws of men they fear, but no other God, but that familiar spirit
which they have produced in themselves, by giving themselves either to fasting
and prayer, unto an unknown divine being or power, supposing this power to be a
spirit that can appear in any shape they shall call for or desire; and all
people being ignorant of the true God, and the right devil, as they themselves
are so that the people have a faith in these Witches, being ignorant as
aforesaid.

What the true God and right devil is, and the Witches faith and their faith
being joined together, it becomes strong to atchieve such apprisions as their
faith has chose to be the object of their imagination: for he that enquireth
of a Witch, his faith and the Witches faith is all one.

Also this is to be minded, that all Witches have some rule by which they do
perceive those Apprisions, and hear those voices, for there is no wicked
knowledge or wicked wisdom as the wisdom of the world, neither is there any good
knowledge or good wisdom as the wisdom of God. I say, there is no knowledge or
wisdom good or bad, but those that have it they must go by some rule, else it
is mere nonsense as most of your Quakers Matters or Principles are mere
nonsense, that has neither bottom nor top.

CHAP. III.
BUt to the matter in hand, we see that the natural Astrologers they go by a
rule, and their wisdom and knowledge in things of Nature, it is declared by
them from and by a rule else that they say would be mere nonsense and
foolishness.

Yet I say, your natural Astrologers they are Witches, and have their Figure to
judge the effects of the Stars; but this Witchcraft is allowed by the Powers of
the Nations.

So I say, these Witches that does do things by a familiar spirit, they have a
rule to walk by as the other has, for as the imagination of the other has by
his study of the Figure attained to give some judgment upon the effects of the
Stars, upon a particular person or Nation. So likewise those Witches that has
a familiar spirit, they have attained to this familiar spirit out of their
imagination of reason, as I said before.

And this familiar spirit being begotten in themselves by the strength of
imagination their father; now understand thus much that this diabolical wisdom
that is begotten in man and woman by the imagination of reason, the devil is
that familiar spirit that men and women do act by.

And after this familiar spirit is begotten in man or woman by Imagination
their father, as I said before, then this familiar spirit of the Witch will
motion in the mind to fast, and pray unto the Host of Heaven, the Sun, Moon
and Planets, supposing that the good spirit is in some of them, and imagining
the evil spirit or devil to be in other some of them.

Now observe, when this familiar spirit is produced in them, then they observe
every motion of the mind, and their faith being in every motion of their minds,
it produces either some further knowledge in their own apprehension, or else
some visions are presented to their ph^tasie, for they have dedicated some
certain words to be said in their minds motional, to be used when they would do
any feats, besides their fasting and prayer; and this thing they have dedicated
to inquire of, is that which they divine with, or tell any thing from it, is
much like unto the Astrologers, their Figure is dedicated for that purpose that
he may tell things from and without the knowledge of the Figure, he can tell
nothing except he were skilled in it before, but the Figure was the thing he
came to know more then others at the first for wonderful things, may be
accomplished through the imagination of reason when it has set it self apart,
on purpose to attain unto such things.

For I find by experience within this seventeen years, what strange things
has bin achieved by man and woman, who has given themselves up to an unknown
God, upon a religions Account, some has by their fasting and prayer unto an
unknown God, attained unto visions, apprisions, appearance of Angels, Voices,
and many other strange things; yet altogether ignorant of the true God and the
right devil, and what Angels are; so that these things has bin all within
them; and they thought that God had revealed these things unto them; when as
they did attain unto these things aforesaid by their own endeavors, as many
Quakers and others can witness at this day, if they would; by harkening to the
light within them, and fasting, and such like. Neither did God present any
vision, or speak any voice unto them, but they do produce those things
aforesaid by their own imaginations.

So is it with Witches, they do raise shapes and voices out of themselves, and
those voices they hear they are no other but motional voices in themselves, and
the ignorant people that believes them is partakers of those motional voices
also with the Witch.

For there is no spirit of the devil without them that does assume any shape or
speak any voice unro the Witch, neither does any spirit without the Witch
reveal any knowledge unto them, it is all produced by their own wicked
imagination, who has begotten within themselves that familiar spirit they deal
with, and not from any devil or spirit without them.

But all comes from the imagination within, that is, the devil and no other,
yet this familiar spirit is produced from within them, to see shapes, and hear
motional voices, merely by watching the motion of the imagination that is
placed in their minds or hearts, even as the Quakers do by harkening to the
light within them, they do procure many strange visions and motional voices,
but they being groundless and nonsensical they come to nothing.

CHAP. III.
LEt the Reader observe when King Saul asked the Witch of Endor, What form the
gods was of she had seen ascend out of the Earth; The Woman answered and said,
An old man with a Mantle, etc. But Saul saw nothing but as the Woman told him,
and Saul believed her words, and bowed himself to the ground. -- Now mind the
15. verse, Samuel said to Saul, why have thou disquieted me to bring me up; the
meaning is this, now the Witch had full power over Saul, so that he did really
believe the Witch, that she had indeed raised up Samuel, though he saw nothing
-- yet the fear of being destroyed by the Philistines, and the belief of the
woman's words, Samuel began to speak in Saul's conscience, that is, there came
into Saul's mind the words that Samuel had told him in his lifetime --. So
that these was no speaking to Saul by Samuel, but the reasonings of Saul's own
heart, and these voices that Samuel spoke to Saul, they were motional voices
that did arise in Saul's own heart -- for an accusing conscience will speak
dreadful voices in the Conscience, as the blood of Abel cried for vengeance in
Cain's Conscience, and the Saints that were slain under the Altar cried for
vengeance, upon those that shed their blood; so that a sinful conscience will
have voices enough to torment him, though God himself, nor Prophet without him,
does never speak unto him. A guilty Conscience will speak with a motional voice
their great terror and torment, which is greater then can be born, as it was
with Cain, Saul, and Judas. Yea, ia was fear, and the remembrance of Saul's
disobedience to Samuels words in his lifetime, this did arise a fresh in Saul's
mind, and spoke with motional voices in Saul's conscience, accusing him for his
disobedience to Samuels words.

For the remembrance of Samuels words may be said to disquiet Samuel, for
Samuels words were buried in Saul's conscience.

But now, by his going to enquire of a Witch, Samuel is revived again in Saul's
mind, and there Samuel speaks fear, wrath and terror; for Samuels words spoke
in Saul's conscience one motional voice, and the guilt of Saul's disobedience
spoke fear and horror in Saul's conscience; this was a motional voice in Saul's
conscience also, for the voice of truth will speak, or the voice of obedience,
and the voice of sin and disobedience will speak in man's Conscience, as if they
were two distinct spirits.

This many guilty Consciences can witness, as we may read by Cain that killed
his brother, and Judas that betrayed his Lord, and many others who has been
guilty of the like crimes.

So that the Witch did raise no Samuel, nor spirit, but a mere shadow it was
the Witch saw which she could raise by her Art; neither was there any Samuel or
spirit not at all that did speak to Saul, but that motional voice in Saul's
Conscience as aforesaid.

And in this sense Samu^l may be said to be disquieted, for if Saul had never
gone to the Witch to enquire of her, Samuels words had been quiet in Saul,
neither would Saul have had such reasonings in himself, nor have been so
sensible of the worm of his Conscience.

So that there was no voice of Samuel spoke unto Saul but a motional voice in
Saul's own mind or Conscience, his fear and his disobedience; and what Samuel
had told him before these, all speaking with voices in his wounded Conscience;
Samuels words spoke one voice, and his own disobedience spoke another, so that
the Witch of Endor did neither raise Samuel, but only made the King believe she
did, neither did Samuel speak to the King but as aforesaid.

For the Kingdom being rent out of his hands, his sons being destroyed, and all
other threatenings of Samuel, they came into Saul's mind afresh with strong
motions, so that they became as voices in Saul's heart, as if Samuel had spoke
to the hearing of the ear, for there was no Samuel raised nor no Samuel spoke,
but what was motional in the mind of Saul, and what did visionally appear unto
the Witch, which was a mere shadow which she could produce by her
Witchcraft-Art to all those that were more ignorant then her self, or had faith
in her power.

CHAP. IV.
FOr the Reader must mind, that Witches and all those that does attain to the
Visions, and hear Voices within them, they do use means to attain unto it, also
they have some standing Rule or Art, by which they come to enquire or to know
things, that are above that knowledge which is common to other people, it is
much like unto the ways of God.

Therefore let the Reader mind the groundwork laid down at the first, that the
imagination of reason had begotten a son out of the Womb of the seed of reason
in man, which I call the Mother and Imagination, the father and the son that is
begotten in the womb of reason; by imagination the father is that great wisdom,
knowledge and power, by which they go beyond other people who are of a lower
capacity.

This son is that familiar spirit Witches does deal with; it is another spirit
begotten in them, which was not in their birth, when they were born, but
begotten in themselves sense by Imagination as aforesaid, neither is this
familiar spirit produced, or does come from any thing, or any devil without
them, as people do vainly imagine; but the familiar spirit it is produced, and
does come from within, for out of the heart comes evil thoughts, murder,
adultery, etc. and all familiar spirits, they are all conceived in the heart,
and being conceived there, in its season it brings forth such spirits as are
conceived in the heart; if envy and murder be conceived, as it was in Cain,
then it brings forth the spirit or deed of murder; if lust be conceived in
the heart, it brings forth the spirit and act of adultery, as it did in
David, and if a familiar spirit be conceived in the heart, then it brings
forth such a spirit that shall speak motional voices within them, as if some
spirits without them did appear without a body, and speak to them, and reveal
those things unto them.

Many wicked spirits more then is mentioned, are conceived in the hearts of men
and women, and acted by them spirits essay, that were never of Gods Creation,
but has been conceived in the mind of man since; for when sin is conceived,
as in James 1.15. When lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when
it is finished brings forth death; so that there is a conception of sin first
in the heart; and if it does not die before it quickens into life, that is,
into act; then it brings forth death, which is the punishment due to such
sins, that are alive in man's actions, after they were conceived in the heart;
and as the evil of murder, adultery and theft is conceived first in the heart,
so is that familiar spirit witches and wizards have; they are first conceived
in the mind, and in a little season it grows alive in them, and speaks unto
them, as if it were without them; for this I say, that a familiar spirit is
conceived and begotten in the heart of man and wom^n as the other sins
aforementioned are, and the cause why God is more angry with those that deal
with a familiar spirit, and has commanded them to be Put to death, more then
for other sins conceived in the mind is, because they imitate the way of God,
or the spirit of Prophecy, which causes the people to believe in a mere
fiction or shadow without any substance, that a spirit may be raised out of the
ground without a body, and so they forsake the living God, who has a body of
his own, and gave life to every creature, that has a body and does believe a
lie, which has been conceived in the mind, and has quickened into a familiar
spirit, and this spirit does always live within the Witch, and not without her;
and this familiar spirit thus conceived, first in the evil mind, and afterward
quickening in the evil heart, it goes from strength to strength, and from one
degree of knowledge, to a further degree of evil knowledge, and evil wisdom, as
all things else does that has life, for sin has life in it, and the outward
Law causes sin to revive in every one that does evil, as St. Paul says, Romans
7.9. thus in some measure the Reader may understand what a familiar spirit is,
and how it comes to have a being in Witches and Wizards, and how the ignorant
are partakers with the familiar spirit.

In the next place, I shall show how those that have a familiar spirit do
imitate the way of God, or the way of true Prophets; observe the way and manner
of true Prophets, Highpriests, and all other people, who are richly gifted
with the spirit of Prophecy, or revelation for the seed of faith planted in
the heart is the seed and nature of God, as reason is the seed and nature of
the Serpent or devil, and as the seed of reason is the womb or mother for
imagination to get a son.

So likewise the seed of faith in man is the womb or mother for the revelation
of faith, to beget a son out of the seed of says, answerable as the
Imagination does out of the seed of reason.

And this son the revelation has begotten out of the seed of faith, is that
heavenly wisdom, discerning knowledge and power over the spirits of others,
and knowledge of things above the Stars, and knows the true God in form and
nature, with many other heavenly secrets, which none else can know but those
that believe them.

So that the Revelation of faith has begotten this heavenly wisdom, power and
glory out of the seed of faith, which is the seed of God, even of his divine
nature, and this wisdom, power and glory, is that son or spirit, by which all
Prophets, Highpriests, Apostles and others that have it.

I say this is that by which they can truly divine by, in that they can foretell
truly what shall come to pass, according to the knowledge of the revelation of
faith, and this wisdom and knowledge being produced by revelation out of the
womb of the seed of faith, it may and is called the spirit of God in man, that
does teach and show the wisdom of God to others, so that others comes to be
taught and subjected by it, to their great peace here, and eternal Joy
hereafter.

CHAP. V.
ANd this spirit of wisdom, knowledge and power which is produced by the
revelation as aforesaid, it has motional voices in the Conscience, as the
familiar spirit has in the evil Conscience, but the motional voices in a good
conscience speaks peace; likewise this motional voice in Prophets, High
Priests, Apostles, and others, is that by which they do foretell things by,
whether it be good or bad, that shall befall those that shall enquire.

Also the spirit of revelation has a standing rule to inquire by, as those
have that does tell things by a familiar spirit, as I said before, for the
Witches does imitate the way of Prophets, and the devils way is as like Gods
way as he can.

Now let the Reader mind, and he may see how men have enquired of the Lord by
motional voices in the mind, by that spirit of faith which is gotten by
revelation, which is called the Spirit of God.

In the time of the Law of Moses the Ephod was a standing Rule, for to enquire
of God for good or bad success. Now there was no man could tell what the event
would be that looked upon the Ephod, but such men as had the spirit of
revelation and prophecy in them, as David and the High Priest, as soon as ever
they looked upon the Ephod, they could tell whether they should prosper in
battle or not; but if any other man which had not the spirit of revelation and
prophecy should look upon the Ephod, they could tell nothing by it.

Though the Ephod was appointed of God, on purpose to enquire of God, yet none
could find out Gods mind, but such men aforesaid, for as soon as ever David or
the High Priest looked upon the Ephod, they could tell what the event would be,
as may be seen, 1 Samuel 23.6, 9. how David called for the Ephod, and Abiathar
the Priest, to bring it to enquire of the Lord.

Yet God never spoke to them by voice, yet they had motional voices in
themselves in their hearts, assuring them that they prosper or not prosper, yet
God never appeared himself, nor any Angel, neither did God speak by any voice,
yet they are bade to go and prosper, as if they had heard some voice by looking
upon the Ephod, so that those voices that bade them go and prosper, they were
motional voices that did arise from the revelation and spirit of Prophecy
within them by that skill they had in the Ephod, which was appointed of God for
that purpose; so that all David's voices, and the High Priests voices, that were
motional voices, yet called the voice of God, because they did arise from the
seed of faith in David and others, which is the divine Nature of God, therefore
called the Spirit of God.

For this I say, if Saul had not lost that spirit of Prophecy by his
disobedience, as he once had, when the good spirit departed from him, he might
have enquired of the Ephod, and have been answered with a motional voice by the
Ephod, as he was by enquiring of a Witch.

For the spirit of Samuel did speak no more to Saul, then the Spirit of God did
speak to David, they were both motional voices that did arise from their two
seeds, the one voice spoke peace and deliverance, and the other spoke wrath and
destruction, the one did enquire in the way that God did appoint, even of the
Ephod, or of the Lords Prophets; the other did enquire of that which was
forbidden, and forsook the Lord and his Prophets, and went to a Witch to
enquire, it was because one was the seed of Adam, which is the seed of God, and
so chosen of God in mercy, even David; and the other was the seed of the
Serpent, even the devil, who was chosen King in Gods wrath, even Saul.

This is the true Interpretation of those voices that Samuel spoke to Saul, and
of his being raised by the Witch of Endor.

Therefore you that can understand these things aforementioned, you may see how
the whole world lies in darkness, and are cheated of their sense and reason by
this lying and vain imagination, to believe that spirits can be without bodies,
or that spirits can be raised without bodies, or that spirits can speak without
bodies, or that spirits departed can assume any shapes afterward, these things
and many more are produced by the dark imagination of the heart of man; and if
the Reader has any true light of faith in him, he may understand the
Interpretation I have given of the Witch of Endor, and how a familiar spirit is
produced or begotten in them, and be satisfied in his mind as to that matter,
so much concerning those words in Samuel aforementioned.

CHAP. VI.
AGain it is said Isa. 8.29. the Prophet speaking there to unbelieving
Israelites that did not believe the Word of the Lord through the Prophets
mouths concerning the destruction that should come upon Israel; this judgment
did the Lord threaten by the mouth of his Prophet Isaiah to bring upon Israel
for their unbelief; and this Prophet seeing the people would not hearken unto
the voice of the Lords Prophets, nor inquire of them, but altogether persecuted
them as false prophets, deceivers and liers, and the inclination of their
hearts was more willing and desirous to enquire of a Witch or Wizard, who had a
familiar spirit then of the Prophet of the Lord, as you may see chap. and verse
abo^e-written, the words are these as follows.

And when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits,
and unto wizards that peep and that mutter, should not a people seek unto their
God for the living to the dead; the meaning of these words is this, that
unbelieving men do think and believe that Witches and Wizards who has a
familiar spirit can rise out of the ground where dead men were buried, living
spirits without bodies that can reveal things unto them, by that motional voice
that does proceed from these familiar spirits, which does peep and mutter.

That is the whisperings that proceeds from this familiar spirit, that is
begotten by the imagination of reason the father, and the seed of reason the
mother, as I said before, is that motional voice all Witches and Wizards have,
whereby they peep and mutter in themselves, as if they did hear voices and see
shapes, and living spirits arise out of the ground, as the Witch of Endor said
to King Saul, She saw Gods ascend out of the earth. Whenas there was no spirit
nor shape came out of the ground at all, but the gods she saw ascend out of the
earth came out of her own imagination, even that familiar spirit begotten in
her, it seemed unto her as if it did ascend out of the earth, but those gods
she said she saw ascend out of the earth, they ascended out of her own
imagination, and Saul believed her, and so was partakers with her, and he did
believe that she had raised Samuels spirit out of the earth, as the Witch had
said.

And this is to be minded by the Reader, that when spirits are to be raised by
Witches, her familiar spirit always arises out of her own self, even from the
seed of reason and imagination of her own heart, whereby she does hear voices
within her, whispering low voices, as if some other spirits without her did
speak with a low voice unto her, and present shapes unto her dazzled eyes, which
seems to the Witch to be real voices of a spirit without her, and a real
shape without her, when as in deed and in truth, it arises out of her own
self, even from the seed of reason, and imagination of her own heart, whereby
she does hear voices within her whispering low voices, as if some other spirit
without her did speak with a low voice to her, and present shapes to her dazzled
eyes, which seems to the Witch to be a real voice of a spirit without her,
and a real shape without her, when as in deed and in truth it is nothing else
but a motional voice begotten in her self, and shapes begotten in her self, by
the imagination in the Womb of reason as aforesaid, which is that familiar
spirit.

Which is that familiar spirit she does deal with, she thinking it is from some
spirit without her, she not knowing it is begotten in her; and this familiar
spirit begotten in her, it whispers within her with a low motional voice, as if
some spirit did whisper out of the ground. According to that saying of the
Prophet, Isa. 28.4. concerning the destruction or Judgment of God upon
Jerusalem, the words are these, And thou shall be brought down and shall speak
out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice
shall be as one that has a familiar spirit out of the ground, and thy speech
shall whisper out of the dust.

As if the Prophet should say, Seeing you have refused to hearken to the voice
of the Prophets, which has declared the mind of the God of Israel openly with
a loud voice; you have heard them speak plain words with your ears, but you
have not believed they spoke truth unto you: therefore you have re^ected the
word of the Lord by his Prophets, and have persecuted and slain some of them as
false Prophets, because they spoke unto you in the Name of the Lord, as it was
revealed by the spirit of revelation in them.

They spoke plain words unto you, as might be heard to the outward ear by the
standers by; they were visible men that spoke unto you, so that you need not to
enquire after any that has a familiar spirit, who speaks so softly and so
low, that no standers by can hear this familiar spirit speak, but he or she
that has it.

But as for plain words openly declared by the Prophets, and publicly heard by
the outward ear, these you have rejected, despised, persecuted, and counted
them liars, deceivers, false prophets, and such like: Therefore God has given
you over to strong delusions, to enquire of a Witch, who makes you believe that
spirits may be raised out of the ground, and that spirits do come out of the
dust, and whisper to the Witch with a low voice, that none can hear but her
self. So those that enquire do believe as King Saul did, that a familiar spirit
can enter into the dust or ground, and bring up another man's spirit that is
dead without its body, and so their two spirits whisper so low together, that
none can hear that stands by, nor tell what this spirit that is raised did say,
nor whether the spirit so raised is gone into the body again, or into the
ground from whence the Witch said it was raised, which spirit that is said to
be raised, or said to speak out of the ground, I say it was raised out of the
Witches own body, and no where else; and those low voices and whisperings were
both within her, and not without her.

CHAP. VII.
NOw how a man may be said to be brought down, and shall speak out of the
ground, and their speech shall below out of the dust: The meaning is, when a
particular man or woman, or a people or nation, be in the same distress and
condition as King Saul was, that is in danger of losing his Crown and Kingdom,
his natural life, and not only so, but his Soul, is tormented with the fear of
eternal death; this makes the heart of man to melt in him; it makes his speech
to grow weak and feeble, so that his speech can hardly be heard; it is even as
if a man did speak out of death, or out of the ground.

A man with the extremity of outward and inward trouble, he becomes speechless,
yet he speaks in his thoughts, but so low, that none that stands by can hear or
tell what he says. This many can experience, that have seen their friend or
relation in this condition; this is like speaking out of the ground, and low
out of the dust. And the voice of every such troubled soul, who has the
plagues of this life, and the horror of conscience as to the life to come, as
King Saul had the voice such people have, is as one that has a familiar spirit
out of the ground, and their speech shall be as if one did whisper out of the
dust.

This place of Scripture has the same meaning as the place before mentioned,
Isai. 8.19. where such as King Saul was are bade to seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards, that peep and mutter, (that is) that
whisper out of the ground; for whisper, peep, and mutter, signifies all one
thing.

These things did Manasseh, 2 Kings 21.6. he dealt with familiar spirits, and
did great abominations; he made his sons to pass thorough the fire, in offering
them up as a sacrifice to an unknown Devil, which he thought was God, and this
he did by the whisperings of the familiar spirit within him, and being
acquainted with others, who were known to have familiar spirits also. And so
did several other Kings of Israel deal with familiar spirits, and had those low
whispering voices in themselves, as if spirits had risen out of the ground, or
from the dust to speak unto them; and this they did attain unto by industry, in
that they forsook the words of the Prophets, and would not hearken unto them,
but gave themselves up to follow the imaginations of their own hearts;
imagining they might as well know God, and what worship would please God as
well as the Prophets; therefore why should we, being Kings, hearken to such
mean inferior men as these? may not we by our familiar spirit as well know
God, and what worship will please him by our familiar spirit, as the Prophets
do by the spirit of prophecy? why should we be in such bondage, that we can do
nothing but what they say the Lord commands us to do? so the imagination says;
Come, we will not be tied up thus; we will see what our familiar spirit
begotten in us will do; we will erect and build altars in several places, and
s^crifice bullocks and lambs to an unknown God; and so by this means they
procure in themselves low motional voices, which whisper in themselves, which
becomes in them a familiar spirit, is produced in themselves: and there is a
more increase of low motional voices, which does whisper in the mind, moving
them to a further degree of knowledge and endeavor after more voices, so that
to attain to this diabolical wisdom in a more high measure. They are moved by
this low voice within them to offer up their own children in sacrifices to
their imaginary God, which they believe is an invisible spirit without a body,
which reveals these things unto them, and whispers and speaks those voices unto
them.

They count nothing too dear for this their imaginary God, no not their own
sons and daughters, as Manasseh and others did, that made their sons and
daughters pass through the fire as a sacrifice to their imaginary God, that had
spoke so many voices to them, and had whispered to them.

But all these whisperings and low voices, and peeping of spirits out of the
ground, as they thought, I say they were all within them; for when they came in
any trouble, their familiar spirit departs from them, and will not comfort them
any more, let it be either in poor or rich, nay Kings that have dealt with
familiar spirits, when they have been in trouble, all their comfort has been
lost, as the poorest Witch that is, as may be seen by Manasseh and other Kings
spoken of in Scripture.

Now observe, when God does bring upon a people, nation, or partitular person,
some great judgment and destruction, let it be either outward or inward in the
mind, when it comes upon a people, nation, or particular person, for their sins
and wickedness they have committed, in forsaking the Lords Prophets, and
dealing with Witches and familiar spirits, as S^ul forsook the Lord and went to
a Witch, and Manasseh, and several other Kings of Israel, who ought only to
have obeyed the Prophets of the Lord; but they forsook him, and enquired of
Witches and Wizards, and dealt with familiar spirits themselves, and caused the
people to worship the Devil (whom they imagined to be God) instead of the true
God, whom the Prophets would have had them to worship.

But when this punishment for sin is inflicted upon a people, nation, or
particular person, for dealing with familiar spirits, and worshipping of
devils; when punishment comes, it makes the heart or hearts to fail, for the
spirit is brought down by this judgment even to death, and so goes to the
ground; so that the very fear, trouble, and sorrow of heart, shall speak as it
were out of the dust, or out of death; for sin will speak out of the ground,
and the speech of death will below in them that have escaped the destruction
which others did go through; for there will be a resemblance in those that have
escaped how their friends and relations are fallen to the ground or dust of the
earth for their wickedness, so that sorrow and grief will speak in the mind of
those that have escaped with a low speech, even as one does who has a familiar
spirit. Or as if their friends and relations, the remembrance of their
destruction being taken away in wrath for sin, it speaks a small low voice of
grief and sorrow in the heart of those that are alive, even as one that has a
familiar spirit, even a low motional voice of sorrow and grief, and it comes
as it were out of the ground, or out of the dust.

That is the very influence of grief and sorrow, for their dead friends and
people; it causes, where grief is, to hear as it were low voices and small
speeches, even out of the ground or out dust of the earth: just as it was with
Cain in another case, the Lord said to Cain, Thy brothers blood cries from the
ground for vengeance; and so the blood of those that were sl^^n under the altar
did from the ground cry for vengeance, as in Rev. 6.10. it cries for vengeance
in the consciences of all bloody persecutors. So in like manner does the death
and destruction of a people, who are destroyed for wicked idolatry, as those
were the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, they spoke from the ground a low speech in
the conscience of those that were concerned, grief, sorrow, and fear of the
same punishment, and such like.

CHAP. VIII.
FOr where grief and sorrow is rooted and settled in the heart, it speaks
with low motional voices in the mind, that is the thought of fear in the mind,
both of temporal losses and the loss of eternal peace. The fear moves to and
fro in that mind, as if it were a speech out of the ground: for the thoughts of
the heart are low voices which cannot be heard by any but themselves.

So is it with those that have a familiar spirit, their voices and speech they
hear from spirits without them, as if spirits did speak to them out of the
ground: which speech they say they hear, is nothing else but the thoughts that
pass to and fro in their own minds, a low motional voice in themselves, as if
spirits did speak to them with a low voice out of the ground, or out of the
dust. For their faith is strong, and above all those that come to enquire of a
Witch, they do all believe that spirits may be raised without bodies out of the
ground; as the Witch does, so they both do believe, that the spirit come out of
the ground that spoke those low voices to the Witch, and she tells it to the
other that enquire of her, and they believe her as King Saul did.

So they are wholly departed from the Lord, and believe a lie, to think that
spirits can be raised out of the ground without bodies after men have been
dead; it is a thing God never did; we never read in Scripture, that God or his
Prophets did ever raise any spirits out of the ground without bodies after they
were dead; but we read in Scripture, that God and his Prophets have raised some
from the dead with bodies, as that of Lazarus being raised out of the ground by
Christ, and the Child that was raised from death by the Prophet Elijah, and
another Child raised from death to life by the Prophet Elisha, and several
others come forth out of the ground at the rising again of Christ from death,
as those Saints that did arise out of the graves, and appeared to many that
were alive; these all did arise out of the graves with bodies after they were
dead, and Lazarus came forth out of the ground after he was dead, but his
spirit came not out of the ground without his body, but body and soul came out
of the ground together.

For it was always Gods practice to raise soul and body together; and because
the imagination of reason in those that have a familiar spirit cannot do so,
nor those that enquire of them, therefore they do imagine that spirits may be
raised out of the ground without bodies, or assume a shape and appear like a
body, yet it shall be of no substance, a shape that can neither be felt nor
handled by the hand of man.

Now mind, all those God does raise out of the ground after they were de^d,
they may be handled and felt; though they be spiritual bodies, yet they may be
felt and handled, as Christ said to Thomas, Feel me and handle m^, after he was
risen from the dead, and Thomas laid his fingers in the print of the nails, and
on his side. Yet Christ was at that time a spiritual body that was risen from
the dead, that might be felt and handled, and not a spirit without a body, as
most people do vainly imagine that spirits may be raised without bodies.

And as for that Lazarus and others, that were raised by the power of God out
of the ground after they had been dead, they had bodies as well as spirits that
might be seen with natu al eyes, and handled and felt with natural hand. So
that Gods power in raising the dead, it is no cheat; the creature is not
cheated nor deceived, but is fully satisfied in his mind.

But for a familiar spirit to say or tell people, they de or cantaise spirits
out of the ground in such a shape without a body or bodily substance; or shall
say they hear voices from this spirit so raised, is a mere cheat to the
ignorant and unbelieving, and le^ds them into the pit of darkness, and makes
them fear where no fear is, and are afraid of their own sh^dows; for it is the
n^^ure of reason the devil to imagine, that this way of raising of spirits
without bodies, to be of a more high nature then to raise spirit and body
together, as God does; and the imagination does conceive it a more great power
to raise spirits without bodies out of the dust of the ground, then it is to
r^ise spirit and body together, as Christ did; for Christ always raised spirit
and body together, as the Scriptures do testify.

For the reas^n in man does send forth the imagination of the heart, the
unclean spirit in man walking through dry places, se^king ^est but can find
none; the ignorant dark thoughts of the im^gination goes out of a man, to
enquire of one that has a familiar spirit, seeking rest but can find none, as
King Saul did: for the imagination of the heart being continually evil, it
always walks through dry places, where no matter of life is to be had, to
quench the thirst of sin or a defiled conscience; neither can the th^ughts of
imagination be satisfied with what a Witch or a Familiar says; therefore
called dry places: they may be called dry, because the heart is never satisfied
with what a Witch says, for she always says a lie.

To tell a man or woman, that she does or can raise spirits out of the ground
without bodies, as the Witch of Endor did to King Saul, or that she did hear
any low voice or speech of Samuel out of the ground, as she told the King; I
say, she did but cheat the King, and made him believe she had raised Samuel,
and had heard him speak to her with a low speech out of the ground, which had
revealed unto her what sad things would befall the King: so he believing her
words, his spirit fainted, so that no strength was in him; when as indeed and
in truth that Samuel she said she saw arise out of the earth, he did arise out
of her own heart; and that low speech she said Samuel spoke, it was all in her
self by the motions of the familiar spirit begotten in her. And King S^ul
believing her, being partaker of her faith, Samuel spoke a low motional voice
or speech in him also, he believing it was Samuel spoke out of the earth, but
it was nothing else but the voice of his own guilty conscience within himself,
as it was the voice her familiar spirit in her self that spoke as aforesaid.

So that the meaning of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 29.4. concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem, that grief and sorrow of heart should speak in
themselves; as if the speech came out of the ground, because they saw in
themselves nothing but death and destruction did approach, and was like to
follow upon them all, fearing they should all be destroyed by their enemies,
and slain and fall to the ground: so that fear of heave of destruction, (...)
spoke a low speech in every man's heart, even as if it spoke out of the ground,
or as one that has a familiar spirit; for it is the nature of a familiar
spirit to speak as if the speech did proceed from the earth, and the speech
does seem to the Witch, and those that enquire of her, to whisper out of the
dust: whenas the speech comes not out of the ground, neither does it whisper
out of the dust, as is imagined by most people, because ignorance and darkness
has overspread the minds of most people in the world. But that low speech the
familiar spirit spe ks or whispers, it is out of her own heart, even that
wisdom begotten by the imagination in her own thoughts, that speaks as
aforesaid, and no spirit without her, as has vainly been imagined.

So likewise the people of the Jews, the fear, grief, and sorrow of heart,
being begotten in them for such like lins, as that of witchcraft, idolatry,
dealing with familiar spirits, causing their sons and daughters to pass through
the fire as burnt offerings and sacrifices unto Devils, which they supposed to
be Gods; these things caused their hearts to fail and faint, and their thoughts
were troubled within themselves, which causes their speech to grow weak and
low within them, even as if some familiar did speak out of the ground, or
whisper out of the dust, fear, grief, and sorrow of heart: but all come out of
their own grieved hearts, who were punished for their sins; and not out of the
natural ground or natural dust, as people do vainly imagine. This is the true
meaning of the Prophets words, and how familiar spirits may be said to speak
out of the ground, and whisper out of the dust.

CHAP. IX.
AGain, it has been objected by many, that spirits may be raised without
bodies, and that spirits may be talked with after they have been dead and
buried; and that spirits have appeared in a shape to several people, yet this
spirit so appearing has no body nor substance at all, neither can it be felt
or handled by mortal man, nor no immortal creature neither: this is the vain
conceit of most people.

But to satisfy the Reader in this, I declare, that there is no immortal
spirit whatsoever, but it has a spiritual body suitable to its spirit; if the
spirit be immortal, the body is immortal also: for this I say, no spirit can
have any being at all without a body, no not God himself, who was from
eternity; his spirit could not be from eternity without a spiritual body, in
form like a man; they were both from eternity, and the one was never divided
nor separated from the other, but they were both eternal. And further I
declare, that God was a spiritual body from eternity, in form like a Man;
therefore God created man in his own image and likeness. Now observe, if man
has a body suitable to his spirit, so has God a body suitable to his spirit;
else man was not created in his image, if God has never a body, but is all
spirit, as people do vainly imagine. For this I know, that God was spirit and
body, in form like a Man, from eternity, and his spirit was never divided nor
separated from his body, but they were both eternal.

So likewise is it with Angels and Men, and all other creatures; wherever the
spirit of life is, there is bodies of life also; let it be either in spiritual
bodies, or in natural bodies. For if the body of either of these be dead, the
spirit is dead also; and if the spirit be dead either in spiritual body or
natural body, the body is dead also: for the one cannot have any sensible being
without the other. And further I say, that they we^e both together spirit and
body from eternity in God the Creator, and he has ordered and created all his
creatures, both celestial and terrestrial, that spirit and body should be one
living being, and that one should not subsist nor have no sensible being
without the other: even as God himself could not enjoy no sensible living being
without a body, he knowing this in himself.

Therefore he created all his creatures spiritual and natural with bodies
suitable to their spirits, and spirits suitable to their bodies, so that one
might not be divided nor separated from the other; for if one dies, the other
dies; and if the spirit live, the body lives also. For this I say, that if
the spirit of God himself could not be without a body from eternity, how then
is it possible that his creatures should have spirits without bodies, seeing he
himself his spirit could not have any being without his body from eternity.

But this conceit, that the spirit or soul of man is immortal, and cannot die,
and may have a being without a body, and appear in a shape without any
substance; this vain conceit proceeded first from the imagination of reason in
man, even from Cain, the first devil in flesh and bone. And this imagination in
Cain his posterity, being heathen men, who had no communion with God, nor
revelation of faith, as the sons of Adam and the sons of S^^h, the generation
of the righteous, had; they knew that the spirit and body was all one substance.

But the imagination of reason, Cain his poherity, the heathen opinion do
imagine the spirit of man to be immortal, and cannot dies; and that spirits may
appear in shapes without bodies; and that spirits may go out of the body, and
go to heaven or hell and leave the body to be laid in the ground, as the
Quakers and others do.

And this imagination of reason in man has created to it self a (...)
creation, which God never created. Man has created and made in his imagination
a spirit without a body, and that this spirit so created is immortal, and
cannot die, nor is not capable of death, that it can slip out of the body, and
that it can have a being when it is gone out of the body, and appear in a shape
without substance, or has power to assume what shape it please, and yet this
shape it does assume shall have no substance, yet it shall appear in a shape
and fright people.

And the imagination of reason in man has created man in his own image and
likeness, as God did Adam: as thus, First, he has conceived in his
imaginat^on, that God is a spirit without a body. Secondly, he conceives in
his imagination that the Devil is a spirit flying in the air, which can neither
be seen nor felt; yet this Devil or spirit without a body does tempt man to
evil, whereby man is punished, and the tempter he is escaped away without
punishment.

Also it is conceived by the imagination, that this Devil or spirit is in hell
fire, and in chains of darkness, and can go no further then God will permit
him, because his chain is no longer then God has limited him.

Also it is conceived in the imagination, notwithstanding the Devil is chained,
and in hell fi^e tormented, yet he being a spirit without a body, he is so
swift that he can be in all places at one time, so that he can tempt tho^sands
of men and women to sin at one and the same time, and they themselves never the
wiser, nor know him when he tempted them. All this the imaginary Devil can do,
and much more; and yet be in hell fire, and tied in a chain at the same time,
and all but one Devil, a spirit without a body.

Also the the imagination has conceived that the soul of man is a spirit
infused or put into the body by God himself, and that man begets the body, but
not the soul or life of man, that is conceived to be immortal, or a spirit that
is so invisible, that cannot be seen nor known what it is, and that it can live
of it self when it is gone out of the body.

Thus the imagination of reason the devil has created its own soul in its own
image and likeness; and this has been the occasion of producing of familiar
spirits, and of dealing with those that have a familiar spirit, being conformed
to the very image of the devil. Many things more of the like nature might be
said in this point.

But here the Reader may see if there be any true light of faith in him, how
the imagination of reason in man has created spirits without bodies, and that
the Devil is a bodyless spirit, and in hell fire, and in a chain of darkness,
and yet at liberty at the same time to tempt people, and in hell fire, and yet
out of the fire when he pleases, and that he may be c^l^ed out of hell, or out
of the ground, when a Witch by her familiar spirit does call; and that he shall
appear in any shape they will have him, yet he shall have no body nor
substance, but a mere shadow; yet this shadow shall speak with a low voice or
speech out of the ground; as if speech could proceed from a shadow without
substance.

So that the imagination of the heart of man has created to it self a devil,
that God never created; and the imagination of man's heart has created his own
soul in the image and likeness of the devil, that is to say, a spirit without a
body; and that a spirit without a body may be capable of joy or sorrow; and
that a spirit may subsist and have a being enjoy or sorrow without a body,
which thing is impossible.

But observe the creation that the imagination of man has created to himself;
for it is the nature of imagination of reason the devil, he always creates
spirits without bodies, but God the Creator he always creates spirits and
bodies together, for God never created any spirit without a body; for when God
made man after his own image and likeness, he made him with a body as well as a
pirit, else man could not be made in the image and likeness of God, if God had
not had a body of his own as well as a spirit.

So that Adam was made or created in the image and likeness of God; for Adam
had a visi^le body and spirit, undivided and unseparable one from the other;
they were but one visible sensible being, and when the life was dead the body
was dead, and when the body is really dead, the spirit and life was and is dead
also; and both are laid in the ground together, as is declared in all our
writings, but more especially in that book entitled The M^rtality of the Soul.

CHAP. X.
ALso I do further declare, that God did never create any spirit without a
body, neither of Angels, nor Men, nor no other creature, neither in Heaven
above, nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the Waters under the earth. There is no
spirit or life whatsoever that is created of God, but it has a body to that
life or spirit; but if a spirit have any being without a body, that spirit is
none of Gods creation, for God never created any spirit whatsoever without a
body, as I said before.

But the imagination of reason in man, which is the devil, has created all
creatures in the imagination to have spirits without bodies, both of Angels
above and Man here on earth, and all creatures upon the earth, and in the
waters, that have the breath of life, the imagination of reason says, their
spirits may subsist without bodies, or go out of those bodies they have, and
enter into other bodies, and appear in the shape of a body, and yet be of no
substance: so that the Devils creation is all of spirits without bodies, and
Gods creation is all with bodies and spirits together.

And this darkness has overspread the nature of man all the world over, which
is the occasion of that opinion of houses and places being hanted with evil
spirits, and spirits walking without bodies, and dea^ing with famili^r spirits,
that peep, and mutter, and whisper as it were out of the ground. These things
and many more are produced by the imagination of the heart of man, for the
imagination of man's heart is evil, and continually evil; for it has given a
being to spirits without bodies, to fright it self to that which has no being
of it self.

For I declare and perfectly know, that there is no such thing as spirits to
walk without bodies, nor assume any shape after death, nor be raised out of the
ground by any Witch or any familiar spirit whatsoever; it is all produced out
of the d^rk imagination of the heart, where ignorance beareh rule; for there is
no such thing can be presented but to the ignorant and darkminded people.

Thus I have given the Reader to understand something more concerning the power
of Witches, and how they may be said to raise spirits out of the ground, and
from whence that low speech does come, with those Scriptures opened that speak
as if a familiar spirit did hear whispering out of the dust.

Also I have given the interpretation of that in Samuel concerning the Witch of
Endor, and those places of Scripture in Isaiah; these places are the most
concerning spirits being raised without bodies, of any in the Scriptures; but
there have been some other places of Scripture, that do seem to carry a show as
if spirits might rise again without bodies, and I have been desired by some to
open those Scriptures that seem to tend to that purpose, though the common and
general objection amongst all people is, that of the Witch of Endor and King
Saul, which I have opened before; yet for the further satisfaction of the
Reader, I shall open and interpret the other places objected, that seem to tend
to the same thing.

The places of Scripture are three; the first is Isa. 61 1. the word^ are
these, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good tidings unto the meek: he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound -- So Luke 4.88. the words in Luke are much to
the same purpose, and little difference; onele that which Isaiah did prophecy
of, it was fulfilled by Christ in his time -- So the first Epistle of Peter,
chap. 3. and 18, 19, 20. verses; the words are these, For Christ also has once
suffered for sin, the just for the unjust; that he might bring us to God, being
put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. Verse 19. By which also
he went and preached unto the spirits in prison: Verse 20. Which sometime were
disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a (...) whe^^in few (that is) eight souls were saved by water.

CHAP. XI.
AS for that saying of the Prophet Isaiah, it was a prophecy of Christ, that he
should be anointed to preach glad tidings unto the meek, and that he was sent
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound. This prophecy was fulfilled when
he was upon earth, as may plainly appear by those words in Luke aforementioned.

Also the Reader may understand, that these places of Scripture have no
relation at all to the raising of spirits without bodies nor of spirits being
in prison, nor delivered out of prison by the power of Christ without bodies.

But the meaning is this, that the Spirit of the Lord Almighty was upon Christ,
and in him, and did anoint him to preach glad tidings of salvation to the meek
in heart, who did believe in him, and trusted in his words; all such as were
brokenhearted, who were led captive by the error, ignorance, and darkness of
the mind; he came to proclaim liberty to the spirit of man, who was in
captivity; and to open the prison door of men's hearts.

For this I say, all men's spirits by nature are shut up in the prison of
spiritual darkness in the mind, and are lead captive by the ignorance of truth;
so that the spirit or soul of man is shut up prisoner in the body of man,
until the true God and Savior has been preached to them, as it was by Christ
himself, when on earth he was anointed to preach glad tidings of salvation; and
he anointed his Apostles to preach glad tidings of peace to men, and to open
the prison, and to deliver the captive out of captivity, and to set the spirits
of many that were in a prison of darkness in their own minds go free: this
prophecy was fulfilled at that time by Christ and his Apostles in their
Commission.

But the same captivity and prison of darkness is now upon the spirits of all
men, as it was at that time: for this I say, and many people can witness that
their spirits have been shut up prisoners in spiritual darkness in their own
bodies, until the the true God and Savior has been preached unto them by his
last messengers.

For this I declare, that those words of the Prophet Isaiah, they were spoken
with relation to a spiritual liberty, and to a spiritual captivity, of the mind
or spirit of man, and not to a natural captivity. Neither was it meant the
opening of the natural prison doors, to them that were bound by the Powers of
the nations; but the doors of men's hearts were opened at the preaching of
Christ and his Apostles, in that light, and life, and salvation was preached
unto them, that whoever believed that this Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of
the world, should be saved and delivered from the fear of eternal death: so
that the soul of man that was lead captive into prison, and bound in chains of
darkness, and strong doors locked fast to keep the spirit of man in prison, by
the works of the Law, and the expounders of the Law before Christ came, the
spirit of reason in them did lead the generality of people their spirits into
spiritual captivity, and shut them up in prison, and tied their spirits up in
the observation of the Ceremonial Law of Moses.

Which was as chains of darkness; and not only so, but shut the door of hope
upon them, so that there was no hope to be saved in them, but by observing the
Law aforesaid, which Paul calls beggarly rudiments, Gal. 3. So that this
spiritual captivity, and being bound in prison, and the doors being shut, it
was the spirits of people that were captives and prisoners in their own bodies,
kept by the Legal and ceremonial righteousness of the Law of Moses; and when
Christ came to preach, and to give power to his Apostles to preach the Gospel
of truth, both to Jew and Gentile, then was the door of hope opened in peoples
hearts, and many that were bound in prison, whose spirits were led captive,
they were set at liberty from that bondage of the Ceremonial Law, wherein they
were bound, and brought out of that prison of darkness in the mind, into the
glorious light and life of faith, by the preaching of Christ and his Apostles.

Then was this prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled in the Apostles commission; then
was liberty preached to the spirits of many that were bound and in prison in
their own minds, the word of faith preached unto them, it opened a door of hope
of deliverance from the bondage of the Law as aforesaid, wherewith they were
bound; so that by faith they had in Christ their chains fell off their feet,
and darkness of their understanding; so that they were at perfect liberty, and
delivered out of prison, and the prison door of hope in Christ being opened,
all true believers in Christ were set at liberty, free from captivity, and out
of that spiritual prison of darkness into the glorious liberty of the sons and
daughters of God for ever and ever.

So is it now in this commission of the spirit, we the witnesses of the spirit
have preached glad tidings of salvation, and have opened the prison doors of
men's hearts, and have let many out of that spiritual prison, that were bound to
the righteousness set up by the imagination of reason now in these last days,
who were led captive by their own traditions, and kept in prison in their own
bodies for many years; but by the declaration of truth in all our writings and
our speakings, many people have been delivered out of captivity and out of
prison, their spirits have been let loose out of the chains of darkness,
because the door of their hearts has been opened by the word of faith in the
true God, which we have preached and written; this many can witness at this day
the truth of it. So that now that Scripture is fulfilled again in these last
days; and this is the true meaning of the Prophet Isaiah, in those words
concerning opening the prison, and giving liberty to the captives that were
imprisoned in their own bodies by the conceptions of the imaginations of their
own hearts.

So that there is not the least color or ground from those words, for the
reason of man to think that spirits may be let out of prison without bodies, or
that the spirit of Christ did preach to any spirit in prison without his body.

CHAP. XII.
ANd as for those words of Peter aforenamed, where he says, Christ was put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; by which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing, etc.

The meaning of those words are as follows; that Christ was put to death in
the body of his own flesh, this is confessed by most people that profess the
Scriptures of truth, but very few do truly believe, that the soul or spirit of
Christ did die, or was put to death at all, notwithstanding the Scripture
says, that He poured out his soul unto death; and he himself says, His soul
was heavy unto death. Therefore that the Reader may understand what is meant in
that Christ was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit; mind,

I declare, that it was the soul or spirit of Christ, which was the Godhead
life that dwelt in that body of flesh and bone of Christ; for as the Scripture
says, In him all the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily: and this Godhead
life that dwelt in the body of Christ's flesh, it was put to death in the body
of Christ's flesh, and the same Godhead life that was put to death in the body
of his flesh: and when Christ's body was crucified upon the cross, then was the
soul and life of Christ, or the Godhead life did die, and was put to death in
that flesh of Christ; for that flesh of Christ was God become flesh, as the
Scripture says; and the soul and life of Christ was the soul and life of God.
And,

When Christ poured out his soul unto death, it was the Godhead life that was
poured out unto death; so that the Godhe d spirit was put to death, and did die
in the flesh of Christ when he was crucified. But this Godhead life which was
put to death in the flesh of Christ, it quickened again where it was put to
death, even in the same flesh where it was put to death. And in its quickening
ag^in, it raised the same flesh again, and so spiritualized the same flesh that
suffered, and made it incapable to suffer death any more.

For this I say, no spirit or life that is put to death whatsoever, could
possibly quicken again in the same body, but the life of God only; so that
Christ must needs be God as well as Man, for it was Christ that was put to
death in the flesh, and the same life that was put to death, and did die, that
which did die did quicken again, and so is called a quickening spirit.

Now observe, it cannot properly be called a quickening spirit, if it had not
been once dead: for if the spirit and life of Christ did not die, nor was not
dead, then I say there was no need that this spirit and life should quicken
again, for it was always quick and alive.

For the spirit quickening does imply, a sensible life is quickened out of an
insensible life; as a child in the womb before it is quick, it feels no pain,
neither does it stir in the womb, and the midwife does not care to destroy it
to save the woman's life, because the child was not quick it was an insensible
life, no more capable of pain then there is in death, or a dead lump of earth;
but when a child is quick in the womb, it is capable of pain, though it has
not strength to express it to us that are strong, yet it is capable of pain,
because it is quickened into a sensible life, that is, a living soul, a living
spirit, and so may be called a quickened spirit of life, out of that which was
dead; yet by the appointment of God in his creation, and the warmness of the
womb, there is a new life or spirit does quicken in the womb in its season,
according to the appointment of God, when he created all things, and placed a
law of generation in them.

So likewise the spirit or life of Christ was put to death in his own body of
flesh, as aforesaid; and in its season he himself had appointed before, namely
three days and three nights, this spirit of Christ so put to death, it
quickened again in the same flesh a new and glorious life, which made that
flesh that suffered glorious also.

And this is the true interpretation of Peter's words, and the faith of all true
believers, that the spirit, life, and soul of Christ did die, and was put to
death in the body of his own flesh, that was crucified on the cross by the
Jews; and that the same spirit that was put to death, it did quicken again out
of death into a new and glorious life by his own power, therefore called a
quickening spirit.

So that here is no ground at all for that vain conceit in people, who do
believe that spirits may be raised without bodies, or appear without bodies,
but altogether to the contrary. And as for that saying of Peter, By which also
he went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were
disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah
while the ark was a preparing.

These words do seem to carry some show, as if the quickening spirit of Christ,
after he was risen from the dead or in the time he did lie in the grave, as if
his spirit in that interim of time went into some local place where spirits
were in prison without bodies, to preach unto them, who had been disobedient in
the days of Noah: this is the vain conceit of most people from those words of
Peter, who says, By which he went and preached unto the spirits in prison, as
if the spirits of the disobedient people in the days of Noah had been in prison
in some local place in the earth without bodies, who had been departed in the
days of Noah, in the destruction of the world by water.

This the imagination of reason in man does imagine, that spirits may be shut
up in prison without bodies, and that the quickening spirit of Christ might
preach unto them without a body.

But the true light and revelation of faith does know to the contrary, that no
spirits can have any being at a^l without bodies, neither of God, Angels, nor
Man, nor no other living creature, who has the breath of life in it.

But to give the interpretation of this Scripture, that the Reader may
understand, it is thus; the spirit of Christ, that quickened from the dead to
life again, I say, is the same spirit that preached to the spirits in prison in
the days of Noah, and the spirits of the disobedient world were in prison in
their own bodies in the days of Noah, as they were when Christ came upon earth,
for then he opened the prison to them that were bound, by preaching glad
tidings of freedom to those that were bound, and liberty to those spirits that
were in captivity.

Now (as I said before) this captivity is spiritual captivity, and to be bound
and in prison, it is meant a spiritual imprisonment in the mind, and not a
natural imprisonment of the body. And this I say, the very same spirit of
Christ that preached to the Jews when he was upon earth, did preach to the old
world in the days of Noah, though in a twofold manner.

And as the spirits of men were in prison in their own ignorance, blindness and
darkness of understandings, in that they were led captives and prisoners by
their wicked and unnatural lusts in the days of Noah: so were both Jews and
Gentiles in the days of Christ when on earth, their spirits were led captive,
and into the prison of unbelief and persecution of the Lord of Life, in that
their fathers persecuted the Lords Prophets and Messengers he did send; so did
these Jews persecute the Lord himself, when he preached to their spirits that
were in prison, and led captives by their wicked murdering wills into the
prison of unbelief; for he did preach when on earth, that whosoever did believe
in him should be saved. And as many as did truly believe in him, their spirits
were brought out of that captivity of unbelief, and out of the prison of
darkness in the mind, into a glorious liberty and light of life eternal. And
thus did the preaching of Christ's spirit deliver many spirits of men and women
out of prison, in the days when he was upon earth.

So likewise this quickening spirit of Christ; it preached unto the spirits in
prison in the days of Noah. And why were their spirits in prison in the days of
Noah? Because they were disobedient. And how may they be said to be
disobedient? Because they did not believe that good man Noah, who was a
preacher of righteousness. And how did he preach righteousness unto that wicked
people? In that he prepared the Ark, and being so many as a hundred years in
building, all that while God is said to wait for their repentance, and that
they might believe that God would destroy the world by water.

But instead of repentance and believing they hardened their hearts, and mocked
at Noah and the Ark; so that while the Ark was preparing, God waited for the
peoples repentance; and all that while that Noah was building he preached to
the people, that the world would be drowned.

And the spirit of Christ, which is the spirit of God, which was put to death
in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, by which he went and preached unto
the spirits in prison in the days of Noah, it was the same spirit that
instructed Noah to build the Ark; so that the building of the Ark by Noah, he
being a Preacher of righteousness, in that he believed God, and built it as the
spirit of God had commanded and instructed him, as God did Moses, showed him
the pate^n of the tabernacle in the Mount.

And in as much as Noah did obey the commandment of the Lord, according as the
spirit of the Lord did reveal unto him, Noah may be said to be a Preacher of
righteousness; and he doing all things by inspiration of the spirit of Christ,
which was not at that time made of flesh, but in the fullness of time became
pure humane flesh, and suffered the pains of death. And the same spirit that
suffered death, that very same spirit that quickened, was that spirit that
preached to the spirits in prison in the days of Noah, as aforesaid.

And the making of the Ark by the inspiration of Gods spirit in the sight of
the people, who were in prison in ignorance and darkness of mind, is called by
the revelation of faith, A preaching to the spirits in prison: so that the
spirit of God in Noah may be said to preach unto those spirits in prison, in
the days of Noah, and that there was but eight persons saved from the Flood.

So that this place of Scripture does no way prove, that the spirit of Christ
did ever preach to spirits in prison without bodies; neither did Christ's spirit
preach in the days of Noah without a body, for he always preached with a body
himself, or else chose men that have bodies, and gave them power to preach to
spirits in prison, and to deliver the captives, and to set the prisoner at
liberty, and the bound in prison to go free.

So that the Reader may see how and in what manner the spirit of Christ did
preach unto the spirits in prison in the days of Noah, and how their spirits
may be said to be in prison, and how their unbelief in the days of Noah was
called disobedience to the preaching of Noah all that while the Ark was
building. And being built by the inspiration of the spirit of God, it may and
is called the preaching of Christ's spirit to them that were in prison in
spiritual darkness in their minds; for their minds being darkened, they did
those things that were unseemly, yea unnatural, as the people of Sodom did.
Now, were not the spirits of these people in prison, and led captive of those
unnatural lusts, I think no sober man will deny; yet these were those spirits
in prison that Christ's spirit preached unto in the body of Noah, in the days of
Noah; and that there was but eight persons in the days of Noah, that were saved
from the destruction by water, by the preaching of that spirit of God in Noah.
This is the true interpretation and meaning of those words of Peter the Apostle
aforementioned; and how the spirit of Christ went and preached unto the spirits
in prison in the days of Noah.

CHAP. XIII.
AGain, there are some other places of Scripture, which several people have
objected, as if the spirit or soul of man might go out of the body, and subsist
in bliss and happiness, or in misery and a tormented condition, without its
body it always lived in; from that place Luke 23.43. Jesus said to the Thief on
the cross, Verily I say unto thee, This day shall thou be with me in paradise.
Now observe, this no way proves that the Thiefs soul went out of his body into
a Paradisical place, and so escaped suffering death, or did not die; for if the
soul of Christ did die at that time, as is clear by Scripture it did, then the
soul and life of the Thief did die also.

Then where was the Paradise the Thiefs soul, and Christ's soul that was heavy
unto death, where did they go? To this I say, they went to a place of rest,
where all righteous souls go, which is to the sleep of death, for there was
nothing did die but the souls of them both, and the Paradise Christ and the
Thief went into that day they suffered death, I declare it was this, that
Christ was sure in himself that he should rise from the dead the third day, and
afterward should enter into eternal glory; and this assurance in Christ that he
should rise again the third day, it was Paradise and Peace to his soul, that he
should pass through that death he was now to suffer that very day into a new
life, that should not be capable to die any more.

So likewise when the Thief did truly believe that Jesus was the Christ, the
Savior from eternal death to those that did believe, as it is certain he did
when he said, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom; for he did
really believe, that Christ would rise the third day, and that he would raise
him to eternal joy and happiness at the last day, and the Thief dying in this
faith, he entered into peace of mind, and had rest and freedom to die in hope
and full assurance, that Christ would raise him up soul and body to eternal
happiness at the last day.

And this was that Paradise that Christ and the Thief were in that very day
they both suffered death; for the assurance of everlasting life in a man's self
here in mortality, is the Paradise of peace in this life. This I know to be
true, and this was the Paradise Christ did mean the Thief should be in that
very day he believed; and not that either of their souls went out of their
bodies to any other place or Paradise, then what was in their own bodies, as
aforesaid.

In like manner people do imagine that the soul of man goes out of the body at
his death, from that saying Acts 7.59. from those words of Stepher, when he was
stoned to death he said, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. The meaning is this,
that when any man dies in the true faith of Christ, in the hope and full
assurance that Christ will raise him up to eternal happiness at the last day,
he commits his spirit into the hands of Christ, knowing that though he does
lose his life for Christ's sake here, that Christ will raise it again, and save
his soul hereafter; and so Christ may be said to receive his spirit. For this I
must tell the Reader, that there is not a quarter of an hours time to the dead
to his rising again, no not a minute; for there is no time to the dead, not a
minute of an hour, though a man have been dead 5000 years, yet it is not a
minute of an hour to him that is dead.

For all time belongs to the living; for after death there is nothing but
eternity, on the other side of death either eternal happiness or eternal
misery: so that when men die, they may be said to go immediately to Heaven or
to Hell, to joy or torment, to be received into Christ's hands of mercy, or into
the hand of Christ's wrath, where they shall be tormented with the Devil and his
Angels, yet shall never see the Devil, nor his Angels, nor themselves, to
eternity; as they did not know the Devil here, neither shall they know or see
him hereafter, yet be tormented with him.

And in this sense a faithful spirit or soul, as Stephen was may be said to
commit his spirit into the hands of Christ, and that Christ does receive his
spirit into his hands, and will raise it up at the last day, which will not be
a minute of an hours time to the dead, as I said before; therefore let not the
seed of faith think the time long between death and the salvation of their
souls, because so many of the faithful have been so many hundred years in the
grave: and let not the wicked unbelieving people comfort themselves, that the
dead shall never rise again, because the Fathers are dead, and the Prophets are
dead, and we see none of them rise again, therefore we conclude their spirits
are gone to Heaven without bodies, and the spirits of the wicked are gone to
Hell without bodies, but as minute of an hours time will deside this matter,
when the dead are raised: for they shall not remember they have been asleep in
the dust one minute of an ho^r, for there is no remembrance of time in the
grave. Therefore let that vain conceit that is in most people fall, of spirits
going to God without bodies, for I can assure you there is no such thing
neither can there be any true peace in that conceit; I know it by faith now,
and by experience, for I was of that opinion once my self, when I was zealous
in religion according to the Puritan way but I knew no Scripture truly, neither
was there one true Interpreter of Scripture, no not one in those days, that
could show, a man the true righteousness of God, or the true way to everlasting
life.

CHAP. XIV.
THere is another place of Scripture that is objected, that seems is if the
soul went out of the body when they die; as in 1 Kings 17.21. where Elijah
prayed, that the child's soul might come into him again. The meaning is this,
that Elijah did pray in faith unto God, that he would assist him in this as in
other things, as i^ shutting up the Heavens that it should not rain, and
calling for fire from Heaven to destroy those two captains and their fitties,
and m ny other wonderful things he did; so he prayed unto God to strengthen his
faith, so that he might have power to raise this child's life out of death again.

Therefore he stretched himself upon the child, and prayed that the child's soul
might come into him again, that is, that the child's soul or life might quicken
in the body of the child again; for Elijah knew the soul of the child was dead,
and by the warm flesh of the Prophet laid upon the child's dead flesh, and the
faith and prayer of the Prophet together, it begot life in the child again, so
that the soul that was dead it became life in the child again, and that life
that was quickened, it run through the veins of the child's body, and so the
child's soul did come into him again.

For this I say, if the soul of the child had been gone out of the body, then
Elijah did not raise the dead child to life again; for how can a man be said to
be dead, wh^nas life does not die, but slips out of the body, as most people do
vainly imagine; but it may be clear to those whose understanding are
enlightened, that Elijah did raise the child from death to life, and that the
child's soul was dead in its body, and that the soul of the child was revived in
the child's body again by the power of faith in Elijah.

And the very same thing was done by the Prophet Elisha, as in 2 Kings 4.34.
the Prophet Elisha did the same thing to the Shunamite woman's son, he went up,
and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his
eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and he stretched himself upon the child;
and the flesh of the child waxed warm, and Elisha stretched himself upon the
child a second time: here the Reader may see, that the child was dead, and by
the faith and prayer, and by the warmness of the Prophet Elisha his flesh, the
child revived to life again both body and soul. And Elisha did use the same
means and way as Elijah did; for he went in, and shut the door, and prayed unto
the Lord as Elijah did, and stretched himself upon the child as Elijah did, and
raised the child to life again by the power of faith.

Yet Elisha makes no mention of the soul coming into the child again, but he
delivered the body and soul of the child, that were both dead together, he
delivered them both alive together to the child's mother. It was the same thing
done by Elijah, only some difference in the words, but the sense and meaning
is all one.

So that the Reader may understand, if any true light of life be in him, that
the soul of the child went not out of its body, but died in the body; and by
the power of faith in the Prophet it quickened alive out of death in the child's
body again; for the soul or life of the child never went out of the body, as is
vainly imagined; but the soul, life, and spirit of the child was absolutely
dead in the body, and by the power of faith in the Prophet the dead soul or
life of the child was quickened alive again, and caused the body to live also.
For if the woman should have had the soul of the child given unto her without
the body, she would have given the Prophet no thanks for raising her child's
soul without a body; but the body and soul being one person, they were both
dead together, and the Prophet raised them both together alive, and the woman
received them both together, and rejoiced greatly in God, and gave honor to
the Prophet.

Thus in short I have given the true interpretation of all those Scriptures
that most seem, or most commonly are objected against the mortality of the
soul, or to prove that spirits do go out of the body at the time of death, or
that spirits may be raised without bodies, or have any being without bodies,
and that a spirit may appear in a shape without a body, or that a spirit can
assume what shape it please, yet have no body or substance.

These things the vain imagination of reason in man has created in it self, to
fright it self with, for there is no such thing as spirits walking without
bodies, neither does any spirit go out of the body when men die, as is imagined
by most people; but these are factions of men's brains, created by the
imagination in the dark minds of men and women, for God never created any such
thing, as I have showed before.

And as for that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to
the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. His
meaning (I suppose) in these words is, as is generally conceived by all people,
the body to the dust, and the spirit returns to God that gave it when men die:
but these sayings of Solomon are no Scripture, for Solomon was no Scripture
writer, for his writings were not written by the revelation of faith, but by
the revelation of reason; yet it was the purest of reason, and he had the
greatest measure of the wisdom of reason, and the knowledge of nature, of any
that was before him since Adam, or any that shall come after him.

Therefore God chose him King, and gave him the purest wisdom of reason,
according to his desire in his prayer to God, that his wisdom might resemble
Heaven for glory, as it did; for what glory could a King have upon earth
greater then he had? which was a true resemblance of the glory of Heaven; and
this glory was procured by that power and great wisdom of reason in him; yet
for all this he was ignorant of the revelation of faith, and of spiritual and
heavenly things, ignorant of the true God, and of the right Devil, and of some
things in Nature.

As that the spirit of a man should return to God that gave it without a body;
when as God never gave any spirit to man without a body, nor to no other
creature: but Solomon being ignorant, that the spirit or soul of man is
generated and begotten by the law of generation as well as the body; this was
in the creation when God made man in his own image, the ignorance of this
caused him to speak thus; for he knew not where the spirit went when the body
is laid in the earth, no more then the learned Philosophers do, who say, A
spirit cannot die; as if the spirit and life of every creature were the spirit
or life of God, else they think no creature could move and have a being.

And though Solomon was a wise man, as the Heathen Philosophers were wise men
in nature; yet they were all ignorant in this one thing, of the law of
generation or procreation, to increase and multiply, as God has placed in
nature, when he created the world in the beginning; for every creature as well
as man were to increase and multiply by the law of generation; and this I am
sure, they begot spirit, life, and soul by generation, as well as bodies.

But if it be objected, that God breathed into man the breath of life, and he
became a living soul; and so man's spirit is of a more noble divine life or
spirit then any other creatures.

To this I say; the law of generation to increase and multiply, was placed in
man's seed and nature by God the creator, as in other creatures: for this is to
be observed, that Adam did not come to be a living soul by generation, as we do
ever since; but he and Eve were first made as a foundation for generation; so
that God made or created but one man and one woman, all men and women that have
been generated and begotten ever since, cannot properly be said to be made nor
created, but begotten by generation; for God never made and created but one man
and one woman, all others are generated and begotten.

Therefore when man begets a son or daughter in the way of generation, he
begets the soul or spirit of the child as well as the body; and the soul or
spirit came out of the man's loins as well as the body: as it was said by Jacob,
Seventy souls came out of his loins; if so, then that spirit or soul that is
begotten by generation, it must and does die: for this I say, God never
breathed the breath of life into no man, but into Adam: the spirit of life in
all men and women else or since have been generated and begotten; and what
spirit and soul of man that is generated, it does die and turn to dust, till
the regeneration, when God shall rai^e it again, which will not be a minute of
an hour to the dead spirit, as I said before. So it may be clear to those that
have the true light of faith in them, that the soul or spirit of man does die
as well as the body: they both came into the world together alive, and they
shall both go out of the world again dead, as I have showed before. Also the
Reader may see, that those Scriptures have been misunderstood through the
ignorance and darkness of men's minds, to think that the soul or spirit of man
does not die, but slips out of the body; but to imagine that spirits may walk
without bodies, or that any Witch can raise any spirit without a body; and many
other conceits that do arise out of the dark mind of man, which have been
grounded upon those Scripture-words; therefore I have given the interpretation
of all those places of Scripture that are of most concernment, and seem to bear
such a sense, as is generally conceived among professors of the Scriptures: so
that whoever understands the interpretation, may receive great satisfaction in
their minds in this point, so much for the satisfaction of the understanding in
heart, and for the discontent of the ignorant and dark-minded people, who
believe by tradition that their spirits do not die, but slide out of the body
at the time of death; and if they have been evil and wicked livers, their
spirits do walk afterward, and cannot be at rest. These conceits have been
exceeding brief in the world heretofore, when people were in darkness, and so
it is still where the darkness of mind rules.

CHAP. XV.
THere is one thing more that would be necessary for the wise in heart to know,
which the Scriptures speak of in several places; but I never heard any of the
Ministry tell what that Satan is the Scriptures speak of, therefore I shall
speak a word or two to show what Satan is, and so conclude. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And
Satan stood up against Israel; and Job 1.6. And Satan came also among them;
and chap. 21.22. And the Lord said to Satan, From whence come thou? And God
said to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? Ezekiel. 3.1. And Satan
standing at his right hand. Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me, Satan. Luke 10.18.
I beheld Satan as lightening fall from Heaven.

1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
number Israel. This Satan that provoked David, it was the motions of reason in
himself, being lifted up in his own mind, in that he had overcome the children
of Amon, he thought to make nothing of the Philistines; therefore the thoughts
of his heart moved him to number the people, to know his strength. And this
motion that did arise in his heart, it was Satan, it is called Satan, because
those motions proceed from the spirit or seed of reason in him. In 2 Samuel 24.1.
it is said, The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them to say, Go, number Israel: that is, the Lord suffered the
motions of reason in David to be powerful and strong in him, that no arguments
should dissuade him from it, but the people must be numbered; and this was that
Satan in David, and no spirit without him.

So Job. 1.6. The sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and
Satan come also among them. To this I say, the book of Job is no Scripture,
neither are men to build their faith upon it, because the book of Job was
written before Moses, therefore no Scripture; for Moses his writing is the
first found^tion of Scripture. Yet this I do confess, that Job was a good and
faithful man; and because he was afflicted by Satan, and Satan is spoken of in
several places of Scripture, yet none of them did declare what this Satan is,
therefore I shall declare now what that Satan was, that came among the sons of
God.

I declare the sons of God they were the sons of Job, who feasted their three
sisters, as you may read. They were called the sons of God, because they were
that good and faithful man Jobs sons; as the sons of Seth were called the sons
of God, and they looked upon the daughters of men, and saw that they were fair,
etc. as you may read in Genesis. Now that Satan came amongst them when they
presented themselves before the Lord, it was the spirit of reason in Jobs seven
sons, when they feasted their three sisters, they were moved in their minds to
voluptuousness, drunkenness, and lust, as the rest of the Heathen were where
they lived; so that they did wickedness in the absence of Job their father: and
Job fearing in their wickedness his sons had cursed God in their hearts, as you
may see in the verse before. So Job caused his sons to present themselves
before the Lord, and to worship the Lord, as it was the manner for Job to do in
those times, and Satan came with them, that is, the spirit of reason in his
sons came with them, reasoning in themselves, why should their father Job
reprove them for their wickedness in their feasts; this was that Satan that
came amongst them, for he was in them, and no other Satan but what was within
them.

And this is that Satan that goes to and fro in the earth, to tempt and
destroy those that are faithful: so that this spirit of reason, this Satan, it
goes to and fro in the earth, to tempt and destroy the faithful.

It was that Satan that did motion the Sabeans and Chaldeans to take away Jobs
oxen, and slay his servants as they were plowing; and fired the sheep, and
burnt up Jobs servants; and the Chaldaeans came with a band of men, seeing J^b
smitten and destroyed by the Sabeans; and they came with three bands of men,
and destroyed the camels and the rest of his servants.

For this must be minded, that in those times there was no Law to deliver or
help the innocent, but he that had the strongest sword carried the day. And the
Lord for trial of Jobs faith and patience, and for a pattern for the ages to
come, he suffered the spirit of unclean reason in the Sabeans and Chaldaeans to
go to and fro in the earth, to stir up their people to destroy Job and all his
house and cattle.

Also God suffered the natural wind to blow down the house where Jobs sons were
feasting, and destroyed them according to the desire of the spirit of unclean
reason in the Sabeans and Chaldaeans. For the sons of Job were wicked children,
though called the sons of God.

And last of all the spirit of unclean reason in Jobs wife was that Satan that
tempted Job to curse God and die: so that there is no other spirit or Satan
without man: but that Satan spoken of in Job, it was the spirit of unclean
reason in the minds of the Sabeans, Chaldaaeeans, and in Jobs wife and sons;
that was that Satan, and no other.

And as for those disputes God had with Satan, and Satan with God; it was
nothing else but the motions of Jobs heart passing through his troubled soul,
the seed of faith disputed in him for God, persuading him to be patient, and
let that have its perfect work, and so hope did increase in him; and the seed
of reason, which was Satan in him as well as in others, it pleaded against God,
reasoning in him as if God did not do well or justly by him, that had been so
righteous in his life, one who never did no wrong to his neighbor, but always
fe^^ed God; yet that God should suffer the wicked to destroy his cattle and
servants, and suffer the wind to blow down his house, and destroy his children;
and not only so, but suffer his body to break out with boils and botches most
lo^thsom, as if he had been the greatest sinner in the world; so that he
thought that God dealt more cruelly with him then with any other creature. And
further, he thought God dealt hardly with him, that he would neither take away
his life, that he might die out of this troubled mind and pains of body, nor
restore him to health. These and such like reasonings and thoughts passed
through Jobs troubled soul, even from the spirit or seed of reason in him,
which is the dispute of Satan: for as the seed of faith in Job disputed for
God, so did the seed of reason in Job dispute for Satan; for there is no other
Satan but what is in man, as I said before.

So in Zach. 3.1. here Zachariah the Prophet saw in a vision the redempttion of
the seed of faith by Christ under the type of Joshua the High priest, standing
before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist
him. This High priest was Christ clothed with filthy garments, when he became
flesh, when on eaeth he appeared unto men, to be clothed in filthy garments,
being so mean, and h^d not a place to lay his head, yet professed himself to be
the Son of God, the High priest that should offer up himself for to save his
people; for High priests in former times did appear to the people with rich and
glorious garments; but this High priest does appear to the seed of reason, to
be clothed in filthy garments, not fit (as reason thinks) to stand before the
Angel of the Lord.

And this Satan that stands at his right hand to resist him, it was the spirit
of unclean reason in those people of the Jews when Christ was upon earth, and
when that Devi^ that tempted Christ, spoken of in Matthew, disputed with
Christ, he resisted the High priest, and stood at Christ's right hand at that
time; and this Devil that tempted Christ, it was a man endued with an high
pitch of reason, and that spirit of reason, or wisdom of reason, in that man
that tempted Christ the High priest, it was Satan that strove to resist Christ
in dispute, whereupon Christ said, Get thee hence Satan.

This Satan was a man, and the spirit of reason in this man, is that Satan that
always resists the wisdom of faith, which is the wisdom of God. But this has
been more largely treated upon in our other writings, so I shall speak no mo^e
of that devil and his temptations here.

So in Matthew. 16.23. Christ said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. Here you
see Peter is called Satan, because it was the spirit of reason in Peter that
said, Master, pity thy self: that is, the thoughts of Peter's heart they did
savor of the fleshly part, that is, those motions to persuade Christ to save
himself from death, they did arise from the seed of reason in Peter, therefore
called Satan; for there was no new spirit that came into Peter at that time, to
cause him to speak those words, but those words proceeded from the seed of
reason in him, as aforesaid, therefore called Satan.

And wheresoever that expression is used, as Peter said himself in the Acts,
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost? that is, why has
the motions of reason in thee persuaded thy heart to tell a lie unto us, that
have the Holy Ghost in us?

So the Reader may clearly see, that there is no other Satan to tempt God or
Man, but the motions and words that proceed from the seed of reason in man and
woman.

So in Luke 10.18. And Christ said unto his disciples, I beheld Satan as
lightening fall from heaven. This Christ spoke, because his disciples rejoiced
that the Devils were subject to them. The meaning of Christ was, that he saw
the spirit of reason, that was in the Rulers of the Jews, very high in the
righteousness of the Law of Moses, even as if they were in Heaven, thinking in
themselves that none could be more happy and surer of Heaven and peace with
God, then they that kept to the Law of Moses.

Now Christ knowing that this righteousness of the Jews should be thrown down
by the righteousness of faith, which his Apostles should pre^ch, therefore he
saw by faith that the spirit of reason in the Rulers of the Jews should fall
like lightening from Heaven; and so it did, and the disciples of Christ should,
by the doctrine and righteousness of faith, tread upon serpents, and upon their
persecution, and upon their righteousness of the Law of Moses, and upon all
that which did fall like lightening from Heaven; they should tread upon Satan,
that is, upon the very wisdom of reason the Devil.

This is the true meaning of Christ, when he beheld Satan fall from Heaven like
lightening, and what Satan is so much spoken of in Scripture. Much more might
be said to enlarge this point, but I have spoken more already then I did
intend; but I suppose there is enough written here in short to satisfy those,
that can understand by a little what a great deal means. And also people may
know when they speak of Satan what Satan is, and when they speak of the Devil,
they may know what the Devil is.

So much concerning the interpretation of Satan, and the conclusion of this
Epistle, written by Lodowick Muggleton.

FINIS.

