A VINDICATION OF St. Gregory HIS DIALOGUES: IN WHICH The Great St. Gregory is
proved The Author of that Work.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

A Vindication of St. Gregory his Dialogues, in which the Great St. Gregory is
proved the Author of that Work.
Gregory the great brought into the Church, by certain petty stories. That he
was the Father of this Opinion, and the leader unto it, and that clearly this
Opinion began about his times. Yet as clear as they reported this to be, now of
late, this Clarity is clearly acknowledged by them to be a flat falsity, and
that in two several books: whence upon fuller Consideration, they profess
themselves to discover the Authority of venerable Bede, attributing the book of
Dialogues to St. Gregory the great, to be defective; yea they openly profess
this book to be unworthy St. Gregory. Why so? because (say they) nothing like
such winter tales, as are told in that book, can be found in his most worthy
and learned works. By this they being enforced to seek out another Author; upon
whom they might Father these Dialogues, they fall into so great a weakness, as
to ascribe this work to that Pope Gregory, to whom Pope Zacharias did succeed,
whom they say to have been by the Grecians called Gregorius Dialogus, who lived
about the midst of the eight age, that is to St. Gregory the third, a Syrian.
All this they confirm by the the authority of Photius, a Man who could not (as
they conceive) be well ignorant thereof, being so learned a person, especially
in books and Authors. By this invention they imagine themselves to make our
doctrine a hundred years later, and to make it first appear in an Age of the
least cultivated, since the beginning of the Church of God.

Gregory the great, to be Father to our Opinion. For we esteem our doctrine of
the deliverableness of souls before the last day, to have had no later
beginning, then the doctrine of Purgatory it self, which was delivered (as part
of the first faith) by the Teachers of that faith: neither will they ever be
able to show any other Origin of it, which is an evident proof of its verity.
But because St. Gregory the great is so clear an Assertor of this verity in his
Dialogues, and a Man so far from introducing any novelty into the Church; or
from believing any novelty to be confirmed by miracle (as he believes this
verity to be) his authority is not to be wrested from us, by so groundless a
denial of his Dialogues, which, upon this their fuller consideration, they
most inconsiderately affirm not to be his work, but to have been written by
Pope Gregory the Third. An opinion so full of most enormious and palpable
absurdities, and that in so great number, that their adhering to it upon fuller
consideration, shows how inconsiderable, their authority ought to be esteemed,
even when this fuller Consideration is used by them. Against this Opinion we
argue thus.

Ildefonsus Bishop of Toledo (who dyed Anno. 667.) in his book de viris
illustribus C. 1. (whose Original manuscript is still kept in the Vatican
library, as Baronius certifies, Anno. 604.) writes thus of St. Gregory the
great. He did set forth four books comprised in one Volume, concerning the
lives of the Italian Fathers, which he would have called by the name of
Dialogues. In which books how great secrets of Diviniy lie hidden, and what
wonderful Documents, of the love of our Heavenly Country, any careful Reader
may easily perceive. Do you not see here these books known and highly esteemed
in the Church before either Gregory the Third, yea or Gregory the second, was
of age to write or read a book? Again, do you not see how, according to the
Judgment of this great Father, that Reader of these Dialogues is no careful
Reader, who does not easily perceive great secrets of Divinity hidden in this
book of Dialogues? Which our Adversaries, upon their fuller consideration,
think unworthy of St. Gregory, and like to Winter Tales.

Julian Bishop also of Toledo, (who flourished, Anno. 688) cites these
Dialogues in his Prognosticon L. 1. C. 7. L. 2. C. 8. C. 19. C. 24. An evident
proof that they were made before either of the other two Gregory's (especially
Gregory the Third) were known in the World.

Bid cites these Dialogues, and ascribes them to our Apostle St. Gregory. But
they did not consider, in their fuller consideration, where, and when Bid did
say what he said. Where said he this? In his History of England. When did he
write that History? He himself, in the end of this History, tells us, that he
did end it, Anno. 731. So that Bid did write what he writ concerning these
Dialogues, that very year in which Pope Gregory the Second dyed, and Gregory
the Third was made Pope. How surely then might Bid know that these Dialogues,
(out of which he transcribed the complaint of St. Gregory, concerning the loss
of his former retirement, by being advanced to the Popedom) were not made by
Gregory the Third, who as then was not made Pope, neither could so fresh a work
of Gregory the Second, which must have been made in Bedes own flourishing Age
(forbid was 59. years old when he ended his History, as Baronius proves Anno.
731) be so much mistaken, by such a Man as Bede was, for a work s^t forth above
a hundred years before.

Joannes Diaconus, who most accurately did write the Life of St. Gregory the
great, is an Author, both more ancient, and of more Credit, then Photius, and a
Man particularly versed in the works of St. Gregory the great. And yet he
writes thus, L. 4. These books (of St. Gregory the great his Dialogues)
Zacharias Bishop of the holy Roman Church, almost a hundred and seventy five
years after, translated into Greek. These words Baronius in his notes upon the
Martyr: Dec. 23. having cited, goes on thus. How much the Grecians esteemed
these books, you may hence understand, that when they cite Gregory, they call
him by the very name of Dialogus, that is the Dialoguist. And again in his
Annals (Anno. 726.) speaking of an Epistle of Gregory the Second ( The Second I
say, and not the Third) he says, That Epistle falsely bears the Inscription of
Gregorius Dialogus, an error with which we find many Grecians, and some
Latins to have been deceived, whilst this Gregory (the Second) is called
Dialogus, which surname, it is manifest out of Greek and Latin Authors, to be
appropriated by the Grecians to Gregory the great, ever since Zacharias the
Pope did translate his Dialogues into Greek, so to distinguish him from the
three other Gregory's, Thaumaturgus, Nazienzen and Nyssen. Therefore our
Adversaries are much mistaken, who, in their fuller consideration, will have
Gregory the Third to have been called Dialogus. But least retiring themselves
to consider more fully, they should Father these Dialogues upon Gregory the
second (who dyed Anno. 731.) I desire them to ponder how demonstratively the
contrary is proved, by the arguments already brought. And yet more
demonstratively, (if it may) the same is farther proved by such arguments, as I
am now going to produce out of the book of Dialogues it self, which, if they
had perused in their fuller consideration (as any considerate writers would
have done) they would have been ashamed of so unexcusable an ignorance, as
apparently is committed in averring these Dialogues to have been written by
Gregory the second; and much more, in ascribing them to Gregory the Third, made
Pope. Anno 731. I pray note this year and then you will soon note the grosness
of this absurdity.

Gregory the great was, and that neither Gregory the Second, or Third, could be
the Author of that book. In his Preface to his second book he writes thus. What
I intend to recount of St. Bennet (who dyed Anno. 543.) I had by Relation of
four of his disciples. Of Constantius, who was next Abbat after him; of
Valentinianus; of Simplicius; of Honoratus, who now is Abbat. These Men were
disciples to St. Bennet almost 200. years before Gregory the Third was Pope.
How then could he have what he related from their mouths? Or how could any of
them be living in his time?

now I will relate such miracles as happened in my own days. Then C. 11. He
relates, how Cerbonius was brought forth and cast to a Bear, to be devoured,
in the sight of King Totilas himself, and his whole army, the bear doing
reverence to the Saint. Many of them who were present and saw it, be yet
living. Now it is evident that Totilas dyed Anno. 553. so that you must make
these many eye witnesses to have lived a hundred and fourscore years after they
did see this wonder, that so they might be yet living in the time of Gregory
the Third. And C. 12. A certain old Priest (says he) who yet lives, was
present, when Fulgentius Bishop of Otricoli was taken by Totilas, see here the
same argument again. And it recurs again in the next Chapter, where it is said.
Floridus told me a notable miracle of Herculanus, who did bring him up, and in
whose time Totilas besieged Perugia for seven years together. And yet again, in
the fourteenth Chapter it is made further evident, that the Author of the
Dialogues was a near borderer upon the day of Totilas. For there he says, at
such time as the Goths (by Totilas) first invaded Italy, there was a holy Man,
Isaac, well known to the holy Virgin Gorgonia, who now dwells in this City.
And presently after he says. This holy man Isaac, was not born in Italy, and
therefore I will only speak of such miracles as he did here in our Country. Do
not these words tell you that the Country of the Author of the Dialogues, was
Italy, and not Syria? But what can demonstrate more clearly, that the Great St.
Gregory was Author of these Dialogues, then what follows Chap. 16. There was
(says he) a Reverend man in Campania, called Marcius, whom many of our
acquaintance knew very well, and many things concerning him I have heard from
the mouth of Pope Pelagius my Predecessor. Now whose Predecessor was Pope
Pelagius? All the World knows St. Gregory the great did succeed him
immediately. As also that no Pope called Pelagius lived nearer to Gregory the
third, then this foresaid Pelagius the second, who died Anno 590. How then
could either Gregory the third or second Hear many things from the mouth of
Pope Pelagius, who ceased both to speak, and to live a whole age before either
of them were born? Yet again C. 19. We had in our days one other miracle. For
not long since, John the Tribune told me, that when the Earl Pronulphus was
there, and himself also with Antharicus the King, almost five years since, when
the River of Tiber became so great, that it ran over the walls of Rome. Behold
here two manifest proofs that the Author of the Dialogues did write the said
books five years after the Inundation which happened Anno 589. as you may see
in Baronius. At what time Antharith was King of the Longobards, so created by
them Anno 585 Though he called himself Flavius, as the same Baronius in that
year testifyes. All this demonstrates our opinion and shames the contrary. It
follows in the Chap. 31. that which the Roman Breviary did transcribe out of
St. Gregory the great concerning St. Hermenigild, in which be these words, St.
Hermenigild was converted by Leander Bishop of Sevil, a man long since joined
to me in familiarity and friendship. This Leander, with whom St. Gregory the
great was so entirely acquainted, is the same to whom he writes, L. 1. Epist.
41. L. 4. Epist. 46. L. 7. Epist. 125. And our Adversaries (to verify those
words in Gregory the third) must make him acquainted with one, who dyed above a
hundred years before he was born. Again Chap. 33. it is said, in the time of
Justinian the Emperor, the King of the Wandals commanded the tongues of
certain Bishops to be pulled out by the roots for preaching against the Arian
Heresy, yet they did as perfectly afterward speak in defense of the true
religion, as before. And at such time as I my self was sent to Constantinople
unto the Emperor about the affairs of the Church, I found there a Bishop of
good years, who told me that he saw them himself, speak without tongues. Now it
is notorius, that St. Gregory the great was sent about the affairs of the
Church to Constantinople, and that Justinian began to riegn Anno 587. that is,
full two hundred years before Gregory the third was Pope. How then could
Gregory the third speak with any Bishop, who had seen those worthy Bishops,
whose tongues had been pulled out in the days of Justinian.

Gregory the great, of which see here by and by N. 18.) but C. 16. he says, I
will here repeat that which I remember also to have spoke in my Homilies
concerning my Aunt Tarsilla. To this Woman Felix my Grandfather, sometimes
Bishop of Rome, appeared in vision. Who is so blind, as not to see that these
words cannot be spoken by Gregory the third, who had no such Italian kindred,
for he was a Syrian? But they are clearly spoken by the great St. Gregory so
well known by his Homilies, and by his Aunt, and by his Grandfather. And C. 26.
He thus describes the year in which he did write these Dialogues, Likewise
(says he) in that mortality which three years since lamentably afflicted this
town. It is notorius by History, that this great plague raged in Rome the first
year of his Popedom, of which see Baronius, Anno 590. who well proves from
hence that these Dialogues were written Anno. 593. see him in that year.
Moreover C. 30. The writer of these Dialogues speak thus, Julian who dyed
almost seven years since, told me this Story. In the time of King Theodoricus
(quoth he) my Wives father being then in Sicily, Theodoricus began to reign
Anno 493. How could Gregory the third (made Pope Anno 731.) speak these words?
Lord! where is these men's fuller consideration?

Hemenigildus April 13. takes the lessons of the second Nocturne out of these
Dialogues of St. Gregory. And upon the feast of St. John Pope and Martyr, May
the 27. the same Church recounts out of these Dialogues of St. Gregory one of
these stories (which they are pleased to Nickname Winter tales concerning a
holy Eremite, who did see the soul of Theodoricus cast down into the fire of
Sipara the same day and hour upon which he dyed, of which see L. 4. C. 30.

Secondly, the same Church is known to have used most accurate diligence in the
History of her Roman Maryrologe, which she appoints to be read daily in the
Quire at the Prime, as part of the divine office, in which it were most gross
to follow the Relaters of Winter tales: yet in a short time, I found above
twenty several places in that Martyrologe, in which St. Gregory in his
Dialogues is cited in confirmation of what is here related, of which I shall
speak more herafter. N. 15.

Lastly, to all these convincing proofs I add the testimony of St. Gregory the
great in that undoubted work of his epistles. Where he tells us clearly that he
did write the book of Dialogues, and upon what occasion. Thus then he writes
Epist. 50. L. 2. Regist. Indict. 11. C. 89. To Maxmianus Bishop of Syracusa. My
Brethren who live familiarly with me do enforce me by all means briefly to
commit to writing some miracles of those fathers which we have heard done in
Italy, for effecting whereof I stand in great need of your charitable
assistance, to wit, that you would signify to me such things, as came to your
memory, or it has been your chance to know, for I remember well, You told me
some things concerning Abbot, Annosus, who lived near Anastasius, etc. Now it
appears by his first book of Dialogues C. 7. that this Maximianus did write
back unto him what he there relates of Abbot, Annosus. And by all this, any man
may see how inconsiderately, in their fuller consideration, they have
proceeded, who, never opening their eyes to any of these so apparent verities,
did most unadvisedly deny these Dialogues to be written by the great St.
Gregory, and fathered them upon Gregory the the third. But now they have
heard our arguments, which are so wholly unanswerable, let us hear their very
weak proofs of the contrary.

First, they object the Authority of Photius (ascribing these books to Gregory
the Third) a Man so learned in books and Authors, that he cannot be conceived
ignorant of the truth. I answer, that this Photius was a Grecian, and nothing
well skilled in sacred, and Latin Authors. Hear what Nicetas writes in his
Life, in which he says, that he was eminent indeed in secular sciences, being
secretary to the Emperor Bardas. But wholly devoid of all sacred literature.
And no wonder. For, as he tells us, That of a Lay man, he, in space of six
days, was transformed into a Patriarch of Constantinople. From which dignity
he, for his most notorius wickedness, was the second time deposed, Anno. 880.
By which account you see also, of how late a standing he is; And how despicable
in comparison of the Authors I have cited.

Secondly, they object that this book is unworthy of St. Gregory the great.
This is directly to oppose the Judgment of St. Ildefonsus, St. Julian, Saint Bede, and of the holy and learned Pope Zachary, who thought this work worthy
his translation, by which also Greece came so highly to esteem of St. Gregory,
as has been showed out of Baronius. This is also to vilify the authority of
the Latin Church, so much relying upon the authority of this book as has been
said, and shall now farther be declared. For you pass on farther, and.

Thirdly object, that this book conteins many stories like Winter tales. I
answer, that it is an unsufferable injury to the Church to say, she yields so
much credit to such a book, so stuffed with such Winter tales, as you will have
them. An unsufferable injury to our great Apostle St. Gregory, whom we have
proved to be the writer of these stories, concerning which he himself says in
the Preface to that work. I have followed the example of St. Luke and St. Mark,
who learnt the gospel, which they write, not by sight, but by the relation of
others. Yet least any in reading should have an occasion to doubt whether such
things as I write, be true, or no, I will set down by what manner, and of whom
I have learnt them. I know Melchior Canus (whose words our Adversaries much
applaud) was so bold as to say that some Anastarche, or Critikes, of our age
would account some of the miracles related by him to be uncertain. But I know
also, that the great Baronius (whose exactness in History is famed through all
Christendom.) examining this censure of Canus (in his notes upon the
Martyrologe December 23.) pronounces it to be a calumny, very inconsiderately
vented against a work, which both the East and West Church, for these thousand
years held worthy all highest credit, veneration, and praise. And then he beats
down this calumny, by a multitude of most grave testimonies, I do cite thee (O
Canus says he) I do cite thee before the Tribunal of thy own most holy and
most learned Spanish Doctors, S. Isidor, S. Ildefonsus, S. Julian. S. Isidor
after he had enlarged himself in the endless praises of S. Gregory comes at
last to conclude thus, He is happy and over happy who is well versed in all his
works. S. Ildefonse affirms, That all antiquity could show nothing like to him
(that is to the great S. Gregory) That he surpassed, Anthony in sincerity,
Cyprian in eloquence, Austin in wisdom. Behold he prefers this Writer of the
Dialogues (which there he names with a special Encomium of that work) before
the great St. Austin, even in point of Wisdom: And yet these men dare compare
him to a teller of Winter tales. But Baronius goes on and shows with what
respect these very Dialogues were cited by S. Julian, cited by whole Assemblies
of Holy Fathers, (namely in Concilio Triburiensi C. 17.) cited by Pope Adrian
in his Epistle to Charles the great; cited by Jonas Aurelianensis as most
powerful weapons to defeat the monstrous Opinions of Claudius Taurinensis;
translated in fine by the most holy Pope Zachary into Greek by reason of their
excellency: And upon this account so much esteemed by the Greeks that they from
these Dialogues gave the great St. Gregory the surname of Dialogus. Nunquid his
omnibus caecutientibus tu solus vides? says Baronius to Canus, and I say the
same to any one who sides with him in this Paradox. As for the rest I refer my
Reader to Baronius, who will easily see how far more bitterly that most modest
Cardinal would have Written against Canus, if he had dared to compare these
Stories of St. Gregory's to Winter tales. To us it suffices, that the Church,
in her Breviary, embraces his strange story of the soul of Theodoricus, and
also others no less strange in her Martyloge. Febr. 13. 15. 25. March the
first, August the seventh, yea, (that which you will dread to hear) in the
thirtieth one day of May, be these words. At Rome of St. Paschasius Deacon and
confessor of whom St. Gregory the Pope makes mention, see you not that the
Church holds forth to us that very Paschasius for a Saint, of whom we find St.
Gregory to make no other mention, but that he was in purgatory, and thence
delivered by prayers? So that you see the Church owns that very story, which,
most of all, they would have accounted to be a Winter tale. Here then we have
our Opinion of souls being delivered from Purgatory before the day of Judgment,
credited by the Church. For otherwise she could not propose to us a Man to be
worshipped for a Saint, of whom she commends to us what is related by St.
Gregory, the substance of whose Relation is, That being in Purgatory, be did
miracles That, he appeared in the bathes to beg prayers, That by these prayers
be was released, wherefore.

Fourthly. they in vain object against this story of Paschasius, that he dyed
obstinately in Schism. And that it is the fancy of an idle brain to imagine
that souls are sent to the bathes, there to scrub and rub, so to be acquitted
of their sins. For first to say Paschasius dyed obstinate in Sch^sme, is to
abuse both St. Gregory, and this Saint, and the Church, and the Reader, St.
Gregory is abused, for in the same breath, in which he told his Reader how
Paschasius was freed from Purgatory, he tells him clearly. That seeing his
fault proceeded not out of Malice, after death he might he purged from that
sin. And we must think that his plentiful alms obtained this favor, etc. The
Church is abused, which recommends to us a Man to be worshipped for a Saint,
who (as they say) dyed obstinate in Schism. The Saint recommended by the
Church is abused, whilst they thus pluck him from Heaven, to Hell. The Reader
is abused by such gross falsities obtruded unto him, after their fuller
consideration. Far more considerately, that incomparable Baronius, pondering
those words which I now cited out of St. Gregory excusing the fault of
Paschasius, expounds by them these his other words which said. That he remained
in his Opinion until his dying day, that is, exclusively, so that his
Repentance happened before his death, or (which I most approve) that his death
happened before that controversy was clearly decided, which seems most
conformable to those words of St. Gregory L. 4. C. 41. saying that Paschasius
whilst he lived thought it no sin to do what he did. Secondly, for what
concerns the appearing of Paschasius in the bathes, it is not St. Gregory, but
some idle brain that speaks of scrubbing and rubbing. I confess St. Gregory to
speak both here, (L. 4. C. 40.) and again C. 55. that such as were in purgatory
did appear sometimes performing, to some particular person, some inferior kind
of services in the bath. God permitting this, that so they should declare the
lownes of their present condition, and also to give them occasion of begging
the prayers of such particular persons, which could and would best assist them
now, though Raphael the Archangel, without feeling any regrete, performed all
bumble service to young Tobie, because all this while he enjoyed the sight of
God, and voluntarily performed his gracious pleasure. Yet if God, in his wrath,
had cast him from his sight, deprived him of glory, banished him from Heaven,
and for his offenses deputed him to those inferior offices in revenge of them,
it is not hard to conceive, that this had been a most sad chasticement, as it
conteins the debasing of so noble a nature, by the just wrath of his Creator
against him.

Baronius has done it so fully. And whereas they most carpe at this
Revelation in particular, the very Prince of Divines, St. Thomas, does give his
approbation of also it in particular. For thus he Writes in Suppl. Q. 69. or 1.
Moreover this is made evident by what St. Gregory says, L, 4. Dial. where he
relates that souls after their departure are led to several corporal places, as
appears by Paschasius, whom Germanus the Bishop of Capua found in the bathes.
And a little after. There be allotted to souls after their departure certain
corporal places by a certain congruitie according to the degrees of their
dignity. And so we place souls, which are in a perfect participation of the
Deity in heaven. But we say those souls to be deputed to contrary places which
are hindered from this participation. That is, We say they be deputed to Hell,
if they be hindered from participation of Deity, by damnable sin. Again, we say
they be deputed to purgatory, if they be hindered from this participation by
only venial sin. again, these venial sins may be many, and great; and so sink a
soul down to the bottom of of Purgatory, that is, depute that soul to the most
painful temporal punish^^nts. as also, they may be very fevv, and of the
lightest kind of sins, and those also expiated (in great part) by contrary
great good works; as they may truly think of the sins of St. Paschasius,
seeing that he did miracles upon earth, when his soul was suffering this
lighter kind of punishment. Wherefore, though such a soul, be deputed to a
purgative state; and is purged by being banished from the sight of God, yet the
other penal pains be of the lightest sort, such as may (to our capacity) be
fitly expressed by being out of the fiery prison of purgatory, yet in some
lovv, abject, dark, smooky place in the ground, deputed there to contemptible
employments, as those in the bathes were. Of which the merciful indulgence of
God made particularly choice, that so those souls might the more connaturally
have commodity of begging the assistance of such persons as God should
connaturally dispose to come thither. This is agreeable to what St. Thomas
now cited, says, ( ad 2) That as lightsome places are commonly assigned to
illightned spirits, and obscure darkened holds to spirits darkened by sins. So
those hot, and smoky, close, and stiffling places, of the bathes, bear a
convenient Metaphorical expression of such as are yet darkened, unvvashed and
unpurged souls. It is also agreeable to what St. Gregory there L. 4. C. 42.
says, discoursing upon this purgatory of Paschasius. For having cited these
words. Thou have deliverd me from the lower hell. He presently adds so that
the higher Hell (and place of lighter torments) may seem to be upon the earth,
and the lower under the earth. Now, as it is not absurd to express the joy of
spirits unto us, by saying they did sing merrily (as it is said of the Angels
in Christ's Nativitie) though singing be an act as unnatural to an Angel
rejoicing, as serving in a bath to a spirit purging: so it is not absurd by
these kind of actions to express unto us the low, and sad estate of those
souls which should be singing with Angels, if their lighter sins did not
banish them from those joys to these abect Offices. The like is to be said of
that other example related by St. Gregory L. 4. C. 55. To which (and the
farther declaration of the former) we may fitly apply what St. Thomas above
cited, says art. 7, ad 8. q. 69. Although separated souls are sometimes
punished in the place of our abode; yet it is not because that it is the proper
place of punishment. But this done for our instruction, that seeing their pains
we may be withdrawn from offending. So surely is to be understood what is said
of the soul of Theodoricus cast into the gulf of Vulcan, at which those, who
are disposed, might carp as much as at his other stories, though it be
contained in the Breviary of the Church, yea they might as well carpe at some
contained in Holy writ, as that, the Devil (who is a spirit) should be chased
away from Saul by the material sound of David's harp. And they might say that it
is like a Wintertale which we read Tob. 6.9. That a piece of the heart of a
fish put upon coals, the smoke of it so chaseth away the devil that he
returns no more. All this is by way of supererogation, said in defense of this
story of Paschasius. For though that should be false, yet it does not follow
that those Dialogues were not written by St. Gregory. And still it does
follovv that St. Gregory thought it to be true, and consequently he judged it
to be a truth confirmed by Revelation; That souls are deliverable from
purgatory before the day of judgment, and the Church judged the same, whilst
she in her Martirologe credited what Saint Gregory mentions of Paschasius.

Fifthly and lastly, they object that nothing like such Winter tales, can be
found in the other worthy works of St. Gregory. A strange objection to proceed
from a Scholar, upon his further consideration. For the least consideration of
any mean Scholar might have made him reflect, how often St. Gregory, in this
very fourth book of his Dialogues (out of which only they have gleened the few
stories, at which they take so great exceptions) does relate the very self same
stories, which, he himself tells you, he had formerly related in his Homilies.
His Homilies be so esteemed by the Church, that she has transferred more out
of them into her Breviary, then out of any other holy Father. Yet how thick be
these his Homilies stored with these stories.

L. 4. C. 14. I remember (says he) that, in my Homilies upon the gospel, I
told a story of Servulus, which here he repeats out of Hom. 15.

Again C. 15. in the same Homilies, I remember likewise how I told a certain
thing of Redempta and Romula..

Again C. 16. I will here report this, which I remember also to have spoke of
in my Homilies concerning my Aunt Tarsilla. To this Woman Felix my Grandfather
sometime Bishop of Rome, Hom. 39.

Again C. 19. By the relation of the same Probus, and other religious men, I
came to the Relation of such things, as in my Homilies I told to my Auditors,
concerning the Venerable Father Steven.

Again C. 27. Concerning the Earl Theophanius, I did in my Homilies make
public mention of such strange things as happened to him, Hom. 36. verbatim.

Again C. 37. There was one Theodorus (which story I remember in my Homilies to
the people, I have spoke of also) who was a very unruly lad, etc. Hom. 19.

Again, he word for word C. 38. Relates that dreadful story concerning
Crisaptius just as he had related it, Hom. 12.

Paschasius, at which they take so great exceptions. And yet these considerate
writers neither marked what was said so often, either in the same fourth book,
or in these two so near bordering chapters, but boldly deny that St. Gregory in
his other works has no such stories, as occurr every wherein his Dialogues.

Though I need not seek further to refute this apparent falsity then what has
been already cited out of his Homilies, yet I cannot but tell you that you
shall find some of his Epistles also most plentifully stored with diverse such
stories, as they are pleased to compare to Winter-tales. L. 3. Register Indict.
12. Ep. 30. And L. 9. Register Indict. 4. Epist. 38.

Gregory relates of a Monk in his own Monastery, whose soul was freed from
Purgatory, after he had appointed sacrifices for forty days together to be
offered for his soul: for when I shall bring this story in proof of our
opinion, I shall demonstrate that cavell to be wholly grounded in ignorance of
antiquity.

Gregory, to be directly opposite to their novelties, have devised all the
shifts they can, to cry down the Authority of his Dialogus, as you may see in
Criticis sacris Riveti Lib. 4. C. 29. Where he cites the very place of Canus so
much magnified by our adversaries, to disparadge these dialogues. But Rivetus
could allege no one more ancient then Clemnitius, who relished not this work,
though he found some who imagined Pope Gregory not the third but the second of
that name, to have been the Author of these Dialogues, which we have
demonstratively (as I dare say) showed to be most false. And whereas Chemnitius
says, that neither the style, nor the contents of this book suit well with the
other works of St. Gregory, we have showed the falsity of both, by the
Authorities cited out of his Homilies, against which work Rivetus has not a
word to say, but most ignorantly carps at Baronius and Fronto Duceus, for
esteeming the great St. Gregory to have been called Dialogus by the Greeks;
for if it be true which he says of Cedrenus, that the occasion of this surname
proceeded from the Book of Dialogues written by this Gregorius, then this
Gregory must needs be the person who did write these Dialogues: but the person
who did write these Dialogues could neither be Gregory the Second or the
Third, as has been demonstrated, but evidently is Gregory the First, whom we
usually call Gregory the Great; whence it remains most clearly convinced, that
the Great St. Gregory is the Man who by occasion of his Dialogues was by the
Grecians surnamed Dialogus, as being the Author of these Dialogues we speak of.

FINIS.

