A JOURNAL OF The Three Months Royal Campaign OF His MAJESTY IN IRELAND.

Together, With A True and Perfect Diary OF THE Siege of LYMERICK.

By Samuel Mullenaux, M. D.

LONDON: Printed for P. Lee in Westminster Hall, near the Common Pleas, M.DC.XC.

The Journal Of His Majestys Royal Campaigne, In IRELAND, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Heroic Actions of William III. in His Three Months Campaign in Ireland,
is a Subject of so sublime a Nature, worthy only of those celebrated Authors of
Antiquity that sung the Praises of their Gods: And as none but the greatest
Masters were allowed to draw the Pictures of any of the Caesar's; so it is to be
wished, there might arise among the Writers of this Age, some Pen equal to the
other famed Pencils, that may be capable to hand down to Posterity, such
Actions of King William, as the Ages to come will hardly have faith to believe.

The King in this Campaign in Ireland, made good the Axiom of that learned
Soldier Zenophon, That a Prince ought to be the Soul of his Army: And if ever
the Naturalists Definition of a Soul could admit of a favorable Sense, it was
then, when His Majesty was to His Army, All in All, and All in every Part, in
the several Actions of the Campaign, where Honor and Necessity both did call
Him, on that Memorable Day of the Boyne, in the Trenches, and under the Walls
of Lymerick, His Majesty behaved Himself to that Astonishing height of Courage,
as to be able to say with as much Reason (or rather more) than he of Old, who
was pleased to say of Himself, How many do you reckon me. I remember the same
great Person, in his Life of Cyrus, tells us, There is something of Emanation,
that from the Soul of a Hero, communicates it self to those about them. This
appears true of our Forces in Ireland; and the Presence and Example of their
Royal Leader seemed to infuse into them a Courage, as extraordinary, as the
Cause, for which they fought.

His Majesty has so far imitated that Northern Hero, Gustavus Adolphus, that
it is evident he designs to surpass the Original. In One of that King's Letters
to Chancellor Oxersterm, who had kindly chid him for exposing his Person in
Battle; he tells him, If ever a Prince be obliged to show the greatness of his
Courage, he must do it at the beginning of a Conquest; It Is then (says he) he
must provide a happy period to the War, by a fortunate Beginning; and in order
to do this, he must conquer (as soon as possible) and he must conquer in
Person, His Renown (continues he) must go a great way before his Ensigns; and
he must level the Walls, and open the Gates of Towns, by the alone Terror of
his Name: Those who after the Example of Alexander (adds this brave King) do
quit their own Country, to seek Glory and Empire in other Nations, must venture
all, and by their Personal Valor, must put a distinction betwixt them, and
other Princes that live at home. Thus far Gustavus Adolphus. And never was
there a nearer Parallel than betwixt his Famous Action at the Isle of Rugen,
which gave so great a Reputation to his Arms, at his first entry into Germany;
and that of His Majesty at the Bovne. The first made way for a Glorious Chain
of Victories, which have gained the King of Sweden an immortal Name; and this
last has made way for an entire Conquest of Ireland, and for other Laurels yet
to come. The many Advantages that attend this Summers Successful Campaign in
Ireland, we have seen in a considerable part already; but what innumerable
Ones, are yet remaining, a little time will discover in a Meridian Light. Who
can be able to count up the Thousandth part of the Advantages the poor
Protestants of Ireland have heaped by one single Victory? They only are fit to
represent them, who are the one day penned up in dark Prisons, every Minute
expecting that the first opening of the Door would usher in upon them
Harbingers of Death; and who the very next day thereafter, had those Doors set
wide open, at the approach of their Illustrious Deliverer. In fine, none can
fathom the vastress of the Change that one single Day has produced in Dublin;
but he who having his Head laid down upon the Block, without hopes of taken it
up again, has had a Pardon delivered him at the very nick of time, when the
fatal Axe was lifting up, to give the blow.

It Is hard to determine whether this Island of Britain, or that of Ireland, has
gained most by this successful Campaign: As they out-vied one an other, in the
greatness of the hazard they were in so they now out vye one another, in the
greatness of their Deliverance, the Dangers that this Island was lately in, is
so well known, that there is the less need of delineating them. And I think no
true Lover of his Country can look back upon them, but with such a horror, as
the now safe Passenger, does from the Shore behold the raging Billows that
threatened him some hours ago, with an inevitable Death. And I am persuaded,
that His Majesty's Success in Ireland, has not only put Englands late sinking
Bark, within the shelter of a Bay, but placed her in a safe Harbor. In short,
this three Months Successful Campaign in Ireland has been to King William, what
the famed Rubican was to Caesar: But with this difference, that instead of
Caesar's Design to enslave Rome, that of our truly invincible Monarch, is to
give Liberty to Europe, Assistance to his Allies, safety and repose to his
Subjects, and to acquire a never-dying Glory to Himself.

The JOURNAL, etc.
ON Wednesday, June 12, in the Morning, His Majesty accompanied with His Royal
Highness, the Prince of Denmark, and several other Persons of Quality, embarked
at High-lake, and the same afternoon went out to Sea, but the Wind wavering
made not much way that day; but on Friday the 14th. the Wind proving fair, made
amends for the slowness of the two former days Sailing; and on Saturday, about
three in the Afternoon, His Majesty came into the Lough of Carrickfergus, with
the whole Fleet that attended Him. His Majesty on His Landing, immediately
mounted, and rode on Horseback through the main Street of the Town, which was
lined on both sides with innumerable Crowds of People, who bid His Majesty
welcome, with continual Shouts and Acclamations: At the White-house, halfway
betwixt Carrickfergus and Belfast, His Majesty was met by the Duke of
Schenbergh in his Coach and Six Horses; the King was pleased to a-light, and go
into the Duke's Coach, attended only with one Troop of Horse, and a few
Gentlemen, and immediately drove over the Strand to Belfast.

The uncertainty of the time, and place of His Majestys Landing, and the
suddenness of the News was such, that few of the Multitude that Flocked to
Belfast to see it had their ends, the Generals motion was so quick; yet before
they got into the Town there were abundance that met them, and coming to the
North Gate, He was received by the Magistrates of Belfast, in their
Formalities, a Guard of the Foot-Guards, and a general continued Shout, and
Shouts of God Save the King, God Bless our Protestant King, God Bless King
William.

His Majesty went directly to the Castle, which had been some time before
prepared for him, where he alighted, and went into an Apartment appointed for
him, immediately gave Orders for the bringing ashore 250000 l. with several
Tons of Tin Halfpence and Farthings; and Expresses were sent to the Agents of
all Regiments, to bring in their Accounts by the 19th. in order to receive
their Men's Pay, etc. In order to which, His Majesty concerted measures how to
clear all Quarters, and discharge the Country; and gave Orders for the Train of
Artillery to be ready to March in eight Days.

His Majesty was waited upon, and Addressed by Dr. George Walker, late
Governor of Londonderry, and about Twelve of the Episcopal Clergy.

At Night the Streets were filled with Bonfire-works, which were no sooner
lighted, but the Allarm Signal was given by discharge of Guns, so Planted, that
from one place to another of the Armies several Winter Quarters throughout the
whole Country in our hands, in a few Minutes, all places had notice of the
King's Arrival, and in a very few Hours made Bonfires so thick, that the whole
Country s^em'd in a Flame; so that the Enemy could not but see, and conjecture
the cause, to their eternal grief.

On the 1 6th. Lieutenant General Douglas came to Belfast; as likewise a great
number of Presbiterian Ministers, who came to wait on His Majesty, and
presented him with a Loyal Address. A little after the King's Landing at the
Lough, betwixt Carrickfergus and Belfast, it seemed to be like a Wood, there
being in it between six and seven hundred Sail of Ships, most laden with
Provisions and Ammunition: The Plenty and Order of all things there was most
wonderful, and not credible to any but those that saw it, no Army in
Christendom the like; and yet all Goods held a good Rate. His Majesty continued
at Belfast, concerting Matters, and giving the necessary Orders for the opening
the approaching Campaign, 'till the 19th. at which time he went to Lisbourn,
and Dined with the General, the Duke of Schonberg, and the same Night he went
to Hilsbrough, accompanied with Prince George, Lord General Douglas, the Earl
of Oxford, and a great many other Nobility and Gentry.

June 20. This day Landed at the White-House, 2500 Horse from Scotland; a Camp
was this day begun to be formed near Tanderagee, about 20 Miles from Lisbourn
and on the very Frontiers between Ardmagh and the Newry, whither all the Army
is marching.

The 21th. This day was wholly taken up in forming the Camp.

The 22th. His Majesty went from Hilsbrough to the Town of Newry, where he
viewed the part of his Army that was Encamped there, consisting of 24000 Horse,
Foot and Dragoons; His Majesty being informed by His Scouts there, That the
Irish Forces, with their King, were come to a Pass within four Miles of the
Newry, betwixt that and the Town of Dundalk; His Majesty sent a Trumpeter to
acquaint the Irish, That in case they burnt any more Houses, He had given Order
to His Army That they should not give Quarter to a Man, either French or Irish
they should meet with. And that very Night His Majesty gave Order for 500 Horse
and Dragoons to be detached, under the command of Lieutenant General
Schravemore, to march toward Dundalk, and mark out a place to Encamp in: The
Irish seeing some of the Horse that were the advanced Guard appear, and they
thinking the whole Army was approaching, immediately quitted their Pass, and
Fled to Ardee, burning their Tents for haste, but left the Town standing, being
apprehensive that the King would be as good as His Word; some of our advanced
Party marched so near the Enemy, that they plainly saw them set Fire to their
Tents, and the confusion they were in.

The Passes being clear, His Majesty immediately advanced with the Forces from
the Newry, toward Dundalk, and sent Orders for General Douglas, and the other
Forces, to change their march before designed them, and immediately to march
and join him at Dundalk.

On the 27th. we Encamped on the Plains of Dundalk, where we rested the next
day, and understood that the Enemy were retired from Ardee, and had Posted
themselves; on the South side of the River Boyne: The King went himself the
next day (with a select Party of Horse) beyond Ardee, to view the Ground; and
on the 29th. we marched with the Army to Ardee; which we found miserably
Plundered by the Enemy, they leaving nothing but the Houses with bare Walls,
except some sick, old, bed-ridden People, for murdering four of which in cold
Blood, a Scotch Soldier and Woman was here hanged.

On the 30th. His Majesty Encampad in sight of the Enemy, the River Boyne being
between us and them: the King's Tent was pitched about a Mile short of the
Boyne, and as much above Drogheda. His Majesty at His Arrival near the River
about Noon, rode in full view of the Irish Army, which lay encamped on the
other side.

The Enemy soon discovered it must be His Majesty who was so attended, which
made them draw down two Pieces of Six Pound Ball from the Forts a little
higher, and planted them opposite to the place where our Horse were drawn up,
they presently began to fire, and one of the Balls passed so close to His
Majesty, that it took away a piece of his Coat, Waste-coat and Shirt, raised
the Skin on the blade of his Right Shoulder, and drew a little Blood; but a
Plaster being put on, His Majesty continued on Horseback without the least
concern, till four in the Afternoon, when he Dined, and in the Evening was on
Horseback again, though he had been up from One in the Morning. The Enemy spent
about two hundred Balls, and killed us four or five Men, and about ten Horses.
Here it was that our Horse stood the Shot of the Enemy, every Man on foot by
his Horse several hours, while they passed the shot before mentioned. At last,
when the King had said, Now I see my Men will stand, some Guns were sent to our
Horse, and about five in the Evening, we brought some of our Guns to bear, upon
the first discharge of which among the Irish Horse, they retreated from their
Battery and stood farther off; we dismounted some of the Enemies Guns on their
Battery, and with our Bombs, beat down several Tents, next adjoining to those
of the late King James, and the Count de Lazun. His Majesty rested very well
all Night, and at Eight the next Morning, being July 1. (ever memorable for
poor Ireland,) was again on Horseback: and while the great Bullets were flying,
the Prince of Dermstadt's Horse was shot in the Neck. We understood, by a
Protestant Deserter, that swam over the River last Night, That the Enemy were
25000 strong, that they had sent away some of their heaviest Baggage, in order
(as they gave out) to Fight us. The King command the Count de Schonberg, to
march with all the Horse and Dragoons of the first and second Line, of the
Right Wing, in all about 5000, and the Brigade of Trelawny, and to pass the
River about four Miles from the Camp, further up the River by Slane, where had
been a Battery of the Irish, but they were drawn off, and only 800 Dragoons
guarded the Ford; this was done in order to take the Enemy in the Flank, while
the rest of our Army passed it nearer Drogheda, over against their Camp; which
the Enemy perceiving, they marched part of their Army to oppose the Count de
Schonberg, (who had already broke some of their Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons
that advanced to hinder his passing the River) and drew them up in Battalia
about a Mile and a half from the place where he had passed the River. In
passing this Ford, our Men were forced to go down a verp steep Hill, and uneven
way, yet the Irish Horse and Dragoons at the foot of the Ford, only once fired
and retreated to a greater Body, who were coming to their assistance. The King
being informed of what had passed on that side, sent Lieutenant General Douglas
with two Brigades of Foot, to reinforce the Count de Schonberg, who thereupon
changed his Order of Battle, making a Wing of Horse on his Right, and another
on his Left, and placing the Foot in the middle. In this posture he marched
toward the Enemy, after some small resistance, put them into disorder, and
followed them fighting as far as the Village called Duleek. The Earl of
Portland, and Monsieur Overkirke had part in this Action as Mareschals de Camp;
mean time the King caused the rest of the Foot of the first Line, consisting of
the Brigades of la Meloniere, which was on the Right, of Hanner, and the Danes,
to march to the Ford wheae Douglas was posted the day before, on the Right,
over against the Village before mentioned near Drogheda (which at this time had
a Garrison of 800 Irish.) The three Battalions of the Dutch Guards were at the
head of them, and passed the Ford on the Right over against the Village
beforementioned, from whence they beat the Enemy that were posted there. The
Battalion of la Melionere followed them on the Left; and these four Battalions
being the first that passed the River, suffered pretty much; of the latter,
there were five Officers killed, and eight wounded, and about Sixty Soldiers
killed and wounded. Monsieur Calimote followed the Dutch Guards, with his
Detachment of 600 Men, whereof mention was made before, and after them the
Regiment of Cambon: And here it was that Colonel Calimote received a Shot, of
which he is since dead, and several of his Officers were killed upon the place:
Duke Schonberg headed the Dutch Foot Guards, and the King the Inniskilling
Horse; telling them they should be his Guards that day. Some of the Irish Horse
opposed the Dutch Foot, who fought up to the middle in Water, and were almost
born down, before some Horse (which they long called for) could come to their
relief. It was in passing this Ford, that Dr. Walker (famous for the Siege of
Derry) was killed.

The Brigade of Hanmer passed next, the Count de Nassau being at the head of
them, as Major General; and the Danes passed on their Left, Commanded by the
Prince of Wirtembergh. After these passed the Horse of the Left Wing; but in
the mean time some of the Enemies Squadrons (as before mentioned) advanced, and
Attacked our Foot: And a Squadron of the Enemies Guard du Corpse, pierced, with
great Vigor, as far as a little Villige, where we lost our great General, his
Grace the Duke of Schonberg; who advanced thither to observe the Enemies
motion. Those that were about his Grace, had before done all they could to
persuade him to retire from thence, but they could not prevail with him. He was
killed with a Carbine shot in the Neck, and three Cuts over the Head, and one
on his Face. Captain Foubert, who was next to him, and had likewise received a
Wound in the Arm, got from his Horse to help the Duke, but he died immediately
without speaking a word. By this time the King had got over the River; who in
passing it with his Horse, (himself engaging in the thickest) met with the like
opposition. The Danish Horse once gave way, but the King went himself and
brought them up again, and at the head of the Horse Charged the Enemy; who
after some resistance retired Fighting, Commanded by Lieutenant General de la
Hoquelle, and Lieutenant General Hamilton, Monsieur de Lazun being with the
Body who made head against the Count de Schonberg, the late King James himself
not Engaging, but standing at the Rear of them, on a rising ground, out of
harms way.

The Enemy retreated from Defile to Defile; our Horse pursuing them as far as
Dule^k, where the King with the Forces he had with them, joined those of the
Count de Schonberg. The Enemy retired about three Miles farther, and there
posted themselves in every advantageous place; and the King followed them with
his Horse and Dragoons, and Orders were given to Attack them there; but it
being very late; and the Fight having lasted from Ten in the Morning till Nine
at Night, His Majesty did not think fit to engage the Troops any farther, but
ordered the Horse and Dragoons to remain in Arms all Night: He returned to
Duleek, where the Foot Encampt: But in the Night the Enemy retired in great
Confusion; we took their Baggage, and eight Pieces of Cannon.

July 2. The King sent Monsieur de la Meloniere, Brigadier General, with a
Detachment of 300 Foot, and 1000 Horse, with 8 Pieces of Cannon, to invest
Drogheda: Being arrived there, the Governor received the first Summons with
great Contempt; but the King sending him word, That if they forced his Cannon
to be fired on them, he would not give them any Quarter. This so frighted the
Governor, that having kept the Trumpeter some time, he returned this Answer;
That he would Surrender the place upon fair Capitulation, viz. To March out
with Arms and Baggage, Colors flying, etc. but otherwise he would defend the
place to the last Extremity. Meloniere sent him word, That his Orders were only
to suffer them to march out without Arms; and that he must quickly resolve
whether he would accept of this Offer. In the mean time Monsieur de la
Meloniere had caused two Batteries to be raised, which would be ready the next
Morning by break of Day. But the Officers of the Garrison after having
consulted together, resolved to yield, and the Capitulation being Signed, they
delivered up a Gate, and marched out about an hour after, between thirteen and
fourteen hundred Men, and were conducted to Athlone, the Officers being
permitted to wear their Swords.

After which Monsieur de la Meloniere gave Protections to a great many Papists,
who expected to have been plundered, and marched to join the Army; whom we
shall leave for a little time, and give the Reader here an account of the
Movements of the late King, and his Troops, and the Affairs in and about
Dublin, and the Protestants therein.

Friday June 13. The Protestants in Dublin received the certain Account of King
William's Landing. Before this a Camp had been laid out by the Irish about
Atherde^, and the late King James had ordered his Army to Rendezvous there from
several parts of the Kingdom

On Monday the 16th. King James marched out of Dublin to join them with about
6000 French Foot, most old Soldiers, excellently well Armed and Clad; one
Regiment of these were Dutch and Protestants, and were observed carefully for
fear of Deserting.

The whole Irish Army encamped, made about 36000, all well Clad, and in good
heart, both Horse and Foot. The same day King James left Dublin, there marched
in 6000 of the Country Militia, and Colonel Luterel and Mac Gillicuddy as his
Assistant, were left Governors.

It was expected the Irish would have been much cast down upon King James's
leaving Dublin, and the certain News of King Williams's Landing, but they were
much the contrary, they Triumphed and rejoiced as if they had got King William
in a Pound, and the Day were their own. They were assured either that the
French Fleet would cut of King William from England, or that an Insurrection
would be made there; for we were told that an hundred thousand Men were ready
to rise, under the Notion of declaring for a Commonwealth.

The Protestants in Dublin knew not what to think of these things, for they
were kept as Prisoners of War, and suffered to know no more, nor enjoy any more
than what the others pleased. But this the Protestants feared most (because the
Irish spoke least of it) that some desperate Persons had undertaken to Destroy
King William as soon as he should come ashore: For the great assurance of the
Irish could not be imputed to any other thing than this. Some were so open, as
to tell their Protestant Friends very lately, That they would be glad to go to
Mass within this Twelve Month: with several other Expressions of the like
nature.

The great concern of the Protestants in Dublin was, how they should be
preserved from being Plundered and Burnt, in case of the Defeat of the Irish
Army; this they thought could be done only by the English pursuing the Victory
close (for by a particular Providence, the Irish had neglected all this time to
fortify Dublin) or else by sending a Party by Sea, to Land at the Bay at the
time of the Engagement; neither of which, as it afterward happened, was done:
But God alone preserved the Protestants of Dublin by an extraordinary
Deliverance.

On Thursday, June 19. After King James was gone to Encamp, about Twelve at
Noon, the Governor ordered all Persons walking the Streets without Swords or
Bayonets, which was the Badge of Protestants, to be taken up and secured in
Parades. At Night he picked out whom he thought fit, and sent them to several
Prisons, where they were considerably incommoded.

After this followed a Proclamation, That not above Five Protestants should
meet in any place, above the Family, on pain of Death. By which they were from
that time shut out from our Churches, which by an extraordinary Providence,
they had enjoyed all these times (except Christ Churh.) Most of them were
frequented twice every Day at Prayers. The Churchmen, who stayed in the City,
though they had lost all their Subsistence by the Irish Parliament, except what
People voluntarily contributed, acquitted themselves with a great deal of Zeal
and Diligence, being particularly influenced by the Bishop of Mead, and Dr.
King, Dean of St. Patricks, who have been the Bulwark of the Protestants in
these sad times.

On Tuesday 24. Dr. King was clapped up in the Castle, and many other of the
principal Protestants in the College, (which was now a Garrison) and other
public places. The Galway Protestants, being about 200, (these were they of
Sir Thomas Southwel's party, which were lately brought to Dublin, in order to
be exchanged) were removed from White Friars to the Round Church, and all the
Newgate Prisoners were put to them, where they were near stifled. The Prisoners
of War were brought from Kilmainham to St. John's Church; the public
Contributions, which hitherto had been very liberal every Lord's Day, to their
Relief, were now intercepted, and the Poor began to suffer much; few
Protestants daring to walk the Streets.

Saturday the 28th. News came to Dublin, That the Irish Army retreated, and the
English Army were come toward Droghedah, and seemed to press forward for
Dublin.

On Sunday the 29th. the Irish Army came on this side the Boyne; and King
James, as it should seem, distrusting the Issue, Sir Patrick Trant, First
Commissioner of the Revenue, and another Gentleman, were ordered to go from
Dublin on Monday Morning to Waterford, to prepare Ships.

July 1st. Early in the Morning, the Protestants in Dublin were wakened by an
Alarm, and the News that there would be a Battle: The Gates of the City were
kept strictly Guarded, and the Protestants kept their Houses. The Issue they
expected with the greatest apprehensions: Several Reports were spread abroad
every Hour; one while that the French Fleet were in the Bay; another, that a
French Express was come from Waterford, with the news of taking the Isle of
Wight by the French, and of their being gone to Dover; then, that the English
Right Wing was quite routed; then, that the P. of Orange was taken Prisoner:
But at Five that Afternoon, some that had made their escape on tired Horses,
told the Protestants, The Irish were much worsted; and others at Six, That they
were totally defeated; from hence, till One that Night, all the Entries of the
Town were filled with dusty, wounded and tired Soldiers and Carriages,
perpetually coming in.

After these, several of King James's Horse Guards came in straggling, without
Pistols or Swords, and could not tell what was become of himself.

Near ten that Night, he came in with about 200 Horse, all in disorder: The
Protestants concluded now, that it was a total rout, and that the English Army
were just ready to come into Town; but were greatly Surprised, when an hour or
two after, they heard the whole Body of the Irish Horse coming in, in very good
order, with Kettle-Drums; Haut boys, and Trumpets; and early the next Morning
the French, and a great Party of the Irish Foot. These being a little rested,
Marched out again (as they gave out) to meet the Enemy, which were supposed to
draw nigh.

Wednesday, July 2d. About five this Mornning. King James having sent for the
Irish Lord Mayor, and some Principle Persons to the Castle, made a Speech to
them to this purpose:

Gentlemen, I had a very good Army in England, and when I had the greatest
occasion for them, they deserted Me, and went to the Enemy; and finding a total
Defection against Me there, I retired and went to France, where I was kindly
received by that King, and had all the Assurances imaginable from Him, to
Re-establish Me in My Throne: In some time after, I came to this Kingdom, and
found My Roman Catholic Subjects here, as well equipped and prepared to defend
My Cause, as their Abilities could bear; And though I have often been told, That
when it came to the Touch, they would never bear the brunt of a Battle, I could
never credit the same, till now; when having a good Army, and all Preparations
fit to Engage any Foreign Invader, I found the total Truth of which I had been
so often Cautioned And though the Army did not desert Me here, as they did in
England; Yet when it come to a Trial, they hasely fled the field, and left the
spoil to My Enemies: Nor could they be prevailed upon to Rally, though the Loss
in the whole Defeat was but inc nsiderable: So that, henceforward, I never more
determine to Head an Irish Army, and do now resolve to shift for My self; and
so, Gentlemen must You, It has been often debated, in case such a Revolution
should happen, whether upon deserting the City of Dublin, the same ought not to
be Fired? I therefore Charge you, on Your Allegience, That you neither Rifle
the City by Plunder, nor Destroy it by Fire, which in all Kingdoms will be
judged very Barbarous, and must be believed to be done by My Orders; and if
done, there will be but little Mercy expected from an Enemy thus Enraged. He
told them, Though he quitted Dublin, He did not quit his Inter^st in it. He told
his Menial Servants, That he should have now no farther Occasion to keep such a
Court, as he had done; and that therefore, they were at Liberty to Dispose of
themselves; And so with Two or Three in Company, he went to Bray, and along by
the Sea to Waterford; having appointed his Carriages to meet him another way.
It Is said, he did not sleep till he got on Shipboard; and having been once
driven in again, is since clear gone off.

All this day being Wednesday, nothing was to be seen in Dublin, but Officers
and Carriages, and the Principal Persons of the Town, their Wives and Families
going away; others coming in dusty and weary, getting away as fast as they
could. About tour in the Afternoon the Protestants were affrighted with the
appearance of the Irish Horse, which were drawn out of the City early in the
morning, and which they hoped had been quite gone, entering into the Town,
followed by the French and Irish Foot, in a full Body; but they on^y marched
through the Town to go farther; the Militia that kept the City followed them,
only the Governor remained. At last, he resolved to march also, and to drive
two or three hundred of the Principal Prisoners before him: but while they were
preparing for this, a false Allarm was spread, that a Party of the English
being Landed at the Harbor, were just at the Towns-end; it was too dusky to
disprove this by View, and they had not leisure to send a Me^^enger, but in
have shifted for themselves.

The Protestants now began to look out, not knowing well in what Condition they
were in, but venturing to the Castle, they found Capt. Farlow, who had been a
Prisoner there, keeping Garrison alone. Upon this Captain Robert Fitzgerald,
and several others, who had been Prisoners, went immediately from the Captains
own House, toward the City, taking their way by the Council Chamber and
Custom-house, which he found by the care of Mr. Francis Babe, lately Survey r
General of the Revenue, were both secured, and continued the Keys of both
places to his Trust, setting Guards on each: From thence the Captain with the
rest repaired to the Castle, which they found Deserted by the Papists, and on
which they seized for their Majesty's Service, having made Sir. Robert Gore,
who was till then a Prisoner in the Castle, Governor for that Night: And
having set strong Guards, on all Places Convenient in the Castle, they passed
through the Iron-Gate into the Castle Yard, to secure what Stores were left, as
well of Arms and Ammunition, as Provisions, where a great Rabble had met, and
forcing open the Storehouse Doors, had committed very great Outrages, but upon
their appearance and some other Persons of Quality that came to their
Assistance, by their Prudent Government, this Tumultuous Rabble were dispersed,
and they forced out of the Castle-Yard, and having well Secured by strong
Guards the Castle-Yard and Stores, Committing the Stores to the Charge of
Captain Farlow, till they returned to the Castle, and leaving the same in
charge with Sr. Robert Gore, they marched to the Main-Guard, where were a Guard
of the Militia, who declared themselves for King James, but were by their fair
Persuasions, prevailed upon to surrender their Arms, and deliver up the Guards,
and left the Main-Guard that Night under Command of Captain Slaughter, a Worthy
Protestant, and lately Disbanded. Having secured the Main-Guard, they went with
Captain Slaughter to the several City Gates, and set Guards on them. They pass
d through the several Streets of the City to prevent any Disorders; they then
returned to the Castle, and finding all things there in great Quiet and
Security, they took a March into part of the Suburbs, and Commanded others with
a Guard to secure the Remote Parts of the Suburbs, and took the other Round
through the City and Castle; and all things being very safe, they Selected out
a certain number of their Company, as the Bishop of Limerick, Dr. King, Dean
Bourk; the Captain, Mr. Witchet, Councellor Dixon, Francis Babe, and others, to
consult what was then fit to be done; and about Six a Clock they sent out
Proclamation by Beat of Drum, for Regulating all Disorders, and forming a
Protestant Militia, and sent away Express to the King by Councellor Dixon, and
Mr. Francis Babe, with their Letters to His Majesty at the Camp. These
Gentlemen found him Marching up to Dublin in two Lines, expecting to meet the
Irish at Swords; at the same time that they gave His Majesty an Account of
Dublins being at Liberty, News came of the Surrender of Drogheda, which he had
left a Party to Besiege, and in which they had Pinnioned all the Protestants
and Prisoners, and placed them under that part of the Wall which was to be
Battered; but this was not known till after the Surrender

Till Afternoon this Thursday, July the 3. the Protestants in Dublin did not
hear a word of the English Army; in the mean time they had reports, That the
Irish and French were coming back, and very near them, which gave a damp to
their briskness; but this blowing over, and the certain account of the English
Army being come, they then perceived themselves at Liberty. The Protestants ran
about, saluting and embracing one another; and blessing God for this wonderful
deliverance, as if they had been alive from the Dead, the Streets were filled
with Crowds and Shouts, and the Roman Catholics now lay in the same terrors as
they had done some few days before.

At Eight this Night, one Troop of Dragoons came as a Guard to an Officer, that
came to take charge of the Stores It was impossible, the King himself coming
after this, could be welcome d with equal joy, as this one Troop; the
Protestants hung about the Horses, and were ready to pull the Men off them as
they marched up to the Castle.

Next Morning b ing Friday, the 4th, the Duke of Ormond, and Monsieur
Overkirke, came in with Nine Troops of Horse; and the King being encamped by
Finglass, came on Sunday to St. Patricks Church, and heard a Sermon, preach d
by Dr. King, concerning the Power of God: Of which, that which seemed to us
greatest on Earth, mighty Armies was a faint shadow. The King went back to his
Camp to dinner, not suffering any Soldiers to come into the City, except a few
for Guards. By some Persons in our Army that have viewed the Dead at the Boyne,
I am told, that there were not above sixteen hundred killed on both sides,
though perhaps you may hear of greater Numbers in England, which is a wonderful
thing, that so small a loss should disperse the whole Irish Army, who seemed to
be blown away, only by a Wind from God. July 5. The Town of Wexford declared
for his Majesty, the manner or it was thus; Colonel Butler, Lord Lieutenant of
the County, hearing that the late late King James was gone by on Wedn^sday
last, he posted after him, and from Duncannon, wrote to his Son to come to him,
and to follow the late King James to France: He wrote also another Letter to
Captain Kelly, to come away with his Company, and set the Castle of Wexford on
Fire, which was under his command; but this Letter falling into the hands of an
English Merchant, where Colonel Butter was quartered; he did not deliver it,
but told the Captain how he was sent for, concealing that part of the Letter
about burning the Castle; and so soon as he and his Company were gone, the
Protestants there rose, disarmed the Papists, and seized the Castle; and at
their humble Request, by two Messengers, His Majesty sent some few days after,
a Regiment, with Arms and Ammunition to secure them; we continued in our Camp
to refresh our selves till July 9. At which time, early in the Morning, his
Majesty caused us to decamp from Finglass, to a place called Cromlin, three
Miles on the South side of Dublin. This Day was Published at the Camp, Their
Majesty's Declaration, which follows.

The Declaration of William and Mary, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland; To all the People of the Kingdom of Ireland, to whom it may
concern.
William Rex.

AS it has pleased Almighty God, to bless our Arms in this Kingdom, with a
late Victory over our Enemies at the Boyne, and with the Possession of our
Capital City of Dublin, and with the general Dispertion of all that did oppose
Us: We are now in so happy a Prospect of our Affairs, and of extinguishing the
Rebellion of this Kingdom; That we hold it reasonable to think of Mercy, and to
have Compassion upon those whom We judge to have been seduced; wherefore We do
hereby Declare, We shall take into our Royal Protection all poor Laborers,
Common Soldiers, Country Farmers, Plough men and Cottiers whatsoever; as also
all Citizens, Townsmen, Tradesmen and Artificers, who either remained at home,
or having fled from their dwellings, shall by the the First day of August next,
repair to their usual Places of Abode; Surrendering what Arms they have to such
Justices of Peace, as are or shall be appointed by Us, not only to receive the
same, but also to Register the Appearance of such of the said Persons as shall
come in, and submit to Our Authority. For Our Royal Intention is, and We do
hereby Declare, That we will not only Pardon all those poor People, as to their
Lives and Liberties, who shall come in by the time aforesaid, for all Violences
they have done or committed by the Command of their Leaders during the War, but
We do promise to secure them in their Goods, their Stocks of Cattle, and all
their Chattels personal whatsoever, Willing and Requiring them to come in, and
where they were Tenants, there to preserve the Harvest of Grass and Corn, for
the supply of Winter. But forasmuch as many of them, had a Legal Right to the
Tenancy of several Lands, some holden from Protestants, and some from Popish
Proprietors, who have been concerned in the Rebellion against Us: Our Will and
Pleasure is, That all those Tenants, who held from our good Protestant
Subjects, do pay their Rents to their respective Landlords: And that the
Tenants of all those who have been concerned in the present Rebellion against
Us, do keep their Rent in their Hands until they have notice from the
Commissioners of Our Revenue, unto whom they are to account for the same. And
as We do hereby strickly forbid all Violence, Rapine and Molestation, to any
who shall thus come in, and remain Obedient to Us; so for those of this, or any
other Rank or Quality, who are already in Our Quarters, and within our Power
and Obedient to Us, We do hereby charge and require, That they be not molested
in any sort without Our special Command. For the desperate Leaders of the
present Rebellion, who have violated those Laws, by which this Kingdom is
united, and inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, who have
called in the French, who have Authorized all Violences and Depredations
against the Protestants, and who rejected the Gracious Pardon We offered them
in our Proclamation, of the 22th of Feb. 1688. s We are now by God s great
Favor, in condition to make them sensible of their Errors; so are We resolved
to leave them to the event of War, unless by great and manifest demonstrations,
We shall be convinced they deserve our Mercy, which We shall never refuse to
those that are truly Penitent.

Given at our Royal Camp at Finglass near Dublin, the 7th day of July, 1690. In
the Second Year of Our Reign.
July 11th. We continued in our Camp at Cromlin till this Morning. When the
King set out to Kilkenny, with a part of the Army; General Douglass, with
another Part, went some days before toward Wexford.

July 14th His Majesty Encamped at Inchiqueen, 21 Miles from Dublin, where News
was brought to the Camp, that Cavan and Sligo had Voluntarily Surrendered; and
that the Irish Villains, called Raparees, had burnt Longford, and the Lord
Longfords House.

July 15th. His Majesty with the Army Encamped at Castle Dermote.

On the 1 6th. We Marched to Caterlough, which was but five Miles.

On the 1 7th. We Encamped about Kelly, leaving the Road to Kilkenny, that City
being above four Miles out of our way; here by some Deserters come into our
Camp, we understood, that the Earl of Tyrconnel (who since K. James's leaving
of Ireland, styles himself Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) having some jealousy of
the Earl of Trone Governor of Waterford, sent for him to Lymerick, and made Old
Colonel Lacy Governor in his stead, and that the Enemy had in it about 1600
Men. Colonel Eppinger, who was sent from Dublin with a small Party by Sea,
toward Wexford (that being Deserted as you have heard) took Possession of the
Place, and secured a Garrison in it; he found a Considerable quantity of
Provision there, and his Men a little after took 400 Head of Cattle from the
Raparees, who had taken them a little time before from the Country People, on
whom they have ever since the Battle of the Boyne, committed many Outrages, and
done much Mischief.

July 12th. We came to a place called Bennets-bridge, within 16 Miles of
Waterford, where we Encamped. Here we understood, that on the 18th the Enemy
quitted Clo^mel; notwithstanding it is a very Considerable Pass, lately
strengthened by the addition of several new Fortifications, and Major General
Sarsfield was Posted there with 5000 Irish; but on the approach of our Army in
it is Neighborhood, he retired toward Lymerick This day four French Officers
came over to us, they gave an account, That the Earl of Tyrconnel, and the
Count de Lauzun, were Fortifying of Lymerick, the remains of the Army being in
that Neighborhood, but in a very ill Condition, having lost all their Baggage.
This day the King dined with the Duke of Ormond, at the Castle of Killkenny.

On the 20 th. We Decamped from Bennets-Bridge, and Marched about 7 Miles to a
place called Rossen Narrow and the next day being the 21 th We came to Carick.
His Majesty Commanded a Trumpet to be sent to Summon Waterford, requiring them
to Surrender the Place: They desired time till the next Morning, when they sent
out Articles, but the King not approving thereof, let them know that they
should go out with their own Arms and Baggage only, and that if they did not
accept thereof, but stayed till they were Attacked, he would give them no
Quarter. However they sent some of their Scruples again the next day, and
Major General Kirk, was sent thither with five Regiments and several Pieces of
Cannon to answer them; the next day in the Afternoon the Capitulations were
Signed, and the next day after, the Garrison Marched out with their Arms and
Baggage, the Number of 1600, and were conducted to Mallow, 12 Miles in their
way to Lymerick: The Garrison would not have had so good terms, only His
Majesty had Compassion on 300 Protestant Families in the Town. Several Officers
staid behind in the Place and Prayed His Majesty's Protection. The same day the
Lord Dover, and Lord George Howard, with several others submitted themselves to
the King. The French when they first came to Lymerick, took Possession of it
with their Infantrey, under the Command of the Count de Lauzun, and they would
not suffer any of the Irish to come into the Town; so that the Lord Tyrconnel,
and General Sarsfield, with their Irish, where forced all to Encamp without the
Town.

July 25th. The King viewed the Walls of Waterford, without entering into the
Town, and returned back to the Camp, which was about three Miles distant, where
all things were ready for an Attack. His Majesty dined in the Camp, and then
returned to Carick that Night. From Waterford His Majesty sent a Summons to the
Governor of Duncannon Fort, Captain Michael Burk, offering the same
Capitulation which had been granted to Waterford, and letting him know if he
refused, or delayed to Comply, he must expect no Mercy. He insisted upon six
days to consult the Lord Tyrconnel, which being refused, he declared he would
take that time, whereupon the Cannon was ordered down in order to an Attack;
but the next day, being the 26th. In the Evening, Sr. Cloudsly Shovel appearing
with Sixteen Frigates in View, it so terified them, that the Governor writ: to
Major General Kirk, that they would accept of what had been offered; which His
Majesty being made acquainted with, he was pleased to order, That they should
still have the Benefit of the Articles that were at first proposed, and the
Fort was accordingly Surrendered, whereby we are possessed of a very advantagous
Post, which commands the River of Waterford.

On the 27th. His Majesty left the Camp, and set forward for Dublin, resolving
to return immediately for England.

On the 29th. The King arrived a Chappel-Izod, where He Published his Second
Declaration as follows.

William and Mary, King, and Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.
To all the People of Our Kingdom of Ireland, whom it may concern.
William R.

ALthough Our former Declaration, of the 7th of July last past, has not
hitherto produced those Effects of Gratitude and Obedience from several of Our
Rebellious Subjects which We justly expected: Yet being willing to
Compassionate those who are misled, and to extend Our farther Grace, as well in
granting unto some a longer time to lay hold of the Advantages already offered,
as to enlarge Our Clemency unto others; We do now farther Declare, That as to
all poor Laborers, Common Soldiers, Country Farmers, Ploughmen and Cottiers
whatsoever: As also to all Citizens, Townsmen, Tradesmen, and Artificers who
remained at home, or who having fled from their Dwellings, shall by the Five
and Twentieth Day of this Instant August repair to their usual place of Abode,
surrendering up what Arms they have to such Justices as are, or shall be
appointed by Us, not only to receive the same, but to Register the Appearances
of such as shall submit to Our Authority; We do hereby Declare, That We will
not only Pardon them as to their Lives and Liberties, for all Violences they
have done and committed by Authority of their Superiors, during the Rebellion;
but We do also promise to secure them in their Goods, their Stocks, and Cattle,
and all their Chattels personal whatsoever; Willing and Requiring them to come
in; and where they were Tenants there to preserve the Harvest of Grass and Corn
for supply of the Winter. But forasmuch as many of them had a legal Right to
the Tenancy of several Lords; some holden from Protestants, and some held from
Popish Proprietors, who have been concerned in the Rebellion against Us: Our
Will and Pleasure is, That all those Tenants who hold from our good Protestant
Subjects, do pay their Rents to their Respective Landlords; And the Tenants of
all those who have been in the present Rebellion against Us, do keep their
Rents in their hands, until they shall have notice from the Commissioners of
Our Revenue, unto whom they are to Account for the same. But whereas we are
farther Advertised, that several of these Ranks aforementioned, who have
adhered to Our said Declaration, do complain of ill treatment from our
Soldiers, and of the loss of Goods and Stock, on pretense that such Stock and
Goods were formerly by them Plundered from the English; and therefore praying
not only the Security of Our General Declaration, but of particular Protections
to be granted to such as should desire the same: As We abhor all manner of
Violence done to Our Loving Subjects of what Religion soever, against the
Tenor of Our said Declaration, which being under the Great Seal of this Our
Kingdom, is above all other Securities: Yet to gratify Our said Subjects, and
to deter all Offenders, We shall Order particular Protections to be granted to
such as desire the same: And shall farther Require upon pain of Our highest
Displeasure, that they become effectual to all such of Our Loving Subjects, as
shall remain steadfast in their Duty to Us. And who have not since the
Publishing of Our Declaration aforesaid, Plundered Our Protestant Subjects, or
sheltered under such Protections as already they have had, the Goods and Stocks
of Our Enemies who continue Obstinate in their Disobedience; for in either of
these Cases they cannot expect but to remain accountable for what they have
done, unless they forthwith make Restitution of all such Plundered Goods to the
Right Owners; and also discover immediately to some of Our Justices of the
Piece, what Goods and Stock they have so concealed.

As for others of Superior Rank and Quality, and also such as have born
Offices under Our Enemies, whether Military or Civil; That which at present we
do declare is this: That if any of them shall within the time aforesaid
surrender themselves to Our Obedience, and shall be content, during the
Rebellion in this Kingdom, to betake themselves to such Town or City as shall
be assigned them, they shall be secure in their Lives, and have the Liberty of
such Town or City; and if they are destitute, and in want, shall also have a
Subsistence allowed them, according to their respective Qualities; and the same
shall be paid them by the Commissioners of Our Revenue, till by the blessings
of Peace, We may be in a Condition to consider all Our Loving Subjects, and
those in particular, who shall have been most early in their Obedience toward
Us. As to Strangers of what Nation soever they be, who have taken Service in
this Kingdom against Us, We do farther Declare, That if they shall forsake the
Enemy, and come into Our Quarters within the time aforesaid, they shall not
only receive Our Protection whilst they are in the Kingdom, but forthwith have
Passports given them to go directly home into their respective Countries: But
if these Manifestations of Our Grace and Favor shall not be valued as they
deserve; or if any shall persist in that barbarous and Unchristian way of
Burning and Desolation, which in some places has of late been practiced; We
shall hold Our selves discharged of those Consequences and Calamities which
must inevitably follow, since those who are obstinate against Our Mercy become
the Authors of their own Confusion.

Given at our Court at Chapel-Isa^d, this First Day of August 1690. in the
Second Year of Our Reign.
The same week was Published a Proclamation concerning the Irish Papists hiding
their Arms and Ammunition, etc. the substance of which, was as follows. That
notwithstanding it was Notoriously known, that the Papists of the Kingdom of
Ireland, of all Ranks and Degrees, were lately very well furnished with
Firearms, Swords, Bagonets, Skeins, Pikes, Half-Pikes; Scythes, and other Arms
Offensive and Deffensive; as also with great quantities of Gunpowder. And
although Hi Majesty in His Royal Proclamation of the Seventh of July, did
Extend, and hold forth His Mercy and Compassion, to all Citizens, Townsmen,
etc. and Assured them not only of Pardon; as to their Lives and Liberties, for
all Violences, etc. but also security in their Goods, Stacks of Cattle, and
Chattels Personal; and that those of any other Rank, or Quality within His
Majesty's Quarters, and Obedient to Him, should not be disquieted in any sort,
without His particular Command. And nothing more was expected on their parts,
but either to continue in, or return to their respective Dwellings, and to give
us their Arms, and to follow their several Trades and Callings. But although
several Persons had laid hold on His Majesty's said Declaration, and are
received into His Royal Protection, yet, few of them had brought in their Arms,
and most of those brought in were broken, which His Majesty looked upon as an
high Contempt, and done out of a Wicked Design, on any Oppertunity to join with
the Rebels. Therefore to the end, that all Persons might be left without
Excuse, and prevent the fatal Consequences of their Contempt, and Disobedience;
His Majesty strictly Commands all Persons, of the Popish Religion within the
Kingdom of Ireland, who reside in any part under His Majesty's Obedience, that
they do within Ten days after the Publishing this Proclamation in the City, or
Shire Town of that County, wherein they respectively Dwell, or Reside,
Surrender, and Deliver all the Fire Arms, Swords, etc. as also the Gunpowder,
which they lately had in their own Custody, or in the Custody of any other for
their Use, To the next Mayor Chief Magistrate, etc. in the City, Town or
Country, where they respectively Dwell or Reside; Who are required to Register
the same, and to return a perfect List of such Arms, and Ammunition as they
shall receive by Virtue of the Proclamation; as also, to lodge the same in some
safe Garrison of His Majesty's that is nearest adjacent.

And His Majesty further Declares, that if the aforesaid Persons of the Popish
Religion, do not by the time limited deliver their Arms, etc. they shall be
looked upon as Contemners of His Royal Authority, and as Persons designing the
Disturbance of His Government, and as Traitors and Rebels, and will accordingly
abandon them, to the Discression of His Soldiers, or they shall be committed to
Goal without Bail or Main-prise.

His Majesty likewise Commands all Protestants of the Kingdom, That they do not
keep or conceal any Arms or Ammunition belonging to any Papist, but that they
be forthwith delivered to the Magistrates and Officers aforesaid.

At the same time was likewise Published, the following Proclamation.

By the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, a Proclamation for a Fast.
William Rex,

WHereas We have, under the Protection of Almighty God, taken upon Us, the
Deliverance of Our good Protestant Subjects of Ireland, from the Oppression of
Popery and Arbitrary Power, under which they lately groaned; And having been
already blessed, with some happy Progress in this Work, and resolving still to
persevere therein, till the Rebellious parts of this Kingdom shall be also
Reduced, in due Obedience to Our Crown of England, We cannot but hold it
needful to invoke the Assistance of Almighty God, who has hitherto been so
Propitious to Us, and pour forth Our Prayers in Public and Solemn Manner, that
he would vouchsafe to Bless the future Progress of Our Arms, and bring Us to a
speedy Enjoyment of Peace and Quietness in the Land.

Wherefore, We do hereby Order and Appoint, that Friday the Fifteenth Day of
August Instant, be solemnly Observed and Kept, as a Day of Public Fasting,
Prayer, and Humiliation, in and throughout all the Parts of this Our Kingdom,
under Our Obedience, for supplicating Almighty God, for the Pardon of Our Sins,
and for imploring His Blessing upon Us, and upon Our Forces by Sea and Land,
and that constantly during the War, Friday in every Week be set apart for the
same Ends and Purposes. And to the end Our good Subjects may be the better
prepared for the said Work, and instructed in their Duty, when they are
Assembled to perform it. We have thought fit to Direct and Appoint, the
Archbishops and Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer, proper
for the Occasion, to be made use of in all Churches and Chapels, and other
Public, Places of Worship in this Our Kingdom.

And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require all Our Loving Subjects to
Assemble together in their Respective Parish Churches, or Public Places of
Worship, at the Times, and to the Ends aforesaid. And We also Charge and
Require all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Others, that have Care of Souls, that
they Officiate accordingly in their Respective Churches, Chapels, or Places of
Worship, and that they give Notice hereof, by Reading this Our Proclamation,
every Sunday, during the Present War.

Given at Our Court at Chapple-Isard, this First Day of August, 1690. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
The Journal of the Siege of Lymerick, from the first of Aug. 1690. to the time
of Raising the Siege.
HIS Majesty receiving an Express at Chappel-Izard, from the Camp, That the
Enemy had drawn together most of their scattered Troops, about Lymerick, were
grown very Impudent, and seemed to have new Life and Vigor put into them, upon
His Majesty's retiring from the Camp, and that they were resolved to make a
desperate Defense of the City of Lymerick, whenever Besieged: On which His
Majesty altered His Resolutions, resolving to return to the Camp, the better to
dispose of things for the pushing on the Siege, and sent Order to Lieutenant
General Douglas to March from Athlone, and join the Count De Solmes.

On July 27. We Marched from Carick, under the Command of the Count De Solmes;
His Majesty, as aforementioned, having left the Camp, and came the same day to
the Town of Clonmel, which is Eight very long Miles: This Place seems to be
very strongly Situated, and doubtless might have held out for some time, had
it been Garrisoned by any but Irish-Men.

The 28. We Marched Seven Miles farther; and the next day, being the 29. We
Encamped at a place called Goolin-Bridge, which is about 23 Miles from
Lymerick: Here, as soon as we Arrived, we had the confirmation, That the French
had possessed themselves of the City of Lymerick, and that they would not
suffer any of the Irish Forces to come into it, having turned out those few
that were in Garrison there. On the 30. and 31. We lay quiet in our Camp, and
refreshed our selves.

August the first, A Detached Party of the Inniskilling and Danish Horse, etc.
Marched from our Camp, and advanced within sight of the Enemy near Lymerick,
who, upon the approach of the advanced Parties, were in great consternation;
and they brought an account, That the Gross of the Irish Army, consisting of
about 27000 Men, were (upon the hearing of the Advance of our Army) retired
from beyond the Shannon.

August 2. Advice was brought into the Camp, of the Surrender of the Town of
Youghal.

August 3. A Deserter came into our Camp from Lymerick, and told us, That
yesterday Morning, the second Instant, he saw the French Infantry March out of
the Town, about 3500 strong, with Eight Field Pieces; (leaving several of their
Ingineers and other Officers in the Town); and that the common report was, That
they were going to Galway to Embark there for France, that being a more
convenient Port for their taking Shipping than Lymerick; Galway being but Nine
Miles from the Mouth of the Bay, and Lymerick is Sixty: And that as soon as the
French had quitted the Place, and were marched out, Three Regiments of Irish
Auxillaries, under the Command of Colonel Lutterel, marched in, and took
Possession of it. This Advice afterward confirmed, as well by our Parties that
had been sent out, as by other Deserters.

August 4. The Regiments that were sent to reduce the Town of Waterford, and
Fort of Dancannon, under the Command of Major General Kirk, joined our Camp.

August 5. A Detachment of Six hundred Horse were sent from our Camp, to
reinforce the Garrison of Youghal, and prevent any Design the Enemy may have
upon it; and this Evening Lieutenant General Douglas joined us from Athlone.

On the 6. Our Army, consisting now of 38500 Effective Men, decamped from
Goolen-Bridge, and Marched in Two Bodies toward Lymerick, the Infantry taking
their way by a place called Sallawood, and the Cavalry marched the other Road
by way to Cullen.

On the 7th, About Noon, we came to a place called Carickellish, which is
between five and six Miles from Lymerick, and here our Horse and Foot joined in
one Body again, and in the Afternoon some small Detached Parties were sent to
observe the Posture and Motions of the Enemy; but on the approach of our Men,
the Enemy retired in great precipitation from place to place, and in the Night
burnt a great many small Houses and Cabins within Three Miles of the Town; and
this Evening was held a great Council of War in the presence of His Majesty,
where Resolutions were taken to Attack the Irish Forces early the next Morning;
which were Encamped, and had Entrenched themselves in all the Defiles leading
thereto; having first Plowed up the Ground, made great numbers of small Forts,
threw Timber and Trees across, and did all that possibly could be done to
obstruct the Passage of the King's Forces; leaving the Hedges, Gardens, and
other places for Five Miles together, with Musketeers, in the nature of an
Ambuscade.

On the 8. At One in the Morning, His Majesty sent out Nine Hundred Horse, and
Two Hundred Foot, Detached out of the Regiments of Oxon, Trelawny, Cuts,
Laneer, Lloyd, and Danes, under the Command of the Here Bentinck, Earl of
Portland, and Brigadeer Stewart, etc. who advanced within Cannon Shot of the
Town, notwithstanding the opposition made by Three Regiments of the Enemies
Foot, one of Horse, and another of Dragoons, who stood but one Firing, though
they had the covert of the Hedges, through which they Fired. About Four hours
after, this Detachment returned to our Camp, and gave the King an account of
the posture the Enemy were in. And about Seven a Clock His Majesty went himself
with a fresh Party of 200 Select Horse, being accompanied with Prince George,
Major General Gnickle, the Here Overkirk, and other great Officers, they
approached within Two Miles of the Town. The Enemy were come so near, with some
of their Out-guards, that we could hear them Talk with their damned Irish
Brogue on their Tongues, but they were separated from us by a Bog, which was
very deep, and so situated, that we could not possibly Attack them. This Night
it was resolved at a Council of War, that the Army should March toward the
Town, in order to Battle; for we understood, as you have heard, That the
Country being very close, and full of Hedges and Ditches, the Enemy had lined
them to defend the approaches to the Town. Accordingly the next day, being the
9th, our whole Army Decamped by Five in the Morning, Colonel Earl leading the
Van, with Two Hundred Horse and Dragoons, and One Thousand chosen Foot out of
all the Regiments in the Army, both English and Foreigners. Upon our approach
we found the Enemy drawn up within Two Miles of the City of Lymerick, whereupon
Colonel Earl ordered his advanced Troops to make a Halt until the rest were
come up. Then our Horse pushed them for near a Mile; their Horse at first made
a show as if they would make vigorous Resistance, and stood our first Charge,
but soon afterward gave way, when they threw themselves behind the Hedges, and
Fired so from thence, that our Horse could not come to them. Upon which we
brought some small Fieldpieces to Fire upon them; and at the same time the
1000 Detached Foot were ordered to Attack them. Accordingly, about One a Clock,
Colonel Earl led on his Foot, who run on with that Bravery, though the Enemy made
a great Fire through the Hedges, and continued this sort of Fighting for Two
Hours, advancing within Four Hundred yards of the Town, and possessing
themselves of Two advantageous Posts, called Ireton's-Fort, and the Old Kirk,
and such was the Bravery, Courage, and Resolution of our Men, that their
Officers could hardly stop them there, notwithstanding they were told it was
His Majesty's Express Order. Then the Besieged began to Fire from the Town with
their Great Guns, which killed us some Men; but in all this days Action we had
not above 35 Killed and Wounded, though above 250 of the Enemy were Killed in
their several Retreats, among which were several Officers of Note, besides
diverse taken Prisoners. Our Pioneers were employed most part of the Afternoon
in levelling the great number of Trenches the Enemy had cast up for their
Defense.

Between Six and Seven in the Evening His Majesty ordered a Trumpeter to be
sent with a Summons to the Town, and as the Deserters has since Informed us, a
great part of the Garrison, with some of the Officers, were for Capitulating;
but Monsieur Boiseleau, who is Governor, Duke of Berwick, and Colonel Lutterel,
etc. resolutely opposed it, making a Speech to the Garrison of the great
Divisions there were in England; and that 50000 French had made a descent, and
said, the Prince of Orange would be obliged to draw off His Army in few days,
to defend the Kingdom of England; and thereupon prevailed upon them to stand to
their Arms. The Trumpeter was sent back with this Answer from Monsieur
Boiseleau the Governor, That as King James had entrusted him with that
Garrison, he would recommend himself to the Prince of Orange by a vigorous
Defense. About Eight at Night the King went to his Camp a little Mile from the
Town, having been on Horseback from Four in the Morning, giving the necessary
Orders, and exposing himself amidst the greatest of dangers, wherein His Royal
Highness the Prince of Denmark did every where accompany His Majesty. The
Cannon ceased not all the while to Play from the Town, several of the Shot
coming over His Majesty's Tent, and some falling near it. The same Evening a
Party of the Royal Regiment, and other Dragoons, was sent to view the Ford at
Annaghbeg, a place about Two Miles above the Town, where Six of the Enemies
Regiments of Foot, Three of Horse, and Two of Dragoons (Commanded by Berwick
and Lutterel) were Posted on the other side of the River, with a Breast-work to
cover them; who all Fired upon our Men, but being such extraordinary Marksmen,
they neither Killed nor Wounded any of them.

The Enemy being thus posted so very advantagiously, that we expected to have
met with great difficulties and opposition in passing the River, which is very
Rapid, and the bottom Stony; but the Enemy in the middle of the Night abandoned
their Station with great precipitation, so that Lieutenant General Ginkle, and
Major General Kirk, who were Commanded by the King with a Detachment to force
their way over, passed the River the next Morning early, being the 10th, with
about Five Thousand Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, selected out of the several
Regiments, the Horse and Dragoons first, and the Foot afterward, who went
almost to the middle in Water, and yet the River is shallower now than has been
known for many Years. About Eight a Clock the King went over in Person,
accompanied with His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark, and the Here
Bentink, Earl of Portland, and Monsieur Overkirk, etc. and Three Regiments of
Foot, with some Pieces of Cannon, were posted there. About Four in the
Afternoon, His Majesty, upon the Information he had received by some Deserters,
That the Lord Tyrconnel was with a small Camp about Six Miles from Lymerick in
the Road to Galway, sent out a Party of Horse, under the Command of a
Lieutenant Colonel, to get a farther account of them, but they were retired
from thence before our Men came up: We had likewise an account this Night
brought to our Camp, by a Deserter, That the Count De Lausun lay with his Men
near the City of Galway, the People there refusing to receive them into the
Town.

The 11. was spent in visiting the several Posts, and giving the necessary
Orders about the Siege.

The 12. His Majesty Commanded Brigadeer Stewart, with a Detatchment, and Four
Pieces of Cannon, to go early this Morning and Attack Castle Connel, which is
of considerable Strength, situated on the Shannon, about Four Miles from
Lymerick. There were in it above 140 Men, Commanded by Captain Barnwel, who had
refused to Surrender upon the Summons sent him the Night before, but no sooner
saw the Cannon, but submitted at Discretion.

The same day Advice came into our Camp, That General Sarsfield, having with 5
or 600 Horse and Dragoons passed the Shannon, Nine Miles above Lymerick, had
about Two that Morning, surprised near a place called Cullen, Eight Pieces of
our Cannon, of 18 Pound Ball, which were coming with some Wagons laden with
Powder and Ball from Kilkenny, under the Guard of a Squadron of Horse and a
small Party of Foot. The Enemy Killed all they met, Men, Women, and Children,
in all about sixty, the rest escaping; the Women and Children that belonged to
the Wagoners and Gunners they Murdered most Barbarously in their Beds; they
Blew up the Powder, which burst Two of the Guns, the other Six, with the
Pantons being left entire, and fit for Service, and they likewise Burnt some of
the Carriages: Their have and disorder was so great, that they could carry
nothing away with them, but left behind them several things untoucht, as also
the Carriage Horses, which were loose at Grass. Sir Albert Cunningham, with
part of his Regiment of Inniskilling Dragoons, that lay not far from thence,
being timely Alarmed by a Deserter marched immediately toward the Enemy,
charged them, killed about Twenty, with a Major and a Captain, and pursued them
as far as was safe. Sir John Lanier, who upon the news of Sarsfield's March,
was, by the Kings Order, sent from the Camp with a Detatchment of Horse, came
within Three Miles of them, and being informed of what had happened, struck off
to Kilcullen Bridge to cut off their Retreat, but the Enemy retired by the way
of Athlone. This accident hindered us five or six days, which we spent in
preparing our Batteries, and put all things in a good posture for a vigorous
Attack of the Town.

On the 14. An Express came to our Camp from Youghal, giving an account, that
the Garrison there consisting of 50 Foot, and 36 Dragoons, hearing what
mischief the Raparies did in the Country, and that there was a great number of
them at Castle-Martyr; the Officers that Commanded drew out both the Horse and
Foot, and Marched to Attack them, but the Foot not being able to March so fast
as the Dragoons, the latter met near Castle-Martyr, 300 Raparies Horse and
Foot, and immediately Routed them, killing 60. and taking 17. Prisoners, and
the Foot being come up, they Summoned the Castle, which Surrendered upon Liberty
to go to Cork, but without their Horses and Arms, which being done, the
Soldiers took the Horses, and the Arms were given to the Protestant
Inhabitants, and so they returned to Youghal. While this was doing, Captain
Price, and Captain Whetstone, Commanders of the Bristol Men of War, who were
then at Youghal, being informed, That there were Two Ships in Cork Harbor,
Laden with Hides and Tallow for France, they Sailed to the Harbors Mouth, and
sending in their Boats, brought away the Two Ships, and carried them to
Waterford.

August 16. This Morning was Published in the Camp the following Proclamation.

A Proclamation by the King and Queens most excellent Majestie^.
William Rex,

WHereas We are informed, That diverse Persons, either through Disaffection to
the Clergy of the Church of Ireland, as by Law Established, or from a Design to
take advantage of the present Disturbances in this Kingdom, do delay or refuse
to pay their Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Duties to the aforesaid Clergy,
as by Law they ought to do. We having a gracious Regard to the distressed
condition of the Church and Clergy, and being steadfast in Our Resolution, to
preserve the benefit of the Law to all Our Subjects in the due Execution
thereof; do hereby strictly Command and Require all Our Loving Subjects, of
what Rank or Condition soever, That they yield, set forth, and pay unto the
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, and all others that have Ecclesiastical Dignities or Cure of Souls,
the Tithes and other Ecclesiastical Duties, that are or shall become due or
payable to them respectively, according to the Laws and Customs of this Our
Realm of Ireland.

Given at Our Royal Camp before Lymerick, this Fifteenth day of August, 1690.
In the Second Year of Our Reign.
On the 17th, The whole day was spent in making the necessary Preparations, and
getting all things ready for the opening of the Trenches, which in the Evening
was put in Execution, the Trenches were opened with Seven Battallions,
consisting of English, French, and Danish Infantry, Commanded by the Prince of
Wirtemberg, Lieutenant General, Major General Kirk, Major General Petteau, and
Sir Henry Bellassis Brigadeer. We advanced this Night about 300 paces, and took
Two Redoubts from the Enemy, from whence they might have disturbed our Workmen.
The 18th, about 10 at Night, the Trenches were Relieved by Lieutenant General
Douglas, my Lord Sidney, and Count Nassau, Major Generals, and Brigadeer
Stewart, with Seven Battallions of Foot, and this Night we made our regular
approaches toward another strong Redoubt of the Enemies, notwithstanding the
Night was exceeding dark, that had it not been prevented by the extraordinary
care and diligence of the Officers, our Men had certainly fallen foul on one
another, through mistake.

The 19. The Trenches were Relieved by the Prince of Wirtemburg, Lieutenant
General, Major General Kirk and Petteau, and Sir Henry Bellassis Brigadeer, and
we continued our Approaches toward the said Redoubt; which the King gave Order
should be Attacked the next day.

The 20. The Trenches were Relieved by Lieutenant General Douglas, my Lord
Sidny, and Count Nassau Major Generals, and Brigadeer Stewart; the Signal was
given by Three Guns, about Two in the Afternoon, when our Men that were
Detached for this Service, to the number of about 150 (choice Select Men)
besides Officers, immediately fell on, and with extraordinary Courage entered
the Fort, and drove out the Enemy, killing about 40 of them. After we had been
about half an hour in possession of the Fort, the Enemy made a great Sally,
Horse and Foot, in all about Two Thousand; but they were so warmly received by
our Men, that after a short Dispute they were beaten back; our Horse pursuing
them to the very Walls of the Town.

The 21. We carried on our Trenches, and finished them to that degree, so as to
hinder any more Sallies.

The 22. We raised a Battery of Eight Guns, and Twenty four pound Ball, and two
of Eighteen, against the Enemies high Towers, from whence they Fired upon our
Men, and we have quite levelled them. The Night following we threw great
numbers of Bombs and Carcasses into the Town, and Burnt many of the Houses.

The 23. This Morning one of Gilmey's Troopers came over to us, and brought
with him a Boy, and Four very good Horses. About Noon Two Captains, a
Lieutenant, a Priest, and Seventy common Soldiers of the Enemy were brought in
Prisoners from Nighua, a considerable Castle Two Miles from our Camp, where
General Gnikle Marched with Two Thousand Horse, Six Hundred Dragoons, a Regiment
of Foot, and Two Guns, the Castle endured a Siege of Twenty Four hours, and
then Surrendered on Discretion. This Afternoon Two Frenchmen came over to us,
and brought with them Two as good Horses as any in our Army, they gave us an
account that the Rogues in the City are in a miserable condition for want of
Bread and Drink, but that Meat is plenty among them. This Night about Seven in
the Evening, we Played furiously into the Town, with our Bombs, Red hot Balls,
and other Fire-Engines, which Fired the Town in several Places, one fell into
their great Magazine of Hay, which was consumed, and several Houses Burnt, the
Fire lasting there about Six hours, another set Fire to a place near the
Church, which was not consumed till Five the next Morning, and as that was
quenched, we Fired another place, which was Blown up by the Enemy.

The 24. This Morning our Guns Fired very briskly at the Walls, but being too
far off did little Execution, so that Two new Batteries were this day made
within Eighty Paces of the Wall, and our Trenches were carried on by the
indefatigable labor of our Men, within Pistol-shot of the Counterscarp, and
our Guns were carried this Night down to the said Batteries, first against the
Wall, of Eight half Cannon, the other of Two Eighteen Pounders against the
King's-Island. This Night a Deserter came over to us, who says, our Fire
Utensils, and great Shot have done them much damage, destroying at least Thirty
People.

The 25. This Morning about break of day, we began to Fire from our new
Batteries against the Wall, but it Rained so hard till Three in the Afternoon,
that our Men could not work the Guns, however on any intermission of the Rain,
our Guns Played violently against the Walls, and from Three we fired at least
300 Shot with good Success against the Wall; had not this day proved so wet, we
had Stormed the Counterscarp, however we advanced our Trenches within 30 yards
of the Ditch. A Deserter that came out of the Town informed us, That the day we
took the Redoubt, the Enemy lost above 300 Men.

The 26. We widened the Breach we had made the day before in the Wall of the
Town, and beat down part of the Enemies Pallisado's on the Counterscarp. This
Night we set Fire to the Town again, which Burnt very vehemently. A Deserter
gives us an account, That Colonel Darington, Colonel Gar. More, Sir Maurice
Huestas, and Colonel Lutterel were Killed in the Sally.

The 27. The King ordered an Attack to be made on the Counterscarp, which was
begun about Three in the Afternoon; a Detached Party of Granadeers made the
onset, and was seconded by other Detachments, who went on with that Heat and
Courage, that having gained the Counterscarp, and a Fort which the Enemy had
under the Walls, instead of lodging themselves there, as they were ordered to
do, and not to advance any further, they mounted the Counterscarp, following
the Irish that fled that way, and some were entering into the Town; but the
Enemy being Entrenched behind the Breach, and having Planted Cannon against it,
they were cut off. The Fight lasted Three hours, during which the Enemy were
still supplied with fresh Men, and they sprang a Mine in the Ditch, but with
little Effect; but in conclusion, our Men having lost the opportunity of
Lodging themselves, it was thought fit to retire to our Trenches. What Men we
have lost in these several Actions we cannot precisely say, but by the best
Computation and nicest Scrutiny of the most Intelligent Observers, it is thought
we may have lost about 700. Killed and Wounded since the beginning of the Siege.

The 28. At Night we advanced our Trenches about 20 Yards, notwithstanding it
had Rained most part of the Day; it continued to Rain all this Night, and all
the next day to the 30th, almost without Intermission: On which a Council of
War being Called, where, as is said, the following Reasons (among others) being
urged, His Majesty thought fit to give Order for the raising the Siege.

First, That the Rain that had fallen, and in all probability was likely to
fall, would in a little time so moisten the Ground about Lymerick, that it
would be impossible to draw off the Cannon and heavy Baggage.

Secondly, That the River Shannon began so to swell, that if they did not
suddenly Pass the same, the Communication with the other part of the Army would
be cut off.

Thirdly, The Watery Season would undoubtedly bring the Country Distemper on our
Army, and so more dye of it than by the hand of the Enemy; in the same manner
they did the last Campaign at Dundalk.

Fourthly, That the Garrison of Lymerick being very numerous, if they abide any
Assault (which on the account of the Weather must be made with great
disadvantage) we should lose a great many Men.

The 30. In the Afternoon the Cannon and heavy Baggage were sent from the Camp.

On the 31. Five Thousand Horse being ordered for a Rear-Guard to Repress any
Sallies, the whole Army Decamped, and marched off in very good Order, and
without any disturbance from the Enemy, toward Clonmel; from whence a strong
Detachment, under the Command of Lieutenant General Douglas, and Major General
Kirk, was ordered toward Cork and Kin-sale. His Majesty having given the
necessary Orders, disposed the Army, and named the Lord Viscount Sidney, and
Thomas Coningsby, Esquire, to be Lords Justices of Ireland, went, accompanied
with the Prince of Denmark, to Duncannon-Fort.

And on the 5th, in the Afternoon (the Wind proving fair) they Embarked, and
Sailed out of the Bay of Waterford, accompanied with Three Yatches, Two Men of
War, and several small Tenders.

On the 6th, About Five in the Evening, His Majesty Arrived safely in
Kings-Road: His Majesty being come a Shore, lay that Night at Kings-Weston not
far from Bristol.

On the 7th, being Sunday, in the Morning, His Majesty went to Bath, and lay
the Night following at the Duke of Beaufort's at Badminton.

Monday 7th, His Majesty lay at the Duke of Somerset's at Marlborough.

Tuesday 8th, His Majesty lay at the Castle of Windsor.

Wednesday 9th, About Four in the Afternoon His Majesty came to Kinsinton,
attended by the great Officers of the Court, and other Persons of the chiefest
Quality, who went to meet him.

His Majesty was received in all the places he passed through with most zealous
Demonstrations of Duty and Affection, and Joy for His Safe and Happy Return.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT IS equally hard to determine, whether His Majesty, in the Action of the
Boyne, or in His Decamping before Lymerick, has showed most of a General: In
the one he gave inimitable proofs of His Courage and Bravery, and to it alone
we owed the Victory: But in Rising before Lymerick, when Three of the Four
Elements conspired to the utter undoing of His Army if He had staid, He has
given yet a Nobler Proof of a consummated Prudence, Wariness and Conduct,
seldom or never to be found in Company with so boundless a Courage. In this He
has imitated Zenophous Cyrus, who valued himself more upon the Title of, the
Father of his Soldiers, than all the great Names his Persian Admirers bestowed
upon him; and who was heard often to say, He had rather Save one of his own,
than Cut off a Thousand of his Enemies. One of the greatest Men of the last
Age, in his Dying Advice to his Son, who was to Succeed him in the Kingdom of
Spain, tells him, It Is one of the truest Politics of a King, or a General, to
know the Critic Moment wherein it is fit to abandon the Enterprise; for want of
which foresight on the one hand (adds Philip II.) the greatest Misfortunes
have befallen them; as on the other hand, the exact observance of it has
produced, in the end, the greatest and happiest advantages. Thereafter he gives
his Son several incident Circumstances, that ought to determine a King or a
General when it is time to leave off the present Execution of a Design, whereof
this is one; When Nature, and Things not in our Power do concur, to render the
Attempt either impossible of it self, or not able to counter-balance the
Expense, though it should succeed. One would almost think that in these Words,
Philip, by I know not what Instinct, should have meant this Advice to the great
Grandchild of his inveterate Enemy William of Orange, rather than to Philip
the III. for it meets in every Act with His Majesty's Case before Lymerick: It
was the swelling of the Shannon, the falling down of the Buckets of Heaven, the
nature of the Soil, and the approaching Season of the Year, all of them things
not lying within our Power, that rendered the Enterprise upon Lymerick, either
impossible, or if at all Successful, not capable to Counterbalance the certain
inconveniences and Losses that must have attended it.

It Is certain, That in all the Actions of War, there is none wherein a General,
has occasion to show more of his Wisdom, than in Besieging of Towns; and to
determine, whether to continue or raise a Siege, many times is the truest
Touchstone of his Skill, both in War and Politics. How many dismal Examples
could there be instanced from the Greek and Roman Historians, of continuing a
Siege too long, in spite of just reason to the contrary: A famous instance of
which we have in the preceding Age, which occasioned the loss of a Battle to
the French Army, of the Duchy of Millan to the French Crown, and of his
Liberty to a French King. Francis I. having forced his Passage into Italy, in
order to recover his pretended Right to the Duchy of Millan; he came at first
to lay Siege to the Strong Castle of Pavie, with a very brave and numerous
Army: At first the Enterprise seemed very favorable; but a little after,
partly by the swelling of the River, partly by the continual Rains, and partly
from the Season of the Year, the French Army began to diminish daily, and then
the hopes of Taking the Town every day grew less. Notwithstanding all these
Circumstances, which ought in reason to have determined Francis I. to raise the
Siege of Pavie (as the very like has wisely determined His Majesty to raise
that of Lymerick;) That Prince would not be prevailed with, by all the
Insinuations of his best Officers, to give it over for that Juncture: In short,
he lay before the Town till he was forced to a Battle, the most Fatal the
French have Fought near these Three Ages; in which he was taken Prisoner, and
had the Mortification to be carried to Madrid in that Quality.

FINIS.

