Liberty of Conscience Asserted against Imposition: Proposed in Several Sober
QUERIES to those of the People called QUAKERS; who have Assumed such an
Authority, contrary to their Former Testimonies: As also unto those that have
Submitted unto it, before they found Convictions in themselves; for them to
weigh and consider in the Balance of True Judgment.
WHether Imposed and Enforced Uniformity and Unity in outward Ceremonies or
Gestures, is not a great Enemy to the True Churches Peace, a Hinderance to the
Prosperity of Truth, and a limiting the Spirit of the Lord?

Whether Uniformity and Unity in outward Gestures, etc. is not Imposed, when
required as a thing necessary, and they that dissent, to be reputed Erroneous,
Heretical, etc. and to be likewise excommunicated for being out of the comely
order? And is there any example either from Christ or his Apostles for such
procedures? But did not they rather judge those that laid a necessity upon such
things?

Whether this kind of Uniformity etc. has not made many through fear,
interest, and necessity, to conform; and will it not retain and let in those,
that should be cast and kept out; to wit, the complying Hypocrite, who is
destitute of the Spirit; and cast and keep out those that should be kept, and
let in; even those that wait in the manifestation of the Spirit?

Whether the keeping off the Hat in time of Prayer, is not an outward Ceremony,
Gesture, or bodily Exercise? and whether to deny me and others the benefit of
Marriage and Burial, having a propriety therein; only for the omittance of
this; and to lay such an Injunction upon so small a matter, that draws after
it so deep a Censure, as to be excommunicated; does it not savor more of
Cruelty in you, than in us, Disobedience or Contempt, either to God or you?

Whether the giving way unto such Imposers, is not an Inlet unto an Arbitrary
Government; and when once they have gained so much reputation, as to be
esteemed Religious and Zealous Reformers, Ancient Friends, and Elders in God;
and that it is our Duty to submit unto such: whether they may not in a short
space, under these Pretenses, establish an Arbitrary Judicature?

Whether it has not been experienced, how difficult it is to root out such,
when once they have reduced a People to this Belief, and they in the exercise
of this Authority; because the honor of being invested insuch a Capacity, does
oblige men to secure themselves in this Superior Orb, and stirs up men of
Parts, and Ambition, to support such an Hierarchy, in expectation that it will
at last fall unto themselves?

Whether some Persons that are accounted Famous and Renowned in the
Congregation at London, have not reduced the People in some degree, under this
Yoke of Bondage; because they give that Meeting this Appellation, The Body (a
high Title) and make it to be the Trial of Motions, and Unity etc. when a few
Principals shall sway the Meeting as they please, unless themselves divide: Now
those Members that exalt themselves above their Fellows and equal Members, what
do they else but usurp the place of the Head, and so break in sunder the Unity
of the Body, which stands in the Unity of the Head; and set up another Head
besides Christ? Did not Rome obtain their unlimited Power by such kind of
Appellations, Principles and Pretenses? If so, let a Mark be set upon all those
that seek the Prebeminence.

Whether some of you have not been filled with Prayer and Praises to the Lord,
in silent Meetings, without either Words or Gestures, to demonstrate the inward
Reverence, and yet approached to the Throne of Grace, in the deep Humility of
your Souls, and with unvailed Spirits? Have not some of you walked by the way
and prayed, been at your Labors and prayed, together and asunder, without
pulling off your Hats; and has it not been as a street-smelling Savor unto
the Lord? Have not many of you given Thanks for his Goodness and Mercy before
Meat in silence, without its use, in a living sense of his Power? Have not some
kneeled, sat, and stood in Public Assemblies, and yet prayed in sincerity,
and the Unity kept? But if you go to impose any of these Postures upon your
Fellow Members, whether the Effects will not then be Division?

Whether it is not as lawful to keep the Hat on in Prayer, as well as in
Praises to the Lord? And whether a Cap is not as real a Covering to the Head,
as a Hat? If so, why is the one condemned, and the other practiced? Why is the
Cap in the Comely Order, and the Hat out of it? Whether the Head mentioned in
the 11th Cor. may not be covered with the Hat off, and uncovered with the Hat
on?

Whether If it be a true Argument, that we are out of the Spirit in which the
Apolstes were, because we forbear the use of the Hat in Prayer, contrary to
that Saying, He that prays or prophesies with his Head Covered, etc. Then
why not also in Prophesying? Besides, Whether others may not more justly judge
the same of you; you being out of many of their Practices and Commands? The
Apostle says in the same Chapter, I permit not a Woman to speak in the Church;
and yet what is more frequent? So that when you can pretend that the Scriptures
prove your Practices, then they shall be your Rule and Touchstone, etc. but
when you are out of their Practices and Commands, then the Spirit, and not the
Scriptures is your Rule.

Whether if pulling off the Hat in time of Prayer, were to pay Honor or
Reverence to the Holy God, who so vile that conld nor do it? This is to make
Religion to consist in some External Appearances (as William Penn says
Superstitious men do) and in invented Gestures, and in a Shadow void of the
Thing it self, which it must necessarily do, in case the Ceremony of the Hat
(says he) be an Honor, or Reverence: but True Reverence, etc. is an Holy
Reverence to what is Holy, demonstrated by some Substantial Good.

Whether, First, Those that have no Impulse unto Prayer; Secondly, Those whose
Hearts are far from the Lord; And Thirdly, Those that do believe that Service
is not required, ought to pull off their Hats when Prayer is performed in your
Assemblies, either in the Spirit of Life, or out of the Spirit of Life? And
also, Whether those that have a true Sense of the latter, ought to be
uncovered? If yea, to all the said Particulars; is not this a Worship in Form,
rather than in Power? in Show and Imitation, rather than in Spirit; and
inconsistent with a Spiritual Worship; and contrary to the Unity in Spirit, and
Principles of Truth (which is to wait, to feel the Openings and Leadings of the
Spirit of Life in the Particular unto every Religious Performance) but a
setting up of the Outward Court again? Does not this make many Hypocrites?

Whether are we to mix our own Works in the Worship and Service of the Lord,
with the Requirings of his Spirit? Whether the use of the Hat is not so, to
those that believe it is not required? Whether we are not rather to cease from
our own Labors, from a Voluntary Humility, (which has a seeming show of
Reverence) lest we set up Posts by his Posts? for whatsoever is not of Faith,
is Sin.

Whether it is not possible for some to forbear its use in Prayer, for
Conscience sake, as to the Lord? lest be should say, Who has required this at
your hands? and not through an obstinate, wilful, and opposite Spirit? What
will you have these to do in such a Case? Ought they, for this cause, to be
excluded your Communion? If yea, whether you may not pull up the Wheat with the
Tares, and to eject, before God does; and then, where is your Liberty to Tender
Consciences?

Whether, if there be a Difference among you in things Ceremonial, or in Bodily
Gestures, when the Truth is owned, loved, and received as it is in Jesus, you
ought not to wait with patience till God shall teach him; because without this
Teaching he can never know it aright? And therefore will it not manifest a
Spirit of Love and Tenderness, not to condemn one another for the Use or
Forbearance thereof, any more than those that did, and did not keep days; did,
and did not eat Meats? And, whether the Apostle did not foresee, that judgings
in such things, would tend to Separation and Division?

Whether, if we are to walk by the same Rule whereunto we have already
attained, then is there a Necessity of a Oneness in Practice; forasmuch as
there are different Measures, Growths and Motions?

Whether the Differences in Outward Exercises or Gestures, will not abundantly
commend the Unity of the True Faith; which does not stand in Garments,
Gestures, Meats, or Drinks, but in the power of an endless life, in which God
only is truly worshipped?

Whether it is not better to be reputed Vile, Crawling, Straggling, and old
Cankered Apostates, VagabondQuakers, etc. and to be separated from your
Communion, rather than through Fear, Interest, and Necessity, to do that which
may be right, before he sees it to be so? But especially, rather, than through
Fear and Necessity, or any private Interest whatsoever, to do that which is
evil; because the Hypocrite God will judge?

Whether, To declare, there is not a further Manifestation, as many of you have
done; and also whatsoever shall be added to, or diminished from what you were
in at the Beginning; shall not the Truths we yet know not, which are to be
brought in, be reputed Errors; and the Errors which yet remain (for ought you
know) be reputed Truths?

Whether, For you to assert those Romish Positions, which have enslaved
Nations, and destroyed Thousands, is not of a more dangerous Consequence, than
can well be uttered? Namely, 1. That we are to believe as the Church believes.
2. That the Church cannot Err. 3. That She has Power to Bind and to Loose. 4.
That it is abominable Pride not to submit unto Her Judgment, She having always
the Infallible Spirit: With many such like Expressions. And if you limit the
Power and the Church to Persons, why may not you Apostatize, as well as Rome,
and yet still claim the same Infallibility, and Dominion over their Faith?
Which is contrary to the Apostles Saying, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

Friends,
THat which was declared of, and testified unto in the beginning, was to direct
our minds unto the Heavenly Gift (not to the Church) but to the manifestation
of the Spirit in the particular; waiting there to feel its Motions, and to hear
its Voice; which would infallibly teach us our Duty toward God, our Neighbor,
and our selves; and not to go forth into Reasonings to promote comely Orders,
after the manner of men; nor to be found in the exercise of any thing in his
pure Worship, but what the Lord (and not the Body) required: else to stand
still in the silence to all Flesh, attending the Motions of the Heavenly
Drawings; and then to answer its Requirings. Were we not then exhorted to be
like the Noble Bereans, to examine and to try the Verity of your Doctrine by
the measure of his Spirit in us; and whatsoever led from that Pure Gift, drew
into the Apostasy: yea, if an Angel from Heaven brought another Gospel, let him
be (said you) accursed. Christ within us, was then to be Head, but now the Body
without us. The Church was then to be in subjection to her Head, and every
Member to be governed and exercised according to the Order of the Head: But now
the Body, the Church, claims an Authority over their Fellow Members, as
peculiarly having the infallible Spirit; the certain un-erring Judgment,
residing with them upon all occasions, to know Truth from Error, and the Right,
from the Wrong Spirit. Will you limit the Lord? cannot he reveal that to a
particular, yea such things as the Church would be startled at, yea, and be
ready to question the Verity thereof; because She likewise has not the
Manifestation of it; when, alas! it is hid from Her, as well as from a
particular Member, unless the same Spirit reveals it? It Is undeniable
therefore, that the infallible Spirit, and the Word of Wisdom depends not upon
the Church, the Body; but upon Christ, the Head of the Body; who administers of
his Spirit in Diversities of Operations; to few, or to many, as he pleases;
without respect to Persons or Bodies. And it has pleased the Lord, that there
may be no Glorying, no Imposing, no Usurping over the Faith of any, to reveal
himself unto the Lowly Ones, that are Little in their own Eyes, and in the Eyes
of others, to inform the Church, and Elders thereof; to wit, John to the Seven
Churches, Isaiah and Jeremiah to the Jews; Elihu to Job and his Friends; Joseph
unto his Parents and Brethren; Moses that was bred in Pharaob's Court, to the
Church there. Who revealed unto David, that Goliath must fall by his Hands? Or
who revealed unto Daniel and John, those profound and deep Mysteries? Did the
Church? Nay: Was it not hid from her Eyes? Did not the Elders that sat in
Moses his Chair, resist the Appearance of Christ both in Flesh and Spirit? Did
the Church make known unto Peter, that the Gospel was to be preached to the
Gentiles; and that in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him? Nay, Nay. Did not Caleb and Joshua withstand
the whole Congregation of Israel? Would they not have stoned them with Stones,
for opposing the Church, in their Desires to return toward Egypt? Who was the
Schismatic here? Caleb and Joshua, or rather the whole Congregation? Of what
has been said, this is the Sum: A Church limited to persons, may impose an
Error, and cast out the most Spiritual. Moreover, Who revealed unto Paul the
Abolition of Circumcision, etc? Was not the Church at Jerusalem dissatisfied
with him in what he preached to the Gentiles? Did not Paul withstand the mighty
Pillars, that compelled the Gentiles, contrary to the Truth received? How ready
were they here to be drawn aside by that Spirit, from the measure of Truth in
themselves? This Example may be a Mark to all Imposers and Compliers? It is
therefore safe to stand still, and to be in the Forbearance of that which we
have no motion to from the Spirit of Truth; because all Faith and Worship ought
to stand upon its Convictions. And therefore you greatly err, who say the
keeping on the Hat, is a Practice introduced; unless you can prove it is done
upon a Religious Account: when as, in truth, it is only a Custom left, which we
formerly practiced. Friends! God is jealous of his Honor, and He will not give
it to another: And those that go to rob him thereof, he will not hold them
guiltless. Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first
works: And your Return must be to that Spirit against whom you have sinned; and
lay down all at the Feet of Jesus, that he alone may rule the Body, and the
Members thereof, as he pleases, for evermore.

Perhaps it will be expected that I make some Reply to a Book called Judas and
the Jews, etc. wherein I am charged by you to be one of the Cabal with the
Author of Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected: And therefore you have not been
wanting to bestow on me the vilest of Names; yea such Names as may deprive me
of my Reputation, as Apostate, Runagade, Vagabond Quaker, Ranting Spirit,
Crawling Apostate, with many more, which may be seen in your Book. The Lord lay
not this unto your charge. And having tasted in a measure of his Mercy and
Forgiveness, I can say in the sense of his Love, Father, forgive them.

Unto the other part I have a few words for the vindicating of my Innocence,
and condemning your Rashness. First, As touching the person that is said to be
the Author of that Book; I declare to you and all the World, that I have not
the least Acquaintance with him; and I have been so far from employing him in
the writing thereof, that I have not so much as seen him, that I know of, for
many years past. And I have been informed not long since, that the greatest
part, if not all, was written before I knew of it. And when I did hear that a
Book was intended against Alexander the Coppersmith, I acquainted several
therewith; with this Advice, to enquire out the person or persons, and give
them a meeting to compose the difference, to prevent its publication, but could
not tell them who was the Author. Nor do I yet know, but by report. And whereas
my name is mentioned abusively in your Book touching John Whitehead and Thomas
Murford, I have this in Answer; That if I cannot make good what the Author of
Tyranny, etc. detected, does charge in page 50, and 52, so far as it concerns
me, before persons equally chosen; I shall be content to bear the blame. And
whereas it is denied, that I accused George Fox to be a Respecter of persons in
Judgment; if Gawen Lawrey, Sam. Newton, John Bolton, and John Osgood, will deny
that I did accuse him, as above; let them declare it: for they, and many more
were at that Meeting. But I positively affirm, I did so accuse him, and am
ready to make good my Charge; and if they deny, or do not remember it, I can
prove it by others there present. To conclude, If you had not either covered or
justified the persons accused, when guilty; and condemned the Accusers, when
innocent; I believe these things had never been made public; and so you reap
the Fruits of your own Doings. And until you take shame unto your selves, and
lie low before the Lord for these Abominations, and let Judgment pass upon the
Transgressor, and spare no Person whatsoever, for Favor or Affection; I say,
until these things are accomplshed, assuredly Sin will lie at your Doors. I
shall leave the Issue of what I have written unto the Lord. And having thus
discharged my Conscience toward you in Faithfulness, I shall end with that
excellent Saying of Christ's, As you would that all men should do unto you,
even so do you unto them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. From one who
greatly desires to see Moderation, Love and Charity, to be mutually extended
unto all those whose Hearts are upright, and Consciences tender toward the
Lord, though in several Forms.

William Mucklowe

London, Printed in the Year 1673/4.


