THE SPIRIT of the HAT: OR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE QUAKERS Among Themselves, As
it has been Exercised of late years by George Fox, and other Leading-Men, in
their Monday, or Seconddays Meeting at Devonshire-House, brought to Light.

In a Bemoaning Letter of a certain Ingenious Quaker to another, his Friend;
Wh^rein their Tyrannical and Persecuting Practices are Detected and Redargued.

Also Preface to the Reader, giving an account how ^he said Letter came to the
hand of the Publisher.

By G. I.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick (...) 1700. (Price Stitcht 6 d.)

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
READER,
THou art here presented with the Copy of a Letter, wherein thou will find
(upon reading) a Discovery made of the Transactions of the Governing Quakers,
both in some of their Persons singly, and in their Body, or Convention,
jointly: For thou should know, that the Quakers have for some years formed
themselves into a kind of Politic-Ecclesiastical Body, and have held their
Meetings for matters of Government, every Monday, or Second day of the Week, at
Devonshire House: There they take Cognizance of those things that concern them
as Quakers, that is, A party of Folk that desire to appear different from all
others in Religion, Government, Speech, Apparel, Civil Converse, and what not.

Of some of their Transactions in these Meetings, thou may perhaps have read
in a Book entitled, The Quakers Spiritual Court, writ by one Smith, who had
been a Quaker, but was gone from them. This piece which is now put into thy
hands, appears also to be writ by a Quaker, and one that is so still (at the
writing of this) in Principle and Practice; but offended at the governing Body,
by reason of their Defection, as he conceives, from their former Principles in
their present Practices, as in the Letter it self will more fully appear;
wherein he does not only declare Matter of Fact, but compares it with the
Quakers Principles, and the Practices of the Apostatized Romanists, and others,
whom they condemn.

The Quakers are wont to glory in their Profession, as standing not in Word,
but in Power: Whereby they seem to mean the excellent Conversation of their
People above all others: But if particular Persons among them transgress so
manifestly, that it cannot be excused; then they defend themselves, as others
do, by saying, That it is no fault of their Principles, but the Person, that
did not walk according to his Principles; But if it do appear, as here it does,
that not only as particular Persons, but as a Body, they are guilty of the like
Tyranny, Oppression, Persecution, etc. as other faulty Bodies or Corporations,
I hope we shall not suffer our selves to be imposed upon by their nauseous
Self-commendations, to believe that they transcend all others, or that their
Principles are better than those of other Christians whom they condemn, at
least it will not appear from their Practices that they are so.

I must needs say, I see no reason at all, why the Writings of particular
Persons, that are of the greatest Eminency among them, who write in their
Names, and are generally, if not universally, approved by them, as written by
their true Spirit, should not be imputed to the Quakers, as Quakers; But that
what they do as a Body and Society should reflect upon them as such, I cannot
see with what face they can deny.

I do indeed easily foresee, they will endeavor to invalidate the Evidence
that is here given against them, from the want of the Author's Name: To which
Exception I have this to say to the Judicious Reader;

1. That in truth, I do not know his Name, for that Copy it pleased God to
bring to my hand, had no Name subscribed, nor was it addressed to any; and the
Person from whom I had it, either cannot, or will not (being perhaps engaged to
the contrary) tell me the Author's Name.

But (2) I suppose the Considerate Reader may find sufficient reason, from the
intrinsic nature of this Relation, and from the Circumstances wherewith it is
accompanied, to exact of him Credence of the Matters of Fact contained in it;
if not, he is at his liberty to judge as he shall see cause.

(3.) I desire the Reader to consider what weight is to be put upon, or what
credit to be given to the Name of an obscure Author, when even Mr. Pen, the Son
of Sir William Pen Deceased, has (for Instance) failed so Egregiously in his
Book entitled, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, etc. in answer of The Spirit of
the Quakers tried, that in relation thereto, and after a diligent comparing of
these two pieces, Mr. John Faldo in his Book entitled, Quakerism no
Christianity, has given this Judgment; But for Pen 's sake I shall believe it
more than possible, that a Man of the highest Pretenses, having some more than
ordinary means to deal rightly and ingeniously, may yet so far deceive my
Expectations, as to give the highest Contradictions to them all. Part. 3. Sect.
1.

And how ordinary a thing is it, in these times, for one Controvertist to
charge the other with notorious Falsities in Matters of Fact; what credit then
to be given to Men's Names, except other things concur to give testimony to
their Narratives?

4. I am not conscious to my self of any the least injury I have done to the
Copy, or undue practice in presenting it, God knows, I believe the publishing
it may be useful to the Public.

There was one line in the Copy which could not be so read as to be made Sense
of, and therefore 'twas left out. I shall say no more, but assure the Reader,
the Author seems to me to be faithful and ingenious, however let him judge of
him and his work as he sees cause.

Farewell. G. J.

THE The Spirit of the Hat: OR, The Government of the QUAKERS among themselves,
etc.
Dear Friend,
WHat is made known and manifested in me, concerning the great Apostasy in this
day, and what I have seen and heard, I am made willing to communicate the same,
to testify unto the truth thereof.

It pleased the Lord, about twenty Years ago, to visit this Nation with his
Loving Kindness, in sending forth a Spiritual-Ministry, in the midst of Wars
and Fightings, to turn us from Darkness to Light, and to bring us out of the
Strife into the Patience of Jesus, into his Love and Meekness, to do good for
evil.

This Seed being fown, prospered in the Hearts of many, and brought forth
Victory through Judgment, and the Spirit of Burning: And the Lord was
wonderfully with them in this Dispensation, that very many came off from the
barren Mountains, and out of the sandy Deserts, and were here refreshed,
without Money, without Price, and the Bread was broken freely to the Hungry,
and Water given freely to the Thirsty: And not only so, but likewise our
Vessels were filled with the same, whereby our Hearts were made glad, and
caused the Springs of Life to break forth out of our Bellies, and the Bread of
Life to dwell within us, that we needed not to go forth out of our own Houses,
having an Holy Anointing within us to supply the wants of our Souls, and lead
us into all Truth.

And the Lord did daily add unto the Church, and raised up many to go forth in
the Power to Preach the Everlasting Gospel, whereby the Church multiplied and
increased to the astonishment of the Nations.

How low and humble were they in their Spirits! how few were they in Words!
Their yea was yea, and their nay, nay!

Ah! let me take up a Lamentation! How are the Mighty fallen! How have the
Stars ceased to give their Light! How are the Poor distressed, and the Young
Ones bruised, by the High Mountains and Lofty Cedars, whose Habitations were
once in Heaven, but now upon the High Places of the Earth, to impose upon the
Conscience, and to Establish an Arbitrary Power by a Law; these are the armed
Beasts, and the many Antichrists, which break the Unity in Spirit, and the Bond
of Peace. This brings in Divisions, causes Differences, contentions and
Emulations: It roots up the good, and eats as does a Canker, whereby the Unity
is divided, and the Peace broken. But the Unity that the Lord approves of, is
for every one to act according to his measure and growth in the Truth. All are
not strong, therefore all cannot be in the same Exercise, no more than a Child
can be found in the Exercise of a Man: So that the disuniting-Spirit does not
barely lie in being of another Mind and Judgment, but in the imposing of its
Judgment and Practice; which appears plainly by Paul, who clearly judged that
the ground of the Differences in the Church, lay very much in the judging one
another in Meats and Drinks, etc.

It Is the great Promise of the Father in these latter Days, That he will write
his Laws in our Hearts, and put his Spirit into our inward Parts, to lead us
into all Truth, and out of all appearances, which his Spirit manifests in us to
be in the Imitation, and after the Traditions of Men.

Is it then reasonable for the Spiritual Man to be found in the practice of
doing, before a Law written, but rather wait at the Feet of Jesus till God
Reveals. And he that walks according to this Rule, shall know his Doctrine, and
be led to behold his Glory, and Witness an Unity in Spirit with his Brother,
though in a different Exercise.

How does this differ from the World's and the Foxoman-Unity, which is to yield
subjection to the Order of the Body, (so called) though no manifestation
within. And this Unity they glory in; by this is their Kingdom upheld; from
this they are able to boast, Who is able to make War with us? Who can stand
before us? Do not all fall that have risen up against us? Are not these the
high swelling Words of proud Babel, whose towri g thoughts must be abased?
Whose practice has been to Crush the Tender Ones, in their Bodies, Souls, and
Spirits. This Language has mine Ears heard, this practice has mine Eyes seen,
to the grief and wounding of my Soul.

This combined Unity I have no pleasure in; its Nature is known by its Image,
its Birth by the exercise of its Power.

My Friend Observe; What difference is there in these things between George Fox
and the Papists? The one says, No Liberty out of the Church: The other, No
Liberty out of the Power, Says the Papist, What Liberty to the Sectary? No:
What Liberty to the Heretic? No. And George Fox says, What Liberty to the
Presbyter? No: What Liberty to the Independent? No: What Liberty to the
Baptist? No. Liberty (says he) is in the Truth. The difference lies only here,
The one has greater Power to compel than the other.

The Papists say, Believe as the Church Believes: So likewise says G. Fox: But
I say Nay, I am not to believe a thing barely because the Church believes it,
but because it is manifested in me, else I am to wait till God Reveals it. I was
told the abovesaid by two there present.

The Church of Rome claims a Power of Excommunication (of them) that will not
submit to their decent and comely Order, though in it self the thing be merely
Circumstantial, Ceremonial, or (as they term it) indifferent; and their reason
is, It Judges the Power, and smites at the Authority, and (say they) it is an
Inlet to Division and thereby is Unity violated.

Behold a resemblance thereof, it has been often said unto me, The Hat is
nothing, but it is out of the comely Order, it judges Friends, who are in the
Power, who testify against it, and it breaks the Unity; and therefore we
cannot suffer such to Marry or Bury, nor to partake of any Privilege as a
Member of the Body; and this is in the substance Excommunication: For
Excommunication chiefly lies in a Man's being deprived of the Benefits, and put
out of the Protection of the Law, as also from being a Member of the Church.

The Severity is the same with us, for where could I Marry or Bury, if we were
an entire Nation? Or how can I take a Wife without a Witness? Or how can I have
a Witness, if to be one is liable to the same Misery.

Selected Bodies ought to be found in the Exercise of Moderation, Tenderness,
and Mercy, as if they were a Nation. I always find, when once such put forth
their Hands to afflict for Conscience sake, as their Power grows strong, so
does their Oppression.

But perhaps they would say, We do not eject for Conscience sake, but because
of an obstinate Will, which opposes Friends.

The Papists justify themselves by saying of the same. I remember a Judge
likewise made the same reply when a Friend mentioned Conscience. Certainly it
cannot be an Evil in one, and Right in the other, no more than it is Cruelty in
the Papists Persecutions, and Just in the Protestants.

It will be a noble Example in those that stand upon the Advantage-ground to
Act in Moderation, Tenderness and Mercy. And although it is the Policy of the
World's Churches, etc. under a pretense for Unity, not to hear the tender
Conscience, yet the Church of Truth will; and where they are found, will
account them as Brethren, and not to think it a sufficient ground to refuse
them after Admonition, if they persist, but to wait till God persuades them.
And this is the Royal Law of Liberty, the other is the Yoke of Bondage, from
which we are not to be entangled after the Traditions of Men.

This great Charter of Liberty is violated, and greatly broken in many
particulars: If I have a Cause before the Elders, but especially if I am a
Dissenter, it is frequently urged, give it to Friends; if I do not, a farther
Snare is offered, namely; Do thou believe Us to be in the Power of God? If I
say, Yea; then, What will thou not leave it to the Power of God in Friends?
Thou art in confusion to believe Us to be in the Power, and yet durst not trust
to the Judgment of the Power. To my knowledge, this is a capital Crime
accounted.

What greater Usurpation can there be than this, to claim my Right from me into
their Breasts? For though the Elders may be preserved in the Power this Year or
Season, they may apostatize from the Truth, and yet claim the same Prerogative
over my Propriety; hereby a Tyranny may be entailed upon my self, by laying of
such a Foundation.

A most incomparable Instance is the Church of Rome, who was in the Power and
Glory of God; howbeit through Pride she lost it, yet gained, through Subtilty,
the Prerogative before mentioned, to give up unto her Judgment, and to believe
as she believes, to the Destruction of many thousands: So that it clearly
appears, the Spirit that claims such a Power, under pretense of being in the
Power, is the Spirit of Exaltation: and I know, that those Persons that have
been most confident in the claim, under the same pretense, have committed great
mistakes; and thereby Truth has been depressed, and Error cherished.

I suppose I may affirm that in all Ages, Truth has not been persecuted as
Truth, but as Error; I could instance, that many in the great Assemblies in
London, have not only been dissatisfied with the rest of their Brethrens
Actings, though they made use of the Name of the Lord. Both these cannot be
right, yet both claim the same Power in Judgment: Otherwhiles submit (through
fear) unto the Judgment of the more eminent, though it does not at all
correspond with their understandings. If one part of the Body be liable to
mistakes, why not the other? And if the Spirit, as they are a Body, is to be
Judge and Determiner of Things; by what Spirit shall I know which is in the
right? How needful is it therefore to be joined to our own, in the particular,
considering how liable man is to err; yea, in petty Matters. And I know, an
Oppressive Act done by a Select Body, having Power, is by very few clearly
discerned; but when done by a private Person, every weak-sighted Man can then
discover it to be an Oppressive Act: And so the evil Actions of Great Ones are
judged less Criminal, and the Persons less Faulty than in Justice they ought to
be.

The Churches of Men are still setting up themselves one above another; but the
Assemblies of the true Church are all equal, having Christ the Light equally
present with and in them: and therefore Friends of one place, cannot say they
have Power over Friends in another place, seeing all may be liable to have
Christ the Light alike, in and among them; else Christ his Spirit, in several
places, should be above, and under themselves: But Christ in each Assembly of
the Faithful is their Head; and this Head they do not leave, to set up a
fleshly Head to themselves, whether it consists of one or many of them; seeing
Antichrist does as strongly invade Christ's Headship in many, as in one Man; in
a Council, as in a Pope; in George Fox and the Body, as either.

This Spirit of Antichrist in G. Fox, etc. would wrest from me what I am not
willing to part withal, to wit, my Conscience, under no less Penalty than
Excommunication; which is as far as in them lies, the loss both of Heaven and
Earth; of Heaven by Excommunication, of Earth by Deprivation; and this without
Redemption, unless complying with his or their Will and Pleasure; and for no
other cause, than for the omittance of a very small Ceremony, which they hold
necessary to Salvation; like the Circumcision of old, who Preached, Unless they
were Circumcised, they could not be Saved. But perhaps they will say, We do not
Excommunicate thee, yet we cannot own thee in thy Error. I answer, It Is one
thing not to own a Man in a particular, and another thing so to disown him, as
wholly to exclude him from Protection: For if I am once accepted of as a
Member, and after cast off as not being a Member, I shall leave it to the Sober
what to call it. Perhaps they will say, This casting off was not for the thing,
(as indeed it has been said unto me) but for the contempt. I may rather say,
Sure the greater the cruelty, to lay an Injunction upon so small a matter, that
draws after it so deep a Censure, as to cast a man out of the Church. Suppose
a Magistrate did command a trivial matter, some Ceremony or other, under pain
of Treason, and should proc ed against the Infringers of this Command as
Traitors; it were much to be doubted, whether the Command did not partake more
of Cruelty, than the Disobedience of Contempt: For where Authority shall so far
lose it self, as to lay so great a weight upon so small a matter, it renders
it self contemptible, and then it is no marvel if it be contemned, having made
it self contemptible. What will our Lord do unto these that shall be found
beating their Fellow Servants, and driving them from their Dwellings?

Again, whosoever squares his Actions in things religious by the Spirit's
requirings, he is a bad spirit, etc. Whosoever would be governed by the great
Law, To do as he would be done unto, he is out of the Truth; He that will not
do what others would have him to do, he is wilful, stubborn, and obstinate.

If the Body says, It is to be so or not so, (though two thirds of them are
otherwise minded, yet are silent) and if it shall happen for one to oppose the
thing with much moderation, and the said two thirds shall in their spirits
unite with him, yet notwithstanding a few of the combined Elders will bring him
to the Bar, and unle s he will own Condemnation, Judgment shall pass against
him, with such an imperious Authority, that the others dare not open their
mouths, so that their arbitrary Commands they can impose upon their
Fellow Members. They proceed further, saying, He that will not submit to the
Body, opposes God and his Truth; And they make the Body the Touchstone,
saying, This is according, or not according to Truth, as the Body has Unity or
not Unity with it; and so by this practice the Spirit of the Lord is to be
tried, and judged by the Body. This has two parts, to deprive us of the Law of
the Spirit, and to bring in a tyrannical Government; it would lead us from the
Rule within, to subject us to a Rule without.

It is asserted in Print, that if I believe the Light within me directs me to a
thing, and the Body shall not have unity with it, it is safer for me to rely
upon the judgment of the Body. I remember about a dozen of the great ones
subscribed a Paper to this effect, and sent it to Hartford, but it was there
much disliked: There was this also in it, That if any person had (as he
thought) a command from God, to do a thing, or to put forth a thing in Print,
he must first come and lay it before the Body, and as they judge, he must
submit. Is not this an Arbitrary Government, bounded by no Law, but what G. F.
and a few more please? Herein the ground of our Liberties is taken from us, (to
wit) To live, act, and judge according to the Law within. In this is the
distribution of Justice, and he that is overawed by a power without, stifles
and strangles true Judgment, which arises in himself; by this is Justice and
true Judgment obstructed and violated. It Is the highest usurpation of our just
Liberties; For when such Principles are established, they are not easily laid
down, they have encroached Jurisdiction where none was, taking upon them a
Power to judge and domineer over the Innocent, over the Conscientious, over the
tender in Spirit, by new Laws which the Spirit never gave forth, nor has unity
withal, nor many of the Body, which through fear oppose not these things. They
go higher; they say, Their Judgment is God's, and their Acts are as binding as
God's, it proceeding from the Spirit of the Lord in the Body: Their Judgments
are so positive from God and for God, and their Censure so severe, which
causes a faint-heartedness in the weaker, to speak according to their measure,
lest they should displease the Body, and be brought to Judgment. It is a
dangerous evil for any Man, Men, or Council, to make him or them Lords, or
Lawgivers in the Church: Christ himself being the immediate Lawgiver, and Judge
in this the Day of his Power. Men have commonly thought, that to preserve the
Church in Peace, is to suppress Error; whereas to preserve them in Faith and
Love, with the Father, Word and Spirit, this is rather to preserve the Church.

How many persons, under pretense of healing the Body, wound it still deeper;
and under pretense of preserving its Peace, hurry it into endless Dissentions;
or reduce People to a Formal Faith! Does not the abovesaid Body practice the
same? Yea. Ah! How do they build up that which they once pulled down; and do
that themselves which they have condemned in others! Ah! That they would suffer
the Word only to be the Rule in the Kingdom, and the Light thereof alone to
shine there, and not to walk in the light of their own Fire, and in the Sparks
which they themselves have kindled, whereby they may lie down in sorrow, whilst
they neglect the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the World.

In the true Church, Unity stands in diversities; But in the false, Unity will
not stand without Uniformity. And it is greatly to be lamented, how that very
many will do nothing without the Authority of the Body, though it be never so
clear in them; and this sets up the Body above Christ.

And because a further dispensation is not relished by the Elders, the which
they hide from the Inferiors, lest their glory should be Eclipsed, and draw
the rest from a dependence upon them: They content themselves with this limited
Ministration, and set up Tabernacles here for their Residence; which is above,
and beside the Spirit of the Lord's teaching, which leads us on to know and
follow the Lord. These are they that stop Israel's travel out of all
appearances, which his Spirit leads not to; These are they that lay
stumbling blocks in the way in their Journey: These are they that will not have
the Lord's People, Prophets; that their Persons may be still had in Admiration
for advantage sake: else, what means it, that certain Persons are appointed
to spend the whole time in speaking in every Meeting, and all the rest to come
as Hearers, neglecting the Gift in themselves, only waiting upon their Lips.
When as oftentimes fresh Springs arise in particulars, to make glad and comfort
the Hearts of others: But through the long Declarations and Discouragement,
withal, the Springs are stopped, and the tender nipt. Ah! God will visit you for
these things. And certainly if this Babylonish practice had not been exercised,
his precious Truths had been published in the mouths of thousands more, and
10000 more to the knowledge thereof would have been brought; a greater growth
in the Truth witnessed, and the Mind and Will of the Lord more revealed; a
greater discovery of the Man of Sin within and without us, by the transcendent
brightness of the Everlasting Day, which will again break forth, and recover
the ground which has been lost; open the Mysteries which are yet hidden, break
the Serpent's head, and wound the Leviathan. Amen, Halelujah.

Moreover, as others before them set up the Scriptures above the Spirit, in
having that to be the Trial, Touchstone, Standard of Doctrine Worship, and of
all Spirits; so do they greatly err in setting up the Body above the Spirit, in
having the Spirit tried by the Body; the one says, The Scripture is the Rule;
but in truth, the Meanings they make the Rule: The other says, The Spirit (and
not the Scripture) is the Rule; but the Dictates of the Body they make the
Rule. For if I walk according to my Measure, and my Measure is my Rule, and it
differs from the judgment of the Body; by their Rule I am to deny my Motion,
because it answers not the Mind of the Body; for they lay down this as an
infallible Rule, That the Body will have a true sense, feeling, and
understanding of Motions, Visions, Revelations, Doctrines, etc. and therefore
safest to make Her my Touchstone in all things relating to God.

Ah! that she would return from whence she is fallen, and repent, that the
Crown may again be set upon Her head.

The same Arguments which the Pope, etc. makes use of to support himself, the
Body uses, and severe judgment is denounced against him that shall speak a
word against the Authority of the Body, as it is against him that shall speak
against the Power and Authority of Rome. And as it was and is a common practice
for the Pope to esteem Drunkards, Whoremongers, etc. far better than
Non-conformists, even so it is with the Body at Devonshire-House.

If a Nonconformist endeavors to bring to light the viciousness of the
Priests, they will have ways to prevent him, either to raise some Accusations,
or some other cunning Evasion. The Body practices the same, as I could
instance, and may, when occasion offers.

I have heard, from a credible hand, what a solemn Meeting there was appointed
by G.F. and others of the Elders, to Judge and Condemn several Men and Women of
good report; and shelter, cover, and hide the wanton practices of others: and
the more effectually to discourage persons from discovering these wanton and
unclean Ministers, to some they would say, Let it fall, bad Spirits will get
it, and reflect upon good Friends; to others, Thou art an unclean Spirit,
raking in Mire and Dirt, to lay open the Miscarriages of others; By which means
the Adulterer goes free; only perhaps private reproof passes upon him.

Consider, O Friends! Is it right to cover the Whoredoms of the wanton
Ministry, etc. and unclean Strumpets? and judge so openly the mistake of a
person, when the Actions were true, and in the same House. Is not this
apparently to discourage persons from discovering these things, and encouraging
of the other in their filthy and defiled Conversations? whom God will judge. He
that justifies the wicked, and condemns the Innocent, is an abomination to
the Lord.

Again, those that forbore the custom of their Hats in Prayer, could not
partake of their Rights as a Member, until a Renunciation thereof, and for no
other cause; when Zealots for that form (though guilty of uncleanness, and other
vile abominations, and the persons accused for the same, yet) allowed to
minister as a Teacher, and employed in the Service for the Body.

Such was the rigidness, That persons only suspected to favor the forbearers
of the Hat, must bear a public Testimony against them and their Spirit, or
else be liable to be disowned. If they were not drunk with an Arbitrary Power,
they might sure find out a medium (for the omittance of so small a Ceremony)
between an Ejection and an Approbation, between owning a person, and not giving
him a liberty to exercise his Conscience.

If this kind of Judicature had been set up in the Apostles days, what
Confusions, what Disorders, what Divisions, what Rents, and Breaches had there
been in the Church? there being some that held a necessity of keeping the
Ceremonial Law, others not; some for keeping of Days, others every Day alike,
some for eating of Meats, others of Herbs; some for Circumcision, others not.
And Paul, to preserve the Unity, notwithstanding these differences, writ, not
to judge one another in Meats, etc. but to wait till God reveals it to him. And
if G. F. and the Body had but this moderation, what a Harmony, what a Unity
would there have been amongst us!

The Papists had a way to try all suspected Persons by, namely, that they call
the Sacrament of the Altar; the Protestants the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, as also the Renunciation of the Covenant; the Presbyter the Covenant
it self: And this Body tries suspected Persons by this, namely, Have thou given
Testimony against the Spirit of the Hat? I could never get any of them to
define what this Hat-Spirit is. And as the Papists (to render the Protestants
odious) styled them Heretics; the Protestants, Phanaticks, Puritans; and all
Sects call us in scorn Quakers; and the same Spirit of reproach has entered
this Body, in stiling the forbearance of the Hat, Hatters, Hat-men. If any may
have that Appellation, it is rather due unto you, who keep it off upon a
Religious Account, than upon those who keep it neither off nor on upon a
Religious Account. They of the Circumcision were so called, not because they
forbore the practice of that Act, but because they still continued in it; and
it is preposterous to give Nicknames unto persons for not doing of a Thing by
the name of the Thing. We were called Quakers, because we trembled at his Word,
not because we did it not.

We displeased Man, because we do not uncover our Heads before him; we say, and
say true, true Respect does not lie in the uncovering of our Heads; a pitiful
low thing to lay honor and respect in a Hat; we say, it is the honor below
which perishes: We say, it is an honor that may be trampled upon, and laid in
the Dust, (as William Baley and others well said, and many of these men that
have born this faithful Testimony, are so far backslidden, that they say there
is a Respect and Reverence due unto God in it); Let the Judicious judge,
whether the Honor and Reverence which they give God in this thing, according
to their own words, be not the honor below, which perishes.

They do not deny the giving of this Cap-honour unto Men, because there is
honor in it, but because there is no solidity in it, for just and true honor
they acknowledge is due unto Superiors; and although G. F. and others have
trampled upon this Hat-honour as the most vile Excrement, yet he and they do
say unto us, You give no more reverence unto God, than unto a Horse.

Is it not strange that these men shall lay so much stress upon a Hat, as a
Duty due unto God, when they have looked upon it as a poor low thing when Man
has required it; and to make us more odious, we are called Ranting-Spirits,
when we do abhor and abominate that monstrous Principle. It Is probable many do
forbear that practice, what then? must I therefore be a Ranter? Nay surely, no
more than they are Papists that are in the same Exercise with them in this
outward Observation. The Ranter gives no honor at all unto God, neither inward
nor outward, but makes a derision at the Name of the Lord.

We do not forbear the Hat in this disdain, or for want of reverence to the
Holy, Pure God, (for if he required it, I believe we could not only offer that,
but our lives also) in the Service of the Lord, and for his Truth: but because
he does not require this of us, but rather a more Spiritual Reverence: It is
therefore an abuse to be styled Ranting-Spirits. It is a true Saying, and
worthy our Observation, That they conspire together to destroy the Child Jesus
in us.

These ill Ministers conjoyn together to subvert our Laws and Liberties, given
by the Great Jehovah, by obstructing or denying of Justice, (if they apprehend
it suits not to their Interest) which is as the Life and Blood to the Body, and
does give warmth and motion to every Member, which is nourished and enlivened
by it, but being once stopped and seared up, as the particular must of
necessity faint and languish, so must the whole frame be dissolved; and
assuredly, though they are lifted up, as it were, unto Heaven, in their proud
imaginations, the Righteous God will blast all their exalted expectations, and
they shall die and perish in the general dissolution; because they have not
regarded the Fatherless, nor pitied the poor in Spirit, nor compassionated the
tender Conscience, which feared to sin against the Lord, but crushed, spoiled,
and oppressed (without bowels of mercy) those that had little strengh to help
themselves: invaded their Rights, violated their Liberties, endeavored to take
the Meat from the Children and give it unto Dogs.

Heretofore, before they were high and mighty, they were the Balm of Gilead,
which healed our Wounds, restored our Spirits, and showed us the way of
Salvation; but of late years, like the Figtree mentioned in Luke, without
efficacy, without Fruit, only destructive to the particular Members, who
discharge their Duties and Consciences; whereas they should be like the good
Old Man, who dies in a full age, after he has fought a good Fight, and
overcome the Evil one; they should be like the Shock of Wheat which comes in,
in due season, to uphold our lives with the staff of Bread; and not unjust
Judges to overthrow our Liberties) nor proud Elders, to overthrow the Gospel.
One thing more to add, and perhaps thou have not altogether forgotten it; it is
this:

G. F. being very sick and weak for a long time, a tender Love rose in the
heart of W. Gosnal, to give him a friendly Visit, and when he came into his
Chamber, G. was transported into such an high Passion, and uttered such
vehement and violent words against him, that many there present in the Room,
were almost astonished thereat; It was for this cause W. G. long before
signified unto Samuel Newton his apprehensions, that G. F. would have strukcen
him, (of this more hereafter) and he being lifted up in his Spirit, like
Lucifer he uttered words to this effect; Friends, Although I have not yet told
it you, I do now declare it, I have power to bind and to loose whom I please.
How has Solomon Eccles fed this exalted spirit, who puts forth these words,
Stand up. Muggleton the Sorcerer, whose mouth is full of Cursing, Lies, and
Blasphemy, who call thy last Book a Looking-Glass for G. Fox, whose name
thou art not worthy to take into thy mouth, who is a Prophet indeed, and has
been faithful, in the Lord's Business in the beginning It was said of Christ,
that he was in the world, and the World was made by Him, and the World knew him
not: So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said, He was not; but
thou will feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a millstone upon thee; and
although the World knows him not, yet he is known.

Certainly such Expressions are not fit to be given unto man; and to lift up
one in this nature above his Brethren, is of dangerous Consequence. Surely this
mortal has been greatly puffed up by such fawning, flattering Parasites; Or else
he would never suffer persons to kneel before him: It is done upon two
occasions, though in a very private manner, and but by a few. The one is when he
sends you forth to Administer; the other is upon some misdemeanour committed by
a Minister, and upon the acknowledging of his fault upon his bended Knees, then
G. absolves him. Such is the absolute power which he takes to himself, That he
will break open Letters, and alter the Contents. One of the most eminent
Ministers amongst them, being of a moderate spirit, writ as in the name of the
Lord, judging both those that kept the Hat off or on, in a wilful, opposite,
contentious spirit; But as for those that kept it off, or on, as to the Lord,
those he nor the Spirit of the Lord did not judge, or words to this purpose: he
blotted out a line or more, and writ over it clearly another sense, to wit,
That he did judge those that kept it on, and not those that kept it off, and
John Whitehead, who writ the Letter, knew not of it.

My heart is oftentimes grieved within me, and my spirit oppressed with
Sorrow, when I call to mind their Lowliness, and their Plainness in Apparel!
Ah, how did their Countenances and Garments suit with their Preaching of the
Cross of Jesus, and very many were brought by their Ministry, out of
Rich-clothings: But behold a Wonderly These Ministers, in a short space, got
into the Rich-Habits, to wit, Beaver Hats, Camlet Cloaks, the finest of the
Cloth, not inferior to the Merchants of the City, setting aside their Lace
and Ribbands. It has been their lot to be haled (with violence) out of the
Assemblies of Professors, for bearing of faithful Testimonies and thrust into
Prison. Did I think to see the same violence offered in our Assemblies! Nay,
but with Sorrow, mine Eyes I have seen pulling down, haling out, and thrusting
forth of our Meetings, and they went to the utmost, as far as their power; And
doubtless they wanted not Will, but Power to Punish. These ravening Wolves,
which worry and prey upon the Flock, boast themselves to be Peers in this
Selected Body? and affirm, That if any of them commit a fault their Peers, or
their equals, are only to be their Judges, and not the Laity, or Commonalty, so
that in their Selected Assemblies, these keep the Inferiors at so great a
distance, and their Spirits are so overawed, that they dare not (but seldom)
contradict the sayings of the most eminent Elders.

It fell out that poor James Claypoole contradicted, and that with much
moderation, the imperious Elder, John Bolton, for saying unto a maid, That she
was first to see the evil in her self, before she judged it, and not (says he)
because we say it. This poor man, for this presumption, was first to
acknowledge his Error: Yet he in private confessed it to be no Error; But being a
man of peace, would rather bear his burden, then to stand against, or contend
with so great an Elder. How is it possible the Young ones can speak their minds
freely, when they are thus curbed and overawed? By this means a few will sway a
Meeting which way they please, unless the Peers are in Competition, then they
meet as two great waters, ready to overwhelm one another, with their asserting
both in the Name of the Lord. To prove this, I shall give thee a few pregnant
instances.

The First is concerning the Marriage of John Osgood, who is well known to be a
man of Moderation, Sobriety, and of a deep Judgment, owning and holding forth,
as occasion offered, the Principles delivered; and he was held in such
reputation, that I know no man's Counsel had a greater influence upon, and
acceptance with the Meeting than his; But after he came to forbear the Exercise
of the Hat in Prayer: The Zealots for that practice, did use their utmost
endeavor to screw him out of that power and authority which he had in the
Meeting, as the Paper signed by Eleven Ministers does clearly demonstrate. It
came to pass, that it was his purpose to take Rebecca Travers, the Younger, to
be his Wife: first he went to the Womans-Meeting, according to Custom, to
acquaint them with his Intentions, and there they past it with so great an
Acceptance, that a very considerable part of them went along with him to the
Mens-Meeting, to justify and stand to their procedure toward him, if occasion
offered, whereas others have seldom above two. He likewise acquainted the Men
with it, and after a short space, one there charged him for opposing a Servant
of the Lord, that had declared a thing in the Name of the Lord.

He presently cleared himself from this aspersion, by proving the person to be
in a notorious falsity, which he asserted in the Name of the Lord; this
Blasphemer, that is thus styled the Servant of the Lord, under the pretense of
a Physician or Chyrurgeon, made it his common practice to commit Uncleanness,
and wantonness toward Women; and yet he was employed and sent by G. F. to
judge Persons and Meetings; he made him also as his Companion in his Travels,
and covered him in his wickedness, insomuch that it was a crime sufficient to
take notice thereof.

And although John Osgood cleared himself as is above expressed, John Bolton
with two or three more had another snare for him; namely, Will thou give a
testimony against the Hat-spirit? His Reply was to this purpose, When he saw it
to be an evil, he should; but at the present he did not, and therefore ^ould
not give a Testimony against a thing, before it ^as manifested in him to be an
Evil. This would not satisfy them, although he again came into their practice,
in the keeping of it off. This Marriage was declared by Rebecca Travers the
Elder, and J. ^. to be of the Lord: and John Bolton, with not above two or
three more, did so oppose the passing ^hereof, in the name of the Lord, that it
could not ^e obtained, unless he would give a testimony as ^bove, and yet
almost the whole Meeting was for ^assing of it. This will seem prodigious to
persons ^gnorant in these affairs.

He therefore, without their Consents, appointed a Day to take his Wife, and a
very considerable number of the Meeting were Witnesses thereof. Such was the
Severity and Lordliness of J. B. that he in public disowned Tho. Salthouse,
for his being there a Witness, and for his Moderation. These Transactions did
so seize upon the Spirits of others, that it was exceeding difficult for any to
obtain Witnesses in such an affair, if the Meeting refused to pass it, though
never so unjustly.

By what has been said, it may be clearly discerned, That the greatest part of
the Meeting signify no more than Ciphers, that a few Rule by Will and
Pleasure, a certain ready way it is to make Hypocrites; for what greater
temptation can a Man meet withal to reduce him to a conformity against his
Conscience, than to deprive him of a Person whom he most dearly loves? And what
greater rigidness can there be to deny the accomplishment of so weighty a
Concern, for the omittance of so small a Ceremony as the Hat?

Let this be had in perpetual memory, That some of you were Judged, Condemned,
and Executed, for no other Cause than the Hat, and now they Judge, Condemn, and
Excommunicate for the same, (Oh greatly to be admired!) Not that I am against
this practice when required of the Lord, but against the customary use thereof;
for this I have known, and frequently seen, that when a Minister has ended his
Declaration, and a general apprehension that he will make a close with Prayer,
off goes their Hats, according to the custom of other Societies; and
immediately up stands another and begins a new Declaration, then, as Men
ashamed, on goes their Hats again. Moreover, it will happen sometimes for a Man
to be overtaken with sleep when the Prayer is begun, by some accident or other
he is disturbed; but before he is well awakned, he snatches off his Hat as a
Man afrighted: Can I judge that those things are any other than a formal
Custom? Nay, assuredly, others do not pretend that spirituality of Worship, and
therefore it is no marvel in them.

I never could yet understand why the Head may be covered by an Assembly, when
a Minister shall return high Praises unto the Lord, in an elevated, fresh, and
lively Spirit, and to be so erroneous as to be Excommunicated for the same in
time of Prayer.

I have been the larger upon this Instance, because it proves the greatest part
that is here written.

The next is this M. Boreman and Elizabeth Baily came before the Men's Meeting,
to express their intentions touching their Marriage; the one part declared
positively, as from the Lord, that it was to pass; John Nelson, Gerrard
Roberts, and Thomas Briggs were three of them, besides many more. Tho. Briggs
was transported into such an angry Zeal, that he told them, That it was of the
Lord, and that they opposed the mind of the Lord: But when the other Party came
close to the business, he did not know whom the Persons were that intended
their Marriage, to his great shame. John Bolton, and Sam. Newton, were the
great Opposers, under the same pretense, but indeed with more moderation.
Several went home with grieved and sorrowful hearts, whereof John Osgood was
one, and William Phillips another; I could name more, but let this suffice.

The next is concerning John Swinton, who did write a large Paper by way of
Lamentation, as being commanded and required of the Lord to publish the same,
wherein was expressed, That the Leaders (the Leaders) were greatly guilty of the
fullness of Diet, fineness in Apparel, and of speaking words out of the Life,
which was a burden to the Life: He justified this for several years, though
strongly urged to deny it; but at last they pursued him so closely, that the
Meeting at Devonshire-House sent for him out of Scotland, in the Wintertime,
for Him and his Paper to be tried: But before he came, there was a meeting at
the said place concerning him, and there John Bolton, Gilbert Layty, John
Nelson, and Charles Harris, with many others, past Judgment against Him and his
Paper: A Reply was made by Gawen Lawrey, That it was not regular to deal so by
a Person and his Writings, that was not there to answer for himself; to Condemn
Him, and then to Try him. This I bring as a further proof of their unreasonable
Tyranny; For what Justice and true Judgment could be expected, when these
Grandees, who were his Judges, did give Judgment against him beforehand?

In a short space after John came to London, and a Meeting was again appointed;
He saw the Breach would be great, and likewise his Exercise, telling diverse
beforehand, The Child must not be divided, nor the Seamless garment rent: and
so when the day came, he denied the Paper, and the Spirit that gave it forth,
yea; fit for the fire; and moreover, That it was writ in an hour of temptation
and weakness.

Let the impartial judge, whether this Recantation was not done rather in such
an hour? and whether the things are not true that he declared?

It Is time to conclude, having dwelt long enough upon this Subject, with this
Counsel and Admonition to the High and Mighty, and to the lofty Mountains, and
aspiring Cedars of this Assembly, before spoken of: Despise not to take counsel
of a Fool, nor disdain the advice of the young and weak Ones, for it is
possible, deep knowledge and yet little esteem may be found together: This I
have to inform you, that though you have reduced many to a sober life, the way
to keep them, and to bring in more into the same Fold, is by mildness, not
setting up a Lordly Judicature over the Conscience, for by this all Professions
have been split before us; and it is observed, that when the Spirit of Lordship
enters a People over their Fellows, the Lord does disappoint the Undertakers
thereof, by the withdrawing of his pure Spirit.

My Soul's desire is, That the Spirit of Lordship and Exaltedness, which has
entered the Body, may be crushed for ever, that the little Ones may serve the
Lord without fear, and be found in the Exercise of nothing in the Worship of
God, but what his pure Spirit leads unto, and out of that, Truth may spring up
in the hearts of thousands, by enjoying of this holy Liberty, and that God may
be exalted in the Earth, that the Horn of all Oppressions may be broken, and
dashed to pieces, to the praise of the Name of the Lord, that the Light of his
Glory may shine in our Temples in its strength and luster, not wanting a proud
Lordly Body to rule over us, nor a proud, wanton, lazy Ministry to monopolize
his precious Truth from us, but that every one may sit under his own Vine
without fear, and eat his Bread at his own Table. And God bears me this
Testimony, That his Truth, as it has been declared, is dear unto me, and the
Principles delivered, my Soul does own; and therefore, according to my Measure,
ought to have a place in the Body; but from the Body of Christ, and the Unity
of his Spirit they cannot exclude me, and therefore my Soul is abundantly
satisfied and refreshed, in my solitary Retirements, and desires not to join
hands to oppress any, nor yet to give up my neck unto the Yoke of Bondage, nor
my Back to the Oppression, nor my Judgment and Eyes to the Body: Though I can
give my Back to the Smiter, and my Cheeks to the pulling off of the Hair, yet
it is through a patient suffering, and not a fordid slavish subjection.

And although they daily exercise the Oppressions beforementioned, yet by their
deceitful flatteries, they make people believe, That they are a harmless,
innocent, and peaceable People, suffering and hearing wrong, but not doing any;
or if any persons Write, or Speak their Grief, that the Public take notice of,
they will represent them under such terms as may render them odious; and the
more effectually to weaken their Testimonies, they will fix upon them
scurrilous and contemptible Appellation, as Scotch-men, Welch-men, Tinker,
Tailor, etc. some of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an inquisition into
the truth of the matter, they would make people believe that they are envious,
malicious, and discomposed Spirits, bad, dirty, factious, and ranting Spirits,
who are gone from Truth, and are out of Truth.

Such is the portion of those that appear in the least against their imperious,
tyrannical, and lascivious Actions; and whatever Man detected the fallacies
and destructive Cheats of imperious disdainful men, but was thus reproached?
Must it be justice in them to complain of their Oppressions, and Envy; and
Malice, etc. in us to complain of ours? their years are but few, yet verily
they have been exceeding expert in learning of the Papists subtilties.

If I have any interest in a Burial-place, and displease the Body by
discharging of a good Conscience, I shall be deprived thereof, and be
necessitated to seek a place for my dead elsewhere: albeit, the Truth, as it
has been declared, is dear unto, and precious with me; for say they, Thou
opposest Friends who are in the Truth. Let the Spiritual Man judge whether this
is not a setting up themselves? yea, let the reasonable Man judge, whether this
is not to dispose of my Right and Propriety by Will and Pleasure? they are like
the Pharisees of old, who were more zealous to keep up their Traditions, than
the Law given from the Lord, for they are more zealous to keep up their power
as a Body, than the Truth it self.

It appears plainly unto the Just and Righteous Man, that G. F. and the rest of
his Council have endeavored to subvert the Royal Law of Liberty, and to
introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government over the Conscience, over the
Flock of God.

These are the ravening Wolves which prey upon the little Ones in a Lordly
Spirit; This is that envenomed spirit which has tainted their Judgments,
poisoned their Hearts, and blinded their Eyes; how heinous it is in the Nature,
how mischievous in the Effects of it? which will best appear, if it be examined
by that infallible Law, To do as we would be done unto; This is the Foundation
of all Laws, out of which they are derived; this is the Supreme Law, and the
Health of the People, and end of all Laws to which they are designed: And how
far this Spirit in them stands in opposition to this Law, I shall further
manifest.

They pretend and claim an Infallibility in Judgment, etc. (not that I am
against Infallibility, but that it is in a special manner peculiar to them, as
they are a Body, this I am against) yet who more fallible in Judgment than
they? who more partial in Justice? And what can be more dangerous and
destructive to the well-being of a People, than such a claim without it? If
they were in it, assuredly they would boast less, be more humble and chaste,
more self-denying and mortified in their Conversations.

I shall be liable to transgress, by breaking a Law hidden in their Breasts;
that must be a Crime which they are pleased to say is so; all must be error
which they please to call so. What (say they) do thou see, do thou feel
that which the Body does not? thou art in an exalted Spirit, the Body has not
unity with it; if it had been a true motion, the Body would have a sense
thereof, (behold the Touchstone); and certainly in their degenerated Natures,
as many great enormities have been, so greater will be produced: Lust will
become a Law, Envy will become a Law; Ambition and Covetousness will become
Laws: What Dictates, what Divisions such Laws will produce, may easily be
discerned by the ^ate Vicissitudes, to dispose of all to the maintenance of it
self? The bounds of the Royal Law they have removed and broken, (and this
mischief must needs ensue in the stead thereof, Tyranny establish^d) and yet
they will tell us, It Is for the honor of Truth, and its service from the
Spirit of Truth.

What greater dishonor can there be to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, than
to pretend ^is Holy, Pure Spirit in the practice of Injustice and Oppression,
and to make use of his great Name and Power to patronize their pride and
ex^lted Spirits?

Such arbitrary courses have an ill Operation upon ^he Spirits of Men, it
weakens their Hearts, and ^ools their Courage, and begets in them a slavish
Temper and Disposition; and where this arbitra^y and unlimited Power is set up,
a way is open not ^nly for the security, but for the Advancement and
^ncouragement of Evil, and a means to Increase ^latterers. Such Men are aptest
to cry up the ^ody in all respects, and are the only good Friends: ^ut others
(though exemplary in their Conversations) who cannot yield and comply against
the light in their Consciences, to some of their proceedings, are subject to
their Jealousy, Censure, if not an Ejection.

In days past the Lord raised up a Moses to be a Ruler and Leader to his People
Israel, who were then under Types, Figures and Shadows; and the Lord spoke to
his People by his Servant Moses: But another Administration more glorious is
established; to wit, The Dispensation of the Son of God, whom Moses prophesied
of, who speaks from Heaven, who is the end of all Figures, Types and Shadows,
he who is the substance of all Types, etc. is now the Great Captain, and Leader
of his People, make use of, and lays by what Instruments he pleases, reveals
his Mind sometimes to one, sometimes to another, without respect to Persons or
Bodies, as he pleases, That there may be no glorying but in the Lord: He
abaseth the proud; and exalts the humble; hides his mind from the High and
Mighty, from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals himself unto Babes; and
therefore he needs not a Fox, nor a Body to conveigh his Will unto his
People, he being himself their Teacher, and has planted his Laws in their
Hearts, and given them an holy Anointing, to know the Spirit of Truth from the
Spirit of Error.

And albeit the Kings of the Earth exercise Lordship and Authority over their
People, yet it ought not to be so among the Disciples of Christ, being all
Brethren: But for the greatest to be well contented to serve in the meanest
employment, if the Lord requires it, as to be served, to hearken, and submit to
the Voice of his Spirit, in the least Babe as in the greatest, or, as in the
Body.

And I affirm, the Lord did not raise them up to bring us off from the barren
Mountains, to feed upon them who are now become a Desert; nor from under our
Oppressors, to turn Oppressors themselves: Let them remember the Army, it is
their Figure; and if the Lord's anger waxed hot against them for their
Unfaithfulness, what will be the Portion of these, who have so deeply
Apostatized fram clearer Manifestations?

Many of the most Eminent have had potent Impulses, to give forth solid, and
sound Arguments for Liberty of Conscience, and have pleaded strongly for the
same, yet George Fox was heard to say in a selected great Assembly thus, Though
many Friends have writ for Liberty of Conscience, I never liked the Word, it is
not a good Word, no Liberty to the Presbyterians, no Liberty to the Papists, no
Liberty to the Independants, no Liberty to the Baptists, etc. Liberty is to be
only in the Truth, and says he, no Liberty out of the Power. In Answer unto
this, Truth gives Liberty unto the weak, yet no weakness in the Truth.

Since the Spirit is withdrawn, they do greatly boast the Power is as much, and
as fresh as ever, (if so, they would be more refreshed with it, and less with
Sleep in their Assemblies) and their Unity as entire as ever. Yet verily,
sharper Contentions are seldom sound amongst any People. To prove this, I will
set down two notable Examples, it is between four famous and eminent Elders.

First, Tho. Salthouse and John Bolton: T. S. being a man of some Moderation
and Tenderness, used his endeavors to beget a Reconcilement between the
Practicers and Forbearers of the Hat in Prayer, and to receive each other as
Brethren, though they differ in that particular thing; but that high and
hot-spirited Elder J. B. called him false Prophet, reputed him worse than the
Forbearers, and opposed his Ministry, until with much ado a Reconcilement was
made by a condescension on both parts.

The other is between G. Fox and Sam. Newton, who being a man of some Honesty
and Cleanness in his Spirit, was against having of a Person to Act in their
behalf, as in relation to Sufferings, whose Conversation Preached not
Righteousness, but G. F. opposed him with so much wrath and violence, that some
there present thought he would have stricken him, he being a person so rightly
qualified and accomplished for George's Interest.

Such is the swelling Pride of this Luciferian that he gave forth a Paper, That
his Marrirge wit^ Margaret Fell, was a Figure of the Marriage between Christ
and the Church. I may more justly believ^ it to be a Figure of the great
Apostasy from the Truth, and barrenness in the Truth.

He likewise declared, That his Marriage was ^bove the state of Adam in his
Innocence, in the stat^ of the second Adam, who never fell. This Pape^ was so
ill Resented, and so much disliked, that i^ was called in again; and a rare
thing it was to ge^ a sight there of, albeit through an accident, I ha^ a View
of it.

The abovesaid Samuel Newton and John Bolton to give them their due, have not
taken a little Pains, Labor and Travel, to bring to Light an^ to Judgment
such unheard of Practices of beastly wantonness, and filthy uncleanness, that
it is hard to believe the excess thereof: But John Bolton has, or had a
Confession in Writing from one or two of the Female Persons concerned, of the
Debauched Actions, to declare the truth thereof; yet notwithstanding they met
with such great Obstructions and Opposition, that they cannot accomplish a
through Examination of it, because it touches many Eminent Ones in the
Ministry; who from day to day resorted unto them, and giving them these
Appellations, Innocent Lasses, and Daughters of Sion.

Sometimes it comes to pass, that two approved of in the Ministry, will oppose
and Judge each other in public Assemblies, in the Name of the Lord: but to
prevent the evil effects thereof, the next day Persons shall be appointed to
declare the Greatness of their Unity, and the Oneness in their Spirits.

But least there should be a misapplication of what I have Written; when I
express the Body, I do declare, my meaning is, The Second Days Meeting at
Devonshire-house, with some other Principals in other Countries, who are their
Abettors, and not the whole Body of the People called Quakers; for I am
assured, and well know, that very many have not bowed to this Golden Image,
with whom my Soul has Unity, and with whom I am Refreshed.

And moreover, I meet with many who will freely open their Hearts to me, with
grieved and sorrowful Spirits, to behold what Domineering, and what partial
Judgment is practiced, what Severity and Tyrany is Exercised at this Meeting,
but especially against Dissenters.

But, say they, it is out of our Power to Redress it, until God does Change
their Hearts, or give us more Power; reckoning themselves at present too weak
to grapple with these Goliah's, unless the little Stone be given them to smite
them on their Foreheads, or Words to this purpose.

Let us trust in the Lord, and wait upon him with patience in Faith which
overcomes the World; that he will thresh the Mountains, and rebuke the High and
Mighty, who are Exalted above their Measures; and exalt his Truth over all,
that Justice and Righteousness may flow as a River, to the rejoicing of his
Oppressed People, and to the Praise and Glory of his Name for ever. From a deep
Mourner in Israel, to behold how the Earth is filled with Violence, and the
Righteous Seed Oppressed.

Dear Friend, It has pleased the Lord to raise thee up to bear a Testimony
against an Adulterous, Tyrannical, and an Hypocritical Generation; let the Word
of the Lord therefore have a free passage in and through thee, and Consult not
with Flesh and Blood; Watch against the Enemy, left he darken thy
Understanding, that thou can not distinguish between the Precious and the
Vile. Mix not thy own Thoughts with the Motions of the Spirit; keep in the
Fear, and in the Humility, that an exalted Spirit may be kept out: Build thy
House upon the Rock of Ages, and stand in the unchangeable without wavering,
that thy Conversation may be without Blemish, thy Judgment withot Error, and
thy Love unto the Truth without Dissimulation. Be Faithful unto the Lord's
Requirings, that Disobedience may not enter. Rember the Root bear^ the Tree,
and the Tree the Branches; if the natural Branches were cut off through
unbelief, and thou with thousands grafted in, be not high-minded, but fear.

From a Little hidden One of the Flock of Jesus.


