AN ANSWER TO Two Books: The first being styled A REPLY TO Sir Thomas
Mainwaring's Book, ENTITLED, AN ANSWER TO Sir Peter Leicester's Addenda; The
other styled Sir Thomas Mainwaring's LAW-CASES MISTAKEN.

Written by the said Sir T. M.

LONDON, Printed for Sam: Lowndes, over against Exeter House in the Strand.
M.DC.I.XXV.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
Upon Saturday the 12th of December last, I received from Sir Peter Leycester a
Book, or Books, thus called, viz. Two Books: The first being styled, A Reply to
Sir Thomas Mainwaring's Book, Entitled, An Answer to Sir Peter Leycester's
Addenda; The other styled, Sir Thomas Mainwaring's Law-cases Mistaken: And
although the one of these was dated the 14th day of April 1674. And the other
the first day of May following; yet, they came not out in Print till Michaelmas
Term in the same year. When I had perused the said Books, I found the latter,
to be the same in effect with the former, and scarce met with any thing in
either, which he had not had in some of his Books before, and had been formerly
answered; so that it was much more difficult to find out any new Matter, than
to give an Answer to the same.

I believe the Reader (when he remembers how Sir Peter, in his Answer to my
Defense of Amicia, did declare, That he had taken leave for ever of this
Trivial Controversy) will very much wonder to find him in Print, twice since
then, upon the same Subject; But for that, he supposes he has a good Excuse:
For he tells us in his Epistle to the Reader, before the first of his two
Books, That although his resolution then was (viz. when he writ his Answer to
my Defense of Amicia, 1673.) to have writ no more about it, (especially if I
had let him alone;) yet now, contrary to his former intention, he is
necessitated thereunto in his own defense, for the removal of those unjust
obloquies which are since cast upon him; Whereas his Servant Mr. Thomas
Jackson, in a Letter, (written, as he says, by the Command of his Master) did
signify to me, that his Master would write again, and this, before I had
printed one word of my Reply: so that if we find him thus stumbling at the
first, it is well, if we do not take him often tripping, before he comes to his
journies end. And for his writing again this second time, he has an excellent
Reason; For he says, page 16. I have published another Book since, and have
(therein) taxed him already for not being just to his word; so that he cannot
now incur a greater Censure from me herein, though he alter his former
resolution and intention, and write in his own defense, so long as he shall
henceforth judge it necessary: so that he is resolved to give me just cause to
censure him, if he had not done so before. He also endeavors to apply to me
that saying of the angry Man in the Comedy, which he mentions in his said
Epistle; but yet he is conscious I will say as much of him, and his Reply, and
thereupon submits it to the Reader; in which I shall willingly close with him,
and especially if it be a Reader who is well acquainted with his temper and
mine: But it is high time to leave the Epistle, and to proceed to give an
Answer to his said Books.

AN ANSWER TO Sir Peter Leycester's TWO BOOKS, etc.
I Doubt not but the Judicious Reader has long since observed what strange
kind of Arguments Sir Peter Leycester does insist upon, both in these last, and
in all other his former Books; For with all the confidence imaginable he
several times affirms, that Mr. Glanvil says, That Lands might be given with
any Woman in Liberum Maritagium: whereas he only says, That they may be given
cum qualibet muliere in Maritagium, as you may see in the 39, 40, and 41 pages
of my Reply, where Mr. Glanvil's words are expressly set down.

He also says, That he has proved Geva to be a Bastard, out of an Historian
Contemporary, by which Ordericus Vitalis is meant, and yet the said Ordericus
has said no such thing.

He also affirms, That the Common Law is now altered other ways than by Act of
Parliament, without quoting any Author for what he says, although the Common
Law has always been the same, and as my Lord Coke upon Littleton, fol. 115. b.
says, Has no Controuler in any part of it, but the High Court of Parliament;
and if it be not abrogated or altered by Parliament, it remains still. And
whereas my Lord Coke does also in the same Book, fol 21. b. tell us, That these
words, in liberum maritagium, are such words of Art, and so necessarily
required, as they cannot be expressed by words equipollent, or amounting to as
much; He, for all this, brags of several Precedents where Lands were given in
free Marriage with Bastards, and yet proves not that those necessary words in
Liberum Maritagium, were used in the granting of any of those Lands, or that
any of those persons with whom the said Lands were given were Bastards.

To conclude, he tells you, That Lhewellin Prince of North Wales, was divorced
from his Wife Joane the Daughter of King John; and for this he can neither show
any Author or Record, but only does dream of such a thing himself: and yet you
must believe him in all these particulars, or else (as you may see in the first
page of his Reply to my Answer to his Addenda) he will tell you, you do
withstand the plainest truth of History and Reason produced.

He also has a fine way of answering; For if he be pressed overmuch with any
point of Law, he will tell you, of his own authority, that the Law in such
particulars has been clearly altered, though he cannot tell how, or at what
time it was so changed. If it be a Record that puts him too hard to it, then he
conceives the Roll from whence the Deed is written, is mistaken in such and
such words, and miswrit therein from the Original Chart it self. And if out of
any History, you tell him of any thing which he cannot answer, then he will not
suffer the words to be read as they ought to be printed; but he will fancy such
expressions as will best suit with his turn: and will also disparage the said
History, although in those matters he had formerly said he did chiefly follow
the same.

He does also, to amuse those Readers that are of weak understanding, tell them
of Circumquaques, of bits of Law, pieces of Law, brought in by the head and
shoulders, fragments of Law, parcels of Law; and in his two last Books, tells
me of my impertinencies, of my being impertinent, and of my speaking
impertinently, (if one who says he has counted, do not mistake himself) no
less than Thirty times; with several other expressions, too ridiculous to
repeat here.

He also, to keep up his credit with the more simple sort of People, does offer
to join issue with me upon very many Points; and gives me some strange
directions to follow: which done, he will then leave it to the World to judge,
otherwise there will never be an end. Whereas I will refer it to all judicious
persons, whether his Arguments in these two Books, be not the same which he
used formerly? and whether they be not sufficiently answered by me in my other
Books? which if so, the Controversy is already at an end.

Now for the manifestation of what I have here alleged, I shall desire the
judicious Reader, when Sir Peter Leycester speaks of what Mr. Glanvil has
said, to take notice what is written in the 32 page of my Defense of Amicia,
and so on to the 43 page; as also what is written in the 39, 40, and 41 pages
of my Reply.

When he says Geva is a Bastard, then I desire the Reader to peruse the 43, 44,
and 45 pages of my said Defense of Amicia, and the 45, 46, 47, and 48 pages of
my Reply.

When he says that the Gift to Geva was a Gift in frank marriage, or that the
Town of Drayton Basset did pass to the Heirs of Geva by virtue of that Deed
which Randle Earl of Chester made to her; see my Defense of Amicia, page 48,
49, and 50; and the 55, 56, 57, 58, and 59 pages of my Reply.

When he says that Joane the Wife of Lhewellin, was the same Joane which King
John had by Agatha, then read the 3, 4, and 5 pages of my Answer to his Addenda.

When he says, that Ellesmere was given with the said Joane in Libero
Maritagio; see the 6 and 7 pages of my said Book.

When he says, King John had not three Daughters called Joane, or that Joane
the Wife of Lhewellin, was the same Joane who was Wife to Robert de Audeley;
Read the 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, and 24 pages of the said Answer to his
Addenda.

When he says, the said Joane was divorced from her Husband Lhewellin, (which
no man ever said but he himself) then read the 17, 18, 19, and 20 pages of the
Answer to his Addenda, where (besides other proofs against what he says) you
will find that the Adustery of Joane, whilst she was Wife of Lhewellin, was
committed Anno Domini sequenti to that Marriage, which he fancies to be the
Marriage of the said Joane Wife of Lhewellin to the said Robert de Audeley.

When he says, Joane the Wife of Lhewellin was a Bastard; then see the 21, and
so on to the end of the 30 page of the said Book. And although he says, page
50. that what I say concerning Joane the Wife of Lhewellin, being King John's
legitimate Daughter by his Wife Hawise, is so ridiculous, that another would be
ashamed to own it: Yet I can show under the hands of persons eminently knowing
in these matters, what great satisfaction they have received in this
particular, by what I have written concerning the same; also besides those
proofs which I have formerly brought, he does acknowledge that Vaughan in his
British Antiquities, page 29. does call her the Daughter of King John: and in a
Record concerning Budiford, mentioned by me hereafter in this Book, she is also
called the Sister of King Henry III, without the least blemish of Bastardy at
all.

I might here very well make an end, but because some persons may be deceived
with some of Sir Peter's Flourishes, I shall (passing by his angry and uncivil
Language, with which he does ever abound) endeavor to clear some things, by
which he might otherways impose upon some silly men.

In the first of his two Books in his second page, he says, I had in the 55
page of my Reply to his Answer, said, those Reasons of mine (there mentioned)
were unanswerable; whereas I said, they were not at all answered by him; and
that the one of them was so far from being answered, that it was not understood
by him, unless he only pretended not to understand it, because he perceived he
could not give an answer to it; so that it seems, in his opinion, to doubt
whether he can answer an Argument, is the same thing as to say, it is
unanswerable.

In his fourth and fifth pages, he wonders if I can english the words in Libero
Conjugio, that I will not allow such a Gift to be a Gift in Frank Marriage; and
yet he does acknowledge, that a Gift in Connubio soluto ab omni servitio, is
not a Gift in Free Marriage: whereas if construing might be the Rule in this
Case, that might be made a Gift in Free Marriage as well as the other; for the
word Connubium, as you may see in Gouldman's Dictionary, does only signify
Lawful Wedlock or Marriage; and therefore is a better word than his word
Conjugium, which signifies Unlawful, as well as Lawful Conjunction: If
construing might also take place in this Case, a Gift in Libero Conjugio, or a
Gift in Libero Connubio, would be a Gift in Frank Marriage at this day, as well
as formerly, and all other equipollent words would also amount unto such Gifts;
whereas the Law, for the reason given by my Lord Coke, will, in this Case,
allow of no such Gift, unless there be used both the word Liberum, and the word
Maritagium.

He also in the said fourth page, does again misrecite that Argument of mine,
which he does there mention; for he says, that my Lord Coke says, that these
words in Liberum Maritagium, are such words of Art, and so necessarily
required, as they cannot be understood by words equipollent; whereas my Lord
Coke says, they cannot be expressed by words equipollent, or amounting to as
much; so hard it is to get Sir Peter either to repeat, or understand aright.

In the seventh page he also mistakes himself very much, when he tells you,
that Lands given in Maritagium, Habendum sibi and Haeredibus suis libere and
quiet ab omni servitio versus Capitalem Dominum de me and Haeredibus meis, was
a good Grant in Free Marriage, by the very words of Glanvil in those ancient
Ages, and was as good as in Liberum Maritagium; if he means thereby, that Lands
might be given in Free Marriage, by those words of Glanvil, in a Deed, without
using the words in Liberum Maritagium; for Mr. Glanvil does there only tell us
what Free Marriage is, and it is the same now that it was then; but Mr. Glanvil
does not there, or any where else say, that Lands may be given in Free Marriage
by those, or any other equipollent words, without using the words in Liberum
Maritagium; and unless he says this, he says nothing for Sit Peter's purpose:
And this may give an Answer to what he has also said in his 14 and 54 pages of
his first Book, and in the 26 and 27 pages of the latter of his two Books.

And whereas he does often tell you in all his Books, that Mr. Glanvil says,
that Lands may be given with any Woman in Liberum Maritagium; he as often tells
you, that which Mr. Glanvil never said. Indeed Mr. Glanvil says, that Lands may
be given cum qualibet Muliere, (with any Woman whatsoever) in Maritagium; but
when he speaks of Gifts in Free Marriage, he says, they may be given cum aliqua
Muliere, (with some Woman) and the Law, in this particular, is still the same;
for Lands may now be given in Maritagium, with any Woman whatsoever; but Lands
can only be given in Free Marriage with some Women, viz. such as are of the
Kindred of him who gives the Lands.

He also very much mistakes (and wilfully I doubt) the Deed made in the time of
King John, where he says, Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester, granted to Robert
his Son and Heir, certain Manors ad dandum in Liberum Dotarium Hawisiae Sorori
Comitis Cestriae, Vxori ejusdem Roberti, which Deed I shall here give you at
large, as I find it in the 133 page of his Historical Antiquities. SAherus de
Quency Comes Wintoniae, omnibus Hominibus, and Amicis suis, praesentibus and
futuris, salutem. Sciatis, me concessisse and dedisse and praesenti Charta mea
confirmasse Roberto de Quency Filio meo and Haeredi ad dandum in liberum
Donarium Hawisiae Sorori Comitis Cestriae, Vxori ejusdem Roberti, Bucehebeiam,
and Grantesset, and Bradeham, and Herdewich, cum omnibus earundem terrarum
pertinentiis, pro centum Libratis terrae: Et si hae praedictae terrae non
valeans per Annum centum Libras, Ego in aliis terris meis de propria
Haereditate mea in Anglia, ei tantum perficiam, quod plenari^ habeat centum
Libratas terrae per visum and considerationem legalium Militum hominum
videlicet, Comitis Cestriae, and meorum. Et praeterea Dedi eidem Roberto Feoda
duorum Militum, scilicet, Feodum Matthei Turpin in Winterslawa it Wilteshire,
pro servitio Feodi unius Militis, ad dandum simul cum terris nominati^
praedictae Hawisiae Vxori suae in liberus Donarium. Testibus his, Comite
Davide, Willielmo Comite de Ferrars, Philippo de Orreby, Roberto de Basingham,
Ricardo de Lindescia, Willielmo de Grumpington, Henrico de Braibroc, Willielmo
de Syelford, David Giffard, Willielmo Picot, Hugone and Thoma and Henrico
Dispensariis, Waltero de Coventrey, Waltero Daivilla, and multis aliis.

And now as you may see in the 29 page of his second Book, he says, That in his
Historical Antiquities, the word Donarium was there misprinted for the word
Dotarium; whereas the word Dotarium is not in the said Copy which he Cites, as
a knowing Friend of mine does inform me, who, at my request, did very lately
and carefully examine the same in one of the Couchir Books in the Duchy Office
in Grayes-Inn; but the word is Donarium, which probably the Transcriber did
mistake for Douarium, the u and n being anciently written alike, and the v
consonant not then used. But if the word had been Dotarium, it would not
signify Marriage, as he does fancy, although Dos is Domesday Book be called
Maritagium; for Dos is twofold, and that Dos which is Dotarium, is the same
with. Douarium, which we in English call Dower, and is not that Dos which
sometimes is called Maritagium: For this see Glanvil, lib. 6. cap. 1. whose
words are these, Dos duobus modis dicitur, dos enim dicitur vulgariter, id quod
aliquis liber homo dat sponsae suae ad ostium Ecclesiae tempore desponsationis
suae, etc. And lib. 7. cap. 1. In alia enim acceptione, accipiter dos secundum
leges Romanas (which three last words, with some others, he leaves out in the
eighth page of the first of his two last Books) secundum quas proprie
appellatur dos, id quod cum muliere datur viro, quod vulgariter dieitur
Maritagium; Now that Dotarium, is that Dos which is Dower, and not that Dos
which is called Maritagium, you may see in Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary Printed
at London 1664. p. 174. whose words are these: De eo Dotis genere, quod
uxoribus constituunt Angli.

Doarium, Dodarium, Dotarium, Dinarium, Dotalitium.] Omnia recte interpretatur
vernaculum nostrum Dover, non Latinum dos. Est enim proprie dos, illud quod
maritus accipit cum uxore: haec vero id quod in remunerationen dotis, reportat
uxor. And Sir Peter very well knows, that what is given in the aforesaid Deed,
was only given as a Dower or Jointure, and not as a Gift in Free Marriage, as
you may see in the 132 page of his Historical Antiquities, where he thus
writes: HAwise, fourth Daughter of Earl Hugh by Bertred, married Robert Quency
Son and Heir of Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester. She had the Earldom of
Lincoln, to wit, the Castle and Honor of Bolingbroke, and all the Lands of
Earl Randle in Lindsey and Holland in Lincolnshire, for which she gave 50 l.
for relief. On Hawise was estated for Note.
Jointure, Bukby, Grantesset, Bradeham, and Herdwick, as appears by this Deed
in the Couchir Book of the Duchy Office, Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de
Bolingbroke, number. 26. page 508.

After which, he immediately does verbatim recite the aforesaid Deed; let the
Reader therefore judge of the integrity of Sir Peter, who in his new Books
pretends, that the aforesaid Lands were given in Free Marriage to the Lady
Hawise; and yet in his Historical Antiquities, does acknowledge that they were
estated for Jointure only, as by his words before mentioned does clearly appear.

And whereas he says, page 9. that it is not absolutely true which my Lord Coke
does say, viz. That at this day, the words in Liberum Maritagium, have no other
words equipollent; for then a Deed in English granting Lands in Free Marriage,
or a Deed in French de terres en Frank Marriage would be void grants; for
neither of these have in strict terms the words in Liberum Maritagium, etc.
wherefore certainly he understood it of a Grant in Latin: His arguing therein
is very weak; for the English words in Free Marriage, and the French words en
Frank Marriage, are the same words in Law, with the Latin words in Liberum
Maritagium, though in different Languages; but the words in Libero Conjugio,
though capable of the same construction in English with the words in Libero
Maritagio, are but equipollent to them, and so the words, in Wedlock free from
all Services, are but equipollent to the English words in Free Marriage; and
the French words, en Nopsage acquit de Services, are but equipollent to the
French words, En Frank Marriage.

Also by this Rule, a gift of Lands, by a Latin Deed in Libero Maritagio, would
be void, because they are not in strict terms the words in Liberum Maritagium;
so that the Reader may see what strange kind of Arguments Sir Peter does use.

In the 17 page, he tells me, that in the fourth and fifth pages of my Answer
to his Addenda, I further prove, by comparing the age of Bertred, that Agatha
could not be Daughter to the second William de Ferrars by Agnes his Wife;
whereas he is pitifully mistaken, for I did go about no such thing, but did in
the 3, 4, and 5 pages show, that Joane, who was the wife of Lhewellyn, could
not be the same Joane which King John had by the said Agatha, and that was all
which I did there prove.

In the 18 and 19 pages he says, that though the Writ (meaning King John's
Precept to the Sheriff of Shropshire, to make Livery of Ellesmere to Lhewellin
after his Marriage with Joane the daughter of King John) if you begin the year
of our Lord the 25th day of March, was in the year 1204. yet it would fall out
to be in the year 1205, if with ancient Historians we begin the year on the
first day of January; but it would be a pretty Trick, if from either of these
reckonings, he could make out what he said in the second page of his Addenda,
viz. that the Marriage of the said Lhewellin with the said Joane, was in the
year 1206.

In his 20 and 21 pages, he thinks he gives me no quarter; for he tells me,
that I would distinguish between Maritagium, and liberum maritagium, and say,
maritagium is twofold, but I do not give the members of my distinction aright;
for a good Logician (Sir Peter is the man meant without all doubt) would tell
me, that the members of a good distinction must be opposite, and not as I
distinguish, Maritagium est duplex, vel maritagium, vel liberum maritagium; The
members are here coincident, for Liberum maritagium est maritagium: Glanvils
distinction is good, Maritagium est vel liberum vel servitio obnoxium: so that
Maritagium the genus comprehends the members, and both opposite one to another,
as either free marriage, or not free marriage. This is Sir Peter's charge, and
a very great one, as he believes: But for answer hereunto, I doubt not but the
Reader has taken notice how in my Reply, p. 39. and 40. I did observe that
Maritagium was twofold, and that it was distinguished into Maritagium liberum,
and Maritagium servitio obnoxium: so that when I did intend to take notice how
it was distinguished, Sir Peter cannot but acknowledge that I did right; the
only color of Cavil that he has, is, because I afterward say, that
whenever any Lands are given in a Deed in maritagio only, it is always the
same thing in Law, as if they were given in maritagium servitio obnoxium, and
it is only his want of understanding that causes him to blame me for what I so
say, for that expression will not thwart with what I said before; this will
appear, because that maritagium servitio obnoxium, is the elder Brother to
maritagium liberum; for when Lands are given in maritagio servitio obnoxio,
such Gifts are agreeable to the Common Law of England; but when they are given
in liberum maritagium, as you may see Coke upon Littleton, fol. 21. b. they
create an estate of inheritance against the general Rule of the Law; and
therefore though this younger Son be connived at, and tolerated, yet, as you
may there see, the Law requires that such Gifts be legally pursued, and that
is the reason why such Gifts cannot be made to any but to those of the Blood,
as also why the words in liberum maritagium, are such words of Art, and so
necessarily required, as that they cannot be expressed by words equipollent, or
amounting to as much: Now the Common Lawyers (as you may see Coke upon
Littleton, fol. 189. a.) have a Rule, that Additio probat minoritatem; and
thereupon it is that my Lord Coke there tells you, that the younger Son gives
the difference; and pursuant to this Rule, when a Gift is made in maritagio,
which is intended to be liable to services, (that being the elder Brother) they
use the word maritagio in the Deed, and no more; but when it is given in free
Marriage, (which is the younger Brother) according as my Lord Coke tells you,
the word liberum (which is the difference) is absolutely necessary: And
herewith agrees the common practice; for I never saw in all my life, where
Lands were given in maritagio, liable to services, that the words in maritagio
servitio obnoxio, were used in any of the said Deeds, but only the words in
maritagio; and if they did intend that any other services should be done, over
and above those services which the Law did create by the words in maritagio,
then they did afterward in the said Deeds, mention those other services, but
else not.

Also the word Foedum, or Fee, is twofold, viz. Foedum simplex, and Foedum
tale, and yet in this Case, like unto the other, Fee-simple being the elder
Brother to Fee-tayle, (all Inheritances being in Fee-simple before the Statute
of Westminster 2. cap. 1. as Littleton tells you, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 13.) if
it be said in any Book, that a Man is seized in Fee, without more saying, it
shall be intended in Fee-simple; for it shall not be intended by this word (in
Fee) that a man is seized in Fee-tayle, unless there be added to it this
addition Fee-tayle, as you may see in Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 293. And
according to this Rule, our Common Lawyers do all of them constantly use the
like expressions at this day; so that there is no more reason for him to tell
me, that I do not distinguish aright in this Case of Maritagium, than there is
to tell them, that they do not distinguish aright as to the word Foedum, the
word Foedum being as much the Genus to Feesimple and Fee-tayle, as the word
Maritagium is the Genus to Marriage liable to services, and to Frank Marriage.

But would any one think, if I had committed so great an Error herein, (as he
would persuade the World I had done) that Sir Peter himself, within a very few
lines, and in the same 21 page, should really be guilty of the like offense,
which he did unjustly charge me withal; and yet you shall see that it is so,
for both in his 21 page, and 55 page, he tells you, that Maritagio was often in
those Ages, ( viz. of Mr. Glanvil) understood for libero maritagio, both by
Historians and old Deeds; you shall therefore see how Sir Peter's own argument
in his 20 and 21 pages, may, mutatis mutandis, be thus retorted upon himself,
viz. Here Sir Peter would distinguish between Maritagium, and Maritagium
servitio obnoxium, and say, Maritagium is twofold, but does not give the
Members of his Distinction aright; for a good Logician would tell Sir Peter,
that the Members of a good Distinction must be opposite, and not as he does
here distinguish, Maritagium est duplex, vel maritagium, vel maritagium
servitio obnoxium; the Members are here coincident, for Maritagium servitio
obnoxium est maritagium: Glanvil's Distinction is good; Maritagium est vel
liberum vel servitio obnoxium: so that Maritagium the Genus, comprehends the
Members, and both opposite one to another, as, either free marriage, or not
free marriage; let Sir Peter therefore answer this his own Argument as he
thinks fit.

As to what he pretends in the 22, 23, and 24 pages, I did not say that the
Gift of Ellesmere to Lhewellin, was but an Estate for Life, it being said in
the Precept, to make Livery to be an Estate in maritagio, (though not in libero
maritagio) and to make Livery thereof would have been needless, if it had been
a Gift in free marriage; Neither is Joane his Wife proved to be a Bastard, so
that that Precedent is out of doors; but I did give some Reasons why that
Precedent would have stood him in no stead, if she had been a Bastard, and that
a Gift in free marriage; and could yet say more in that particular, if occasion
did require: but that not being the Case, I will forbear to say any more
concerning the same.

In his 24 page, and so on to the 42, (besides some mistakes of his, which,
because they are not material to the point, I will not here take notice of) he
spends a great deal of time in proving, that Hellen the Wife of John Scot, was
the Daughter of Lhewellin, by his Wife Joane Daughter of King John; whereas he
did clearly prove the same, in his 28 and 29 pages, in very few words: and the
same does also appear by a Record hereafter mentioned, which very lately came
to my knowledge; but yet for all that, this Precedent will do him no good, as
well because the said Joane is not proved to be a Bastard, as also because
Budeford and Suttehale were not given to the said Lhewellin in libero
maritagio, as will anon appear; Sir Peter does indeed tell us, that those
Mannon were given in libero maritagio to the said Lhewellin, but the Deed
lately belonging to Somerfield Oldfeld Esquire does prove no such thing, but does
only prove that the said Lhewellin did mistake himself, and think that they
were given him in free marriage, when they were not so given; I therefore
believing Sir Peter, that those Manors were given in free marriage to
Lhewellin, when they were not; and perceiving Lhewellin to say that King John
had given them to him, but not telling with whom, and knowing (as appears in
the 13, 14, 15, and 16 pages of my Answer to his Addenda) if they were given to
him in frank marriage with his Wife Joane the Daughter of the said King, that
the said Lhewellin had not power to dispose of them from his Son David, (who
was his right Heir) could not find out any other way to reconcile every thing
in this particular, but by supposing that Lhewellin had a former Wife who was a
Kinswoman to King John, with whom those Lands were given, and by whom he had
his Daughter Hellen: And what I said was by way of consequence, for I relied
only upon my fourth Argument, as appears in the said 13 page, and brought the
other three but as concurrent; And what I there believed might very well have
been true, for Sir Peter proves that Lhewellin had a former Wife; and if his
words had been true in saying that those Manors were given to the said
Lhewellin with the said Joane in libero maritagio, my words must necessarily
have been true also; for I was only mistaken in Hellens Mother, by building
upon that unsound foundation which Sir Peter did there lay.

But mark what work Sir Peter does make of it, now he has proved Hellen to be
Lhewellin's Daughter by his said Wife Joane; for he in his 37 page grants all
my Quotations, (I would I had cause to say the like by him) and also grants
what by those Lawyers is said in the 14 and 15 pages of my Answer to his
Addenda, which is a certain sign he does not understand what they do say; for
by what is there said, it appears, that if a Man have Land given him in free
marriage with a Wife, he has only custodiam cum uxore, and has not so much as
an Estate for his own life, until he be Tenant by the courtesy of England, and
by consequence he cannot dispose of those Lands to any person whatsoever from
the next Heir; And this ignorance of his runs him upon his mistake in the 36
and 37 pages of his latter Book, wherein he says, that a man would have but
custodiam cum uxore, although the Wife were not of the blood of the Donor:
whereas you may see in the 14 and 15 pages of my Answer to his Addenda, that
though when Lands be given with a Woman to a Man in frank marriage, it is
liberum tenementum uxoris, and non viri, cum non habeat nisi custodiam cum
uxore, yet it is ( secus) otherways, when the Land is given in marriage, pro
homagio and servitio viri, and one reason of this difference betwixt Land given
in marriage, for which no service is to be done, and Land given in marriage,
for which Homage is to be done, is because in the one Case, the Land may revert
to the Donor, but in the other Case, the Land can never revert, as you may find
in Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 18. who, after he has told you what free marriage is,
has these words: Cum quis itaque terram aliquam cum uxore sua in maritagium
ceperit, si ex eadem uxore sua haeredem habuerit filium, vel filiam clamantem
and auditum infra quatuor parietes si idem vir uxorem suam supervixerit, sive
vixerit haeres sive non, illi in vita sua remanet maritagium illud, post mortem
vero ipsius ad donatorem vel ejus haeredes est reversurum. Sin autem ex uxore
sua nunquam habuerit haeredem, tunc statim post mortem uxoris ad donatorem vel
haeredes ejus revertetur maritagium. Et haec est quaedam causa quare de
maritagio tali non solet recipi homagium. Si enim sic donata esset terra aliqua
in maritagium vel alio modo quod inde reciperetur homagium tune nunquam de
cetero ad donatorem vel ejus haeredes licite possit reverti ut supradictum est.
Sir Peter therefore must either confess that Lhewellin had no power to dispose
of those Lands in such manner as he did, and then that Precedent will be of no
more force, (if the said Joane had been a Bastard) than a Precedent would be of
a Man who now should give Lands is libero maritagio, to one who is not of the
blood, or else he must acknowledge that those Lands were given to Lhewellin but
in maritagio, and so he being liable to do homage for them, might dispose of
them as he did please; And that they were given to him but in maritagio, will
appear, as well by the making of Livery of them (which is needless in a Gift in
frank marriage) as also by these following Records.

Claus. 2. H. 3. M. 1. MAndatum est Vic: War: quod plenam seisinam habere
faciat Leolino Principi Norwall: de Villa de Budiford cum pertinentiis suis
quam Dominus Johannes Rex Pater Domini Henrici Regis dedit ei in Maritagium cum
Johanna Sorore Henrici Regis uxore ipsius Leulini. Test. Scilicet Williesmo
Marescallo Comite Pembrochis tune Rectore Regis and Regni.
Comite apud Westminster. 10. Oct.

Rot. Pip. de ann. 2 H. 3. War. and Leic. WIllielmus de Cantilupo Philippus de
Kinton pro eo reddit comp. de cxxviii. li. ii. s. bl. de firma de Warewick: and
de quater viginti and quinque libris xvi. s. iiii. d. bl. de firma de
Leicestreshire.

-- Et Leuelino Principi Norwall: lxxvi s. in Budiford in maritagio cum Johanna
uxore sua, de dimidio anno per Breve Regis.

But the Deed to John Scot Earl of Chester, might be either in libero
maritagio, according to the agreement of Lhewellin with Randle Earl of Chester,
or else it might be in maritagio only, as it was given to the said Lhewellin;
so that be that Deed how it will, it will work nothing in the Case.

In his 57, 58, and 59 pages, he seems much displeased with what I tell him in
the 33 page of my Answer to his Addenda, concerning his partiality, and does in
some respects strain my words further then he should; But though I will not say
any thing at this time concerning this particular, for some reasons I have
formerly told him of, yet if he does please to speak of it to me at any time,
when any judicious person is present, I think I can make good what I said, and
that he will not be excused by that contradiction of his, when he says, page 58
and 59, that Admit he were partial never so much, in what I charge him with,
yet he hopes what he has written, I find it impartial to all, so far as he
goes, or does know.

In his 60 and 61 pages, he tells me, that I go to excuse an Error of mine, in
calling Ralph Maniwaring Chief Justice of Chester, because I found in his
Historical Antiquities, page 160, and also in other places, there were in the
time of Hugh Cyveliok, sometimes two Justices of Chester, and sometimes but
one; But I did not absolutely say, there were two Justices living both together
in the time of the said Ralph; I only did insinuate, as you may see, in the 5
page of my Reply, and the 34 page of my Answer to his Addenda, that it was
possible there might be more than one at a time, because when Earl Hugh was
living I found some Deeds, directed Justiciariis, and I am sure the reasons
which he gives to the contrary in the 61 page of the first of his last two
Books are very strange ones; for he says that it is there to be understood of
the Judges, etc. successively or with their Deputies under them; Now how can
any Deed be directed to any Justice and his Successor, before he has a
successor? or to their Deputies under them, if what he says in the same page be
true, that then they executed their places themselves, no power being given to
them in those ages to make or constitute a Deputy (by Commission) at pleasure,
as we have now, and in these latter ages has been usually done? Neither does
he mend it afterward, for he says, possibly upon an emergent occasion, the
Ancient Earls might constitute another Judge for the present in the absence of
the other, to execute the place for a time, and so change them as often as was
thought good: Now if this conceit of his be true, that another Judge was
constituted for a time, only in the absence of the former, were there not then
two Justices at one time? so that here are three very weak Answers given
thereto; But I shall now make it further appear, that there was sometimes a
Chief Justice of Chester in those elder Ages, which I will thus prove.

That the word Justitia (which then is of the Masculine Gender according to
that Rule, Mascula nomina in a dicuntur multa virorum) was sometimes in those
elder Ages used for the Judge or Justice of Chester, I believe he cannot deny,
because in his Historical Antiquities, page 144, I find a Deed thus directed;
Ranulphus Comes Cestriae, Constabulario suo, and Dapifero, Justitice, and
Vicecomiti Baronibus and Ballivis suis, salutem. I also in the 143 page of the
said Book, find this Deed following: RAnulphus Dux Britanniae, and Comes
Cestriae and Richmondiae, Omnibus tam praesentibus quam futuris qui Chartam
istam viderint and audierint, Salutem. Sciatis quod ego dedi and concessi
Andreae Filio Mabiliae, and Haeredibus suis, ut sint liberi and quieti de me
and meis Haeredibus de Teloneo per totam terram meam, and in aqua, and in
terra, and in Civitate Cestriae, and extra, and a Brevibus portandis, and a
Prisonibus capiendis and custodienis, and a Namis capiendis, and a Vigiliis
faciendis nocte vel die, and a caeteris hujusmodi consuetudinibus and
exactionibus, nec de querela aliqua in Civitate Cestriae, vel extra,
respondeant in praesentia mea, Note.
vel summi Justitiae mei: Et super forisfacturam meam x Librarum prohibeo, ne
aliquis eos de supradictis libertatibus impediat vel inquietet, sed eas libere
and quiet teneant, Reddendo mihi and Haeredibus meis annuatim vi Denarios ad
Festum Sancti Michaelis. Hiis Testibus, Bertre Comitissa Cestriae, Radulfo de
Meinewarin, Radulfo Seneschallo, Hugone de Boidele, and Alano fratre ejus,
Roaldo, Roberto Came. Roberto Saraceno, Ranulfo Dubeldai, Nicolao filio Roberti,
Thoma fratre suo, Willielmo Marmiun, Ricardo Poibel, Rogero Clerico, and multis
aliis. Apud Cestriam.

And now let any person judge whether those words in praesentia mea, vel Summi
Justitiae mei, do not clearly prove, that there was a Chief Justice of Chester
in those elder Ages; for that Deed was made in the time of the said Ralph
Mainwaring, he being a witness to the same. And as I have proved in the fifth
page of my Reply, that if there were then two Justices, the said Ralph was the
Chief; so it will also easily appear, that the said Deed was made, when the
said Ralph was Judge; for you may find in Sir Peter's Historical Antiquities,
page 143, and 144. that Randle Earl of Chester did first write himself Duke of
Britain in the year 1187, and did relinquish that Title in the year 1200. And
you may see in the 172 page of the said Book, that Philip de Orreby (who
immediately succeeded the said Ralph) was not made Judge till about the year
1209.

In the 62 and 63 pages, he thinks that he has at last found out a fine device
to cure what he formerly said; for whereas I told him (page 9. of my Reply)
that I could not imagine how it was possible that the said Geffrey de Dutton,
to that, or any other Deeds of his own, could have his name either with the
word Domino, or without, either five times for once, or at all, amongst the
Witnesses subscribed, unless he did fancy that he was a Witness to his own
Deeds: He now pretends, that when he said he had seen several other Deeds of
the same person, he meant and understood, several other Deeds touching the same
person: for the word (of) is used many times for concerning, as, of or
concerning the same person, etc. which Answer of his does not at all make the
matter better than it was before; for, as Men do not use to be Witnesses to
their own Deeds, so they did not use (and especially in those ages when the
Deeds were so short) to be Witnesses to Deeds which concerned themselves; And
though he may possibly show me a Deed made concerning a Geffrey de Dutton, to
which a Geffrey de Dutton was a Witness, because there were several Geffreys de
Dutton living at that time; yet he must excuse me, if I do not believe that he
can show me either several Deeds, or any one Deed in that age which does
concern a Geffrey de Dutton, to which that Geffrey de Dutton was a Witness, who
was the Party concerned.

In his 64 page he says, what he said in his Addenda, p. 11. is not contrary to
what he did write in the bottom of the fifth page of his Answer to the Defense
of Amicia. Let the Reader therefore see how Sir Peter says in the 11 page of
his Addenda, that, Geffrey Dutton was no Knight; For otherways he would have
called himself by his Title, as, Ego Galfridus de Dutton Miles, or Ego Note.
Dominus Galfridus de Dutton dedi, etc. which few Men will omit in their own
Deeds, if they have really the honor of Knighthood. And let him also observe,
how at the bottom of the fifth page of his said Answer, speaking of the word
Domino, he says, that word is never used in old Deeds by the party himself, but
where it is Note.
joined with another word, as, Ego Willielmus Manwaring Dominus de Peover; and
then let him judge whether those expressions be contrary to each other, or not.

In his 65 page he says, that I would fain palliate another gross mistake, in
making Geffrey de Dutton the Father, to live on to be a Witness to the Deed of
Geffrey de Dutton to his Daughter Margaret of the Manor of Nether Tabley; but
if the Reader please to see the 36, 37, 38, and 39 pages of my Answer to his
Addenda, it will there appear to be very uncertain, whether it was any mistake
at all: And he himself after he has said all he can, does confess in the 67
page of the first of his said two Books, that his Deeds do but probably
demonstrate, that Geffrey Dutton the Father was dead before; see therefore what
a stir he keeps about nothing, for it is not material whether this be a mistake
or not. And whereas he pretends page 68, that it is petitio principii to say,
that the word Dominus does always show, that the person to whose name it is
applied, was a Knight, or Clergyman; yet I have showed that it is usually
applied to such persons, which is the only proof that can be had in this Case;
and it lies upon him to prove, if he will contradict me therein, that it was so
applied to some one, who was neither Knight nor Clergyman; for of the higher
Nobility I do not speak, to which kind of persons the word Dominus, either as
it signifies Lord or Sir, might sometimes be applied: And though he says that
those very worthy persons Mr. Wood and Mr. Blunt, are of opinion that the word
Domino was sometimes also prefixed in those elder ages to the names of persons
of better sort and quality, though no Knights, as well as to Knights and
Clergymen, contrary to the opinion of some other skilful men, (as learned
persons do sometimes differ from each other;) yet he does not instance in any
one example to make good what he says, and it will be a very hard matter so to
do; for the proving that the word Dominus has been prefixed to a persons name,
and sometimes afterward omitted, will not be sufficient, because I can prove
that some who were certainly Knights, have been afterward named without having
the word Dominus prefixed, or the word Miles added to their names.

In the 39 page of my Answer to his Addenda, I told him of some words, which he
pretended to have written, which I could not find in his Book; and for this in
the 69 page of the first of his two Books, he says I would bespatter him with a
falsity therein, although in the 70 page, he confesses those words were not in
his Answer expressly, etc. and that it was a negligent error; and yet for all
this, in the 64 and 65 pages of the first of his new Books, he pretends that
the words Ego Dominus A. B. dedi, etc. (which were some of the words I could
not find in his said Book) were spoken of before, in the 7th page of his Book
there mentioned, so that he commits the same Error again.

In the 68 page, he again takes notice how I had formerly said, that Margaret
was the Daughter and Heir of Geffrey Dutton, whereas he says she was his
Daughter, but not Heir, and this he calls a gross mistake of mine; but a gross
mistake it cannot be, because the said Margaret and her Heirs did enjoy several
Manors which were her Fathers, and because it is not material to the point in
hand, whether she was or was not his Daughter and Heir. And whereas he is
displeased at me for saying, if it was any mistake at all, he must thank
himself for that; for since he did so untruly quote the Book of Barlings, and
so many other places, he must excuse me, if I dare not rely too much upon his
bare word.

In his 67 page, he does confess he calls one, Sir Geffrey Dutton of Chedil in
his Book: but he calls him not Sir Geffrey Dutton of Chedil Knight, as I
allege; whereas I cannot imagine what he should be but Sir Geffrey Dutton of
Chedil Knight, being he was no Clergyman, unless he would have him to be Sir
Geffrey Dutton Esquire or Sir Geffrey Dutton Gentleman. And though he pretends,
page 73. that Esquires were none in those ages, I shall refer the Reader for
that to Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor, page 830, 831, etc. Though I confess the
word Esquire does not often occur as a legal Addition, till after the Statute
of Additions made in the first year of King Henry V.

From the end of the 73 page, to the end of the 84, instead of producing an
Example where the word Dominus was applied to the name of a Layman, who was but
an Esquire or Gentleman, (which was the thing which he ought to have done) he
vainly spends his time in acquainting you with some Notes of his, in
Manuscript, never yet printed, on the several Notions of the word Dominus, and
the English word Sir; but as he has there omitted some things to which those
words were used to be applied, so he went too far, when in his 77 and 79 pages,
he applied to the Lady Hawise de Quency the word Dominus, and the word Sir.

In his 86 page, and so on, to almost the end of the 89, he would fain persuade
the Reader, that Hugh Cyveliol was not One and twenty years of age when he
joined with his Mother Maude in giving Stivinghale to Walter Durdent Bishop of
Chester, and his Successors, to which Deed Eustace the Constable was a Witness,
and tells you of a Precedent in his Book of Antiquities, page 114. and 115.
where you may find Richard Earl of Chester joining with Ermentrude his Mother
in the Grant of Wudemundeslai to the Abbey and Church of Abington in Barkshire,
Anno 6. Henrici 1. Anno Domini 1106. whiles he was scarce 12 years old, whereof
the Book of Abington immediately before the Deed, says thus, fol. 47. Ipse
Comes benefactum extulit, and suo descripto roboravit: quod descriptum Sigillo
quidem matris Signari constitit: nondum enim militari Baltheo cinctus, materno
Sigillo literae quaelibet ab eo directae includebantur, hac de re; quod eo
annotatur, Comitissae potius quam Comitis Sigillo signatur. But he does not
give you the Deed in either of his two little Books, therefore I think fit to
Transcribe it here, for the satisfaction of those who have not seen the same,
as I find it in his Historical Antiquities, page 114. but misprinted 122.
RIcardus Cestrensis Comes, and Ermentrudis Comitisia matter ejus, Nigello de
Oilii, and Rogero filio Radulfi, and omnibus Baronibus de Oxenford Scira,
Salutem and Amicitiam. Sciatis quia pro amore Dei and anima Patris mei, and
remission nostrorum Peceatorum, Concedimus hidam illum, quam Droco de Andeleia
dedit Eeclesiae Abbendonensi, quae est in loco qui dicitur Wudemundeslai: Nos
eidem Ecslesia concedimus and auctorizamus perpetuo habendam, solidam and
quietam ab omni nostro servitio: Et Rogerus filius Radulsi and Successores ejus
sint quieti in nostro servitio, quantum ad illam hidam pertinet: Et defendimus,
ut nullo modo Rogerus, vel alius per eum, inquietet habitantes in terra illa:
Hoo autem fecimus and testimonio nostrorum Baronum; scilicet Willielmi filii
Nigelli, and Hugonis filii Normanni, and Ricardi Balaste, and Willielmi filii
Auskitilli, and Ricardi filii Nigelli, and Domini Goisfridi Capellani and
aliorum. Hoc actum est in sexto Anno Regni Henrici Regis, in mense Mail, in die
Pentecostes.

And to make the Reader believe that Hugh Cyveliok was not of age when he
sealed the said Deed of Stivinghale, he tells you page 86. of his first Book,
and page 30. of his latter Book, that what Earl Richard then did, was according
to the Law and Customs of those elder Ages, and that Earls and great Lords in
those former Ages did often join with their Mothers (who had the Tuition of
them) in Deeds and Charters whiles they were very young, and before they
attained the age of One and Twenty years; whereas I am confident Sir Peter
cannot prove, that persons who were under age, did then use to join with their
Mothers, and so give away their Lands of Inheritance; for Mr. Seldom in his
Titles of Honor, page 785. at the bottom, and page 786. (the place which Sir
Peter cites) tells us, that this of the Earl of Chester, ( viz. Earl Richard)
is only a Note of a Monk after the Entry of the Charter of Confirmation, and no
part of the Body of the Charter; And in regard that he sees no other Testimony
of ancient time to second it with the like, he should think that the Monk was
either grossly deceived in his reason of Nondum enim Militari Balteo cinctus
est, or else that he meant only that the Earl was a Child within age, and that
by reason of his Minority, Wardship, and the Tuition of his Mother (who joineth
with him in the Charter) her Seal was only used to it, as also to his Letters;
Also a little after, in the same page, Mr. Seldom thus says, Now the Law being
that whosoever was Knighted, though before the age of One and Twenty, was of
full age in regard of any Wardship, or any other Tuition (as presently is
further showed) and the use being that such great Lords were Knighted often,
before they were of that age, and so had their full age supplied; and that
perhaps also, while they were in ward, they used only their Guardians Seals,
lest the authority of a Seal of their own, before they had discretion to use
it, might have done them prejudice, in point of Note.
honor at least, if not in matter of profit. It is likely enough, that the
Monk here took the phrase of being not Knighted, to serve for being not of full
age; So that the having of a Seal was not peculiar to this Order of Knighthood,
but to such only (of what condition soever) as were of full age: Also Sir Peter
does not in either of his two new Books give you the Charter of this Earl
Richard and his Mother, but only tells you of it in general terms; for he
cannot but see that it is not a selling or giving away any Land of Inheritance,
but is only (according to Mr. Seldom) a confirming of that Hyde of Land which
Droco de Andeleia had given to Abington Church; And Mr. Seldom a little after
in the next page says, though the wardship of the Body be ended (in the case of
Knighting after the death of the Tenant by receiving the Order of Knighthood)
yet Note.
the Land continues to the Lords, until the full age of the Heir, as if he had
not received the Order. What then is this to the Case of Hugh Cyveliok, who did
pass away Stivinghale to the Bishop of Chester, and his Successors for ever?
And without doubt the said Land was given immediately after the death of Earl
Randle, Father to the said Hugh; for he dying Excommunicate, his friends in
that age, would be very impatient until he was absolved; and it cannot be
imagined that Maude did join with her son Hugh, because he was under age; for
that he could not be, because he here passed away Lands for ever, as also
because he was old enough to take Melyenith Castle in the year 1142; and if he
was then but 12 years of age, he would be 23 years old in the year 1153, about
which year his Father Earl Randle dyed; his Mother therefore certainly had
Stivinghale (which is not in Staffordshire, as Sir Peter in his 86 page
supposes, but is a Member of Coventry, as you may see in Mr. Dugdale's
Antiquities of Warwickshire, page 88, 128, 129. and in Sir Peter's Historical
Antiquities, page 129.) as part of her Jointure, and thereupon joined with her
Son; And indeed it had been a great shame to her, if her Son Hugh had been such
a tender Infant as Sir Peter does suppose him to be, to make him part with
those Lands, upon that occasion (if it could have been so done) and she to part
with nothing at all.

But though I doubt not but what is here said, will give full satisfaction to
all judicious persons, yet I think fit to acquaint the Reader that I have a
Pedigres by me, of the Barons de monte alto, drawn not long since by Sir Peter
himself, and written all with his own hand, in which he makes the first Robert
de Monte alto, Steward of Cheshire (who, he says, lived in the time of King
Steven) to have issue (besides other Sons who were younger) two Sons, Ralph and
Robert, who were afterward successively Stewards of Cheshire, all which is
certainly true.

He also in his Historical Antiquities, page 131, does give you this Deed of
Earl Hugh, in which his Mother does not join with him, which I think fit in
this place to Transcribe. HUgo Comes Cestriae, Constabulario suo, Dapifero,
omnibus Baronibus suis, omnibus Hominibus suis, Francis and Anglicis, tam
futuris quam praesentibus, Salutem. Concedo Sanctimonialibus de Bolintona
Stagnum meum de Dunintona firmum terrae meae sicut fuit tempore Henrici Regis,
in perpetuam Elemosynam pro anima mea, and Patris mei, and meorum Antecessorum:
Et praecipio omnibus Hominibus meis, quod habeant meam firmam pacem, ita quod
nullus inde praedictis Sanctimonialibus injuriam vel contumeliam faciat. Test
Roberto Dapifero de Monte alto, Filippo de Kima, Simone Filio Osberti,
Willielmo Patric, Radulfo Filio Warneri, Rogero de Maletot, Johanne Priore de
Trentham, Orm ejus Canonico, Rogero Monacho de Hambi, Willielmo Clerico Comitis
qui Chartam scripsit apud Beltesford, and multis aliis.

Now that Robert de Montealto Stew ard of Cheshire, who was Witness to this
Deed, was the first Robert de Montealto, will be manifest, because the second
Robert came not to be Steward of Cheshire during the life of Earl Hugh, as
appean by the said Pedigree, as also in Sir Peter's Book of Historical
Antiquities, page 143. and in the 33 page of this Book, where you find Ralph
the Steward, elder Brother to the second Robert, outliving Earl Hugh, and being
a Witness to a Deed of Randle Son to the said Hugh; it will therefore
necessarily follow, if this Deed of Earl Hugh was made immediately before the
death of that Robert de Montealto, who was a Witness thereto, that the said
Earl Hugh was a great deal elder than his Wife Bertred; for though the said
Robert did live something longer than Sir Peter does take notice of, yet I
think it cannot be proved that he was living any considerable time after the
said Eustace, and I know no reason why we should conclude that Eustace was
slain immediately after he was a Witness to the other Deed, or that this Robert
dyed presently after he was a Witness to this Deed; nay, I think it will
appear, that the aforesaid Deed to the Nuns of Bolinton, was certainly made
some years before the said Robert dyed, viz. in the time of King Stephen; for
if it had been made when Henry the Second was King, Earl Hugh would not have
said sicut fuit tempore Henrici Regis, (as he there does) but he would have
said, sicut fuit tempore Henrici primi, or else he would have used some other
words to distinguish King Henry the first from the then King. Now King Stephen
dying in the year 1154. and Bertred being not born till the year 1157. it will
from this Deed be very clear, that if Earl Hugh had sealed the said Deed
immediately before King Stephen dyed, yet Earl Hugh would be at the least 24
years older than Bertred his Wife.

And whereas he pretends that he shows, (page 93.) that Earl Hugh could neither
be so old as I would now suppose him, nor yet that he was born Anno 1142. I
answer thereto, that any man who can but count 20. ( viz. how long it is from
the year 1109. to the year 1129. or from the year 1110. to the year 1130.) if
he looks on my Defense of Amicia, page 51. and my Reply, page 61, 62. may find
that Hugh Cyvelick might be older than I say* But I doubt Sir Peter is no good
Arithmetician, as well because of what he say here, as also because he says in
his Historical Antiquities, page 137. (which words you may also find before my
Defense of Amicia, page 14.) that he was eight years older than his Wife, when
he was married; whereas he is not now much above six years older, for as you
may see in his Historical Antiquities, page 361. he was born the third of
March, 1613. and his Lady was baptized the 23 day of May, 1620. And I believe
Sir Peter will acknowledge he reckons his own birth, not according to the
Julian, but according to the account of the Church of England; and if he should
say otherways, he might be easily confuted: for as you may find in the said 361
page, he had a sister named Margaret, who was born September 29, 1612. and
buried at Great Budworth, October. 12, 1612. so that Sir Peter could not be born
the third day of March, 1613. according to the Julian account; for then his
birth would have been but a little above five months after his said sister was
born.

And whereas in the 49, 50, 51, 52 pages of my Answer to his Addenda, I have
proved out of the Welsh History written by Caradocus Llanearuan, that Hugh
Cyveliok in all probability had another Wife before Bertred, because he could
be no less than 41 years of age when he married her, (although we suppose that
he married her so soon as she was 14 years old) Sir Peter to avoid this proof,
does endeavor all he can to disparage Dr. Powell who did put out the said
History, and writ Notes thereon; but he was not so contemptible a person as Sir
Peter would make him, for Mr. Wood in his History and Antiquities of Oxford,
lib. 2. page 319. does call the said Doctor, Rerum Antiquarum rimatorem
industrium, atque Historiarum Britannicarum peritissimum: and Sir Peter does
also very well know that it is not the Doctor, but Caradocus Llancaruan which I
do cite; he also will not suffer the said Book to be read as it should have
been printed, but would have it read according as he does please; which liberty
if he may take, he has very ill fortune, if he cannot keep it from saying any
thing contrary to his own mind; then he will read it, not as it ought to have
been printed, but as it is misprinted, and thinks he shows a great deal of
skill, in proving that it cannot be true as it is misprinted, which every one
will confess as well as himself. And lastly, although in his Historical
Antiquitles in the Fifth Chapter, concerning the Kings of Wales, and Princes of
Wales, in which Chapter he did quote Ingulphus, Orderiews, Cambden, Matthew
Paris, and others, and did tell you there in his 44 page, that in these Welsh
matters, he did chiefly follow the Welsh History put out by Dr. Powell, 1584.
yet now he will also disparage the said History all that he can.

But that he may seem to have some reason for what he says, he will tell you,
that in that very place where Caradocus speaks of taking Melyenith, he also
says, that at that time King Steven took Geffrey Mandevile Prisoner at St.
Albons, whereas Mat: Paris sub anno 1142. says, it was William Mandevile who
was there taken, and therefore he will not have Caradocus to be believed in
other things; but this which Sir Peter here says will be of no force, first,
because though Mat: Paris be a very good Author, yet Caradocus (if there was
nothing else in the Case) ought to be believed before the said Mat: Paris,
because the said Caradocus was living when the said Hugh did win Melyenith, and
when the said Geffrey de Mandevile was taken Prisoner, whereas the said Mat:
Paris lived a long time afterward, for he dyed in the year 1259. which was 117
years after that time; secondly, because what Carodocus says concerning the
said Geffrey in his said 197 page, is very true, whose words are these: AT that
time, (viz. 1142.) King Steven took Geffrey Mandevile Prisoner at St. Albon,
where the Earl of Arundel was like to be drowned by default of his Horse; The
Earl Mandevile gave to the King for his liberty, the Tower of London, with the
Castles of Walden and Plassey, who afterward lived by spoil of Abbeys, and was
slain in a skirmish against the King.

Now that Caradocus does not mistake herein, will thus appear, If you look in
Henry of Huntington, (who lived in the time of the said King Stephen) page 393.
line 15. you may thus read: EOdem anno cepit Rex Gaufridum de Magnavilla in
Curia sua apud sanctum Albanum magis secundum retributionem nequitiae consulis,
quam secundum j^^ gentium, magis ex necessitate quam ex honestate; Nisi enim
hoc egisset, perfidia consulis illius regno privatus fuisset; Igitur ut Rex eum
liberaret, reddidit ei Turrim Londoniae and Castellum de Waledene and illud de
Plaisseiz, possessionibus igitur caren^ consul praedictus invasit Abbatiam
Ram^siensem and Monachis expulsis raptores immisit, and Ecclesiam Dei speluncam
fecit latronum.

Also if you peruse the History of Simeon Dunelmensis (who lived in the time of
the said King Steven, and whose History was continued for about 25 years by
John Prior of Hagulsted) col. 273. line 15. you may thus read: Galfridus enim
de Magnavilla ejectis Monachis Monasterio de Ramesbi abusus est vice Castri.

Also Roger Hoveden (who lived in the times of King Henry 2. R. 1. and King
John, in his Annals printed at Franfurt, 1601. page 488. l. 41.) thus says:
ANno autem ipso consul Gaufridus de Mandevilla Regem validissime vexavit, and
in omnibus valde gloriosus effulsit; Mense autem Augusti miraculum justicia sua
dignum virtus divina monstravit; Duos namque qui monachis evulsis Ecclesias Dei
converterant in Castella, similiter peecantes simili poena mulctavit; Robertus
namque Marmiun vir bellicosus hoc in Ecclesia de Coventree perversus exegerat;
Porro Gaufridus ut diximus in Ecclesia Ramesiensi scelus idem patraverat.

And a little before in the said page, he also tells how the said Geffrey was
taken Prisoner at St. Albon, and delivered the Tower of London, and the Castles
of Wallinden and Plasseis to the then King.

Also Gulielmus Nubrigensis (who lived in the times of R. 1. and King John)
thus writes, lib. 1. cap. xi.

EOdem tempore Rex Stephanus cepit Gaufridum de Magnavilla in curia sua apud
Sanctum Albanum: non quidem honest and secundum jus pro merito ejus: and metu
scilicet, quod expediret, quam quod deceret plus attendens. Erat enim idem
Gaufridus homo Audacissimus, and magnarum virium, simul and Artium: praeclaram
illam Arcem Lundoniensem cum duabus aliis Munitionibus non ignobilibus
possidens, and subtili astutia ingentia moliens. And afterward in the same
Chapter he speaks how the King did wrest from the said Geffrey the Tower of
London, with his two other Castles, and also what the said Geffrey did to the
Monastery of Ramesey.

Also Raph de Diceto, who was Dean of Paul's in King John's time, in his Abbrev:
Chronic: col. 508. line 32. thus says: 1142. STephanus Rex Gaufridum de
Magnivilla cepit in Curia sua, qui ut liberaretur, reddidit turrim Lundoniae
and Castella sua.



Also Gervasius a Benedictine Monk of Canterbury (who lived in the time of King
John, col. 1360. line 7.) thus writes: M CX LIIII. REx Stephanus cepit Comitem
Gaufridum de Mandavilla in Curia sua apud sanctum Albanum, magis ex
necessitate, quam ex honestate, Nisi enim hoc fecisset, ut a pluribus
dicebatur, perfidia Comitis regno privandus esset. Captus itaque Comes nulla
potuit occasion liberari, nisi sua Castella resignans Regiae pareret
voluntati. Reddidit ergo Turrim Londoniae and Castellum de Waldene and illud de
Plessiz and liberatus est. Comes igitur munitionibus carens, and a Militari
crudelitate se cohibere non valens; invasit abbatiam de Rameseia, and de
Ecclesia Dei non ^^ritus Justitiam, speluncam fecit Latronum.

Also John Brompton col. 1033. l. 1. EOdem anno Comes Galfridus de Mandavilla a
Rege captus pro restitutione turris Londoniensis and Castelli de Walde postea
liberatur, qui possessionibus carens, cum adhuc magnam haberet familiam
confestim abbathiam Sancti Benedicti de Rameseye invasit and Monachis expulsis
raptores immisit, and sanctum Monasterium speluncam fecit latronum.

But I shall, after all this, show you what Mat: Paris himself says in that
Edition put out by Dr. Wats, page 79. which is the same place which Sir Peter
does cite, whose words are these: EOdem tempore Rex Stephanus cepit Willielmum
de Mandevilla apud Sanctum Albanum unde reddidit Regi Turrim Londoniarum cum
Castellis de Waldene and de Plessiz antequam a vinculis solveretur. Qui carens
possessionibus paternis, invasit abbatiam Ramefiensem, atque Monachis expulsis
raptores immisit.

But on the other side of the Leaf, viz. page 80. l. 17. in the year 1143. he
thus says: EOdem anno Robertus Marmimi vit bellicosus qui Monachos Coventrenses
a suo Monasterio expulerat, and de Ecclesia illa Castellum fecerat, dum contra
hosts decertaret, inter praedones suos, ante ipsum Monasterium, solus
peremptus est, and excommunicatus morte depascitur sempiterna. Noto.
Eodem vero tempore Gaufridus Consul de Mandavilla qui idem scelus patraverat
in Monasterio Note.
Ramesiensi ante ipsam Ecclesiam inter Consortes suorum acies, a pedite quodam
vilissimo solus sagitta percussus, occubuit interfectus, etc. So that the
Reader may plainly see, how deceitfully Sir Peter does here deal; for finding
him in Mat: Paris called William de Mandevile on one side of the Leaf, (through
either the slip of Mat: Paris 's Pen, or the Printer's negligence) he acquaints
the Reader with that, but never tells him how he is on the other side of the
Leaf called Geffrey de Mandevile. And that this was purposely done, may easily
appear, because if Mat: Paris had called him William on both sides of the Leaf,
yet Caradocus, who was then living, having called him Geffrey, Sir Peter should
have consulted other Authors, to have seen which of them two had been in the
right; but these ancient Authors being against him, it was a good way to let
them alone.

I shall therefore leave it to the Reader to judge, whether Caradocus
Llancaruan be not to be believed concerning Hugh Cyveliok's taking of
Melyenith, being the same was taken when he was living; as also whether it does
not certainly appear by that proof, that Hugh Cyvelio^ was at the least 41
years old when he married Bertred, and by consequence in all probability
imaginable had a former Wife, for which reason, (if the other proofs were laid
aside) there is no just cause to suspect Amicia to be illegitimate, and with
this I will conclude my Answer to his former Book.

In the Latin Epistle to the Judges, (which I suppose to be Sir Peter's, though
he does not vouchsafe to set his name thereto) he said I was the first
Instigator of this Controversy; but whether that be so or not, let the Reader
judge by what I have said in my Epistle before my Defense of Amicia, and in the
second and third pages of my Reply. Also in the same Epistle, when he does
appeal to the Judges, he does not put the question, Whether the Law was
different in the time of Glanvil in this point of free marriage from what it is
now? But he proposes this Question, Whether or no in the time of Glanvil, by
our ancient Law, it was lawful for any Man to give Land in free marriage with
his Bastard Daughter, although the Law being now changed, the Law does not at
this day permit a Gift in frank marriage with a Bastard Daughter? By which he
proves himself to be very like the Gentleman he speaks of in the 14 pages of
both his Books, who would needs dispute about a Cross, and the question must be
-- Whether the Cross was a Cross or no Cross? For if the Law be now clearly and
certainly changed in this particular point of frank marriage, from what it was
in the days of Glanvil (as he in his Question absolutely says it is) it is then
as certain, that Lands might have been given in free marriage to those not of
the blood in the time of Glanvil, as it is certain, that a Cross is a Cross;
(but this Point must be otherwise proved than by such a frivolous question as
this is.)

He also in the same Epistle, tells those Reverend Judges, how highly he
prefers Divinity before other Studies; but if he had been so conversant
therein, as he would have them to believe, it seems strange to me, that he has
not better learnt his duty to his deceased Grandmother; for we are bound to
honor all our Parents, whether mediate or immediate; and whether they be
living, or dead: And I believe he will not find any Precedent in Scripture,
where any one did divulge the shame of any person, out of whose loins he did
descend except that of wicked Ham, which pattern is in some respects exceeded
by Sir Peter; for Ham did really find his Father naked: and when the other Sons
of Noah had co^^ered their Father with a Garment, he did not offer to reveal
his Fathers nakedness again and again.

As for his second Book, which he directs to all the Judges of England, it so
falls out, that there is nothing therein, but what is in his former Books, and
is already answered; though if there had, I should not have presumed to have
given any Answer thereto; because those learned persons know well enough what
the Law was, and is in all particulars, and cannot receive any information
therein, either from Sir Peter, or me, or be deceived by his misrecitals in his
said Books; However, I cannot but observe how slightly he speaks of the Lord
Coke in his 48 page, and also how he has such light expressions in his Book
directed to the Judges, as I believe were never used before by any person of
discretion, to such Reverend and Learned Men. No wonder therefore, if he speak
coursely of me, and tell me of so many Impertinencies; but whether I be guilty
of them, or of those untruths, or of that opprobrious language, which he does
charge me with, let the indifferent Reader be Judge. And whereas it does
appear, that he is resolved to have the last word, although he have nothing new
to say; and that his Writing again be contrary both to his duty to his deceased
Grandmother, and to his promise in Print: I do therefore declare, If what Sir
Peter writes hereafter be no more to the purpose, than that is which he has
said in his two (last) Books, that I will not appear in Print against him any
more, but will choose to vindicate my Grandmother and my self by word of mouth,
whenever I shall have any opportunity so to do; only let me now acquaint the
judicious Reader, that some other Judges have declared their opinion concerning
the Legitimacy of Amicia, besides those three who formerly did so, and who were
spoken of by Sir Peter, in the 49 page of the latter of his last Books.

Baddeley, Febr. 15. 1674/5. T. M.

FINIS.

