A full Account from ^RELAND, OF THE Maid at Dublin; Miraculously struck by the
Hand of Heaven, and Burning by a Supernatural Fire; In which deplorable
condition she still continues: With her penitent behavior and discourses since
the recovery of her Speech.

And other Remarkable Passages relating to this Stupendous Judgment.

As Communicated in a Letter received by the last Post, Jan. 14. from Mr. Mount
her Master, living in Christ-Church-Yard in Dublin.

^s also several Historical Instances in the like kind; Published for a Warning
for all to avoid such Profane Exec^ations.

When Gods Judgments are upon the earth, let the Inhabitants learn
Righteousness. With Allowance.

Printed for P. Brooksby, and sold by R. Kell, a^ the Blew-Anchor, in
Pye-corner.

A Full Account from IRELAND. Of the Maid at Dublin.
COnversation, if corrupt, will soon infect the Judgment, Vicious lives, and
unsound opinions being for the most part like Ice and Water, which mutually
produce each other: When People by horrid Impieties have so far forfeited all
hopes of happiness, as it is become their interest, there were neither God nor
Devil, no future reward nor punishment: it is no wonder if they first wish, and
at last come to believe that there may be none: from this accursed fountain
proceeds that inundation of Atheism, which too far has overwhelmed our ungodly
Age, and to that bitter root must we refer those spreading branches of
Infidelity, which vainly endeavor to clould all instances of Divine Judgments
upon notorious sinners, with a shadow of Fiction or improbability.

The deplorable condition of the unhappy Maid at Dublin, who lies severely
languishing under the severe rod of incensed Heaven, is sufficiently notorious
in it self to challenge belief from any person not obstinately incredulous, and
at once affect our Hearts with trembling and our eyes with tears, at the
relation of so eminent and dreadful a punishment: It is not a thing that happened
many Ages since, in some strange remote Regions, or done in a corner, but in
this very Month of January, amongst our own people, in our Sister Nation, and
chief City of that Kingdom, confirmed and attested (without injuring truth, I
may affirm it) by some hundreds of Letters, to persons of repute in this City
of London, from their Friends and Correspondencies.

Some brief account of it has already been made public, what further tidings
we have received by Letters of a fresher date, we shall here acquaint you: but
first be pleased to take the matter of fact fully and truly as it happened, which
is thus.

This party, or wretched subject, whose Name we have no Commission to discover,
and for several reasons think fit to conceal,) was Servant-Maid to one Mr.
Mount, living in Christ-Church Yard in Dublin, a person of good account and
worth, and indeed she seemed to be a better Servant than a Christian, for
though she would very orderly dispatch her houshold-work, yet she had got a
most wicked habit or custom, when she was asked any question, to answer with an
Imprecation or Confirmative Curse on her self, Let me be burned, or, The Devil
burn me, if it be not so: particularly one day, on occasion of something being
lost, or mislaid (what it was is variously reported, but most agree it was a
Silver Tankard) she was very seriously examined about it, and after several
stout denials, several times repeated her wonted Curse, saying often very
solemnly: The Devil burn me alive if I know any thing of it, or what is become
of it, or to that wicked effect: insomuch that her Mistress reproved her for
it, and advised her to forbear such extravagant and prophain expressions,
though she seemed not at all to regard her pious Admonitions: But that evening
her Master and Mistress being gone to bed, and she left up alone, about her
usual occasions, her Master was on a sudden, toward midnight, surprised with
the noise of a strange and unusual Groaning, which after some time obliged him
to get up to satisfy his curiosity, what might be the cause of such
heart-piercing moans, which seemed as the last Accents of some miserable
departing soul: no sooner came he downstairs into the Kitchen, but he finds his
Maid lying in a most miserable condition, for though she were alive, she was
senceless, and all her fingers, hands, arms, and face wonderfully burnt, and
yet neither fire nor candle near her, and (as it appeared afterward) she burnt
in the same manner in other parts of the body, and yet her Clothes not
prejudiced in the least, when they went to touch her, her Flesh felt hot, as
not to be endured, and it appeared to be a kind of burning far different from
our common f^^e it was only in the skin and superfines of the flesh and that it
does somewhat waste, but not violently consume, nor sink far deep to destroy
the vital parts, so that she appears a perfect emblem of infernal misery, still
burning without consuming, and dying without being able to dye.

Several Physicians were sent for, but in vain, this was no Erisephelas or S.
Anthonies fire, nor lies it in the verge of Art. but only in the merciful power
of the Omnipotent Physician, to restore them whom he has visited to make them
Monuments of his Justice. She was removed into Exchequer-Lane, where she was
visited by the greatest part of the City with admiration, remaining for 2 whole
days, without being able to speak; or appearing to have the use of any of her
senses: but on the third day, it pleased the Lord to restore her understanding
and speech, which she no sooner received, but being asked how she came into that
deplorable condition, she with many sighs answered, That she was taken on a
sudden as if she had been flung into a mighty fierce fire, and that the torment
thereof was still beyond expression, but she acknowledged it to be a Visitation
from heaven and a just Judgment of God upon her, for her wicked Cursing, and
Prophain wishes: being futher discoursed with, she seemed too inclinable to
despair, alleging that she had been so notorious a sinner, that God-would
never pardon her, but had cut her off for ever, and visibly damned her to
eternity, whereupon several able Divines were sent for, whom she entertained
very patiently: they applied the Balm of Gilead to her wounded Spirit, and
supported her Heart with those Rich Cordials of promises of pardon and
forgiveness, wherewith the Book of God is plentifully stored: These they so
excellently opened, and so closely brought them home to her condition, that she
seemed to receive some satisfaction from their discoursed and at last burst out
into this pathetical Ejaculation. And is there still mercy and pardon for so
vile a wretch as I! Oh my God, though my present pain be very grievous, yet let
me suffer it for many years, so I may but enjoy thee at last.

They concluded that day with prayer, wherein she seemed very devout and much
affected: Every day since she has been visited by able Men, and gives very
satisfactory answers, acknowledging her Sins and Gods Justice, in laying this
affliction upon her, so that it is generally hoped that this temporal Judgment
is inflicted on her, that she may escape Death Eternal.

Se continues still in the same condition, and can receive food, but takes so
very little of it at a time, that it is believed that unless God restore her,
she will in short time waste away.

Our last Letters that gave any account of her, were dated the Fourteenth of
this instant January; and we can say no more of her, but leave her to the
infinite mercies of her Almighty Creator, hopeing (which she also often
expresses to be the great desire of her heart) that her example may Warn and
deter all others that see her, or shall hear this faithful Relation of her
condition, to avoid and abandon all such horrid Execrations, Cursings, wicked
wishes, and profane expressions, lest a worse thing come upon them.

Tunc tua Res agiter paries cum proximus ardet. Shall the Lion Roar, and we not
tremble, or the tempest of Gods wrath be so effectually and miraculously
powered down, and we presume to practice the very same sins for which this poor
Creature is made a Monument of Divine justice and dreadful spectacle of misery;
as the holy Scriptures (wherein such judgments come to pass) for our
instruction, and no doubt every one ought to reap profit to himself by such
Examples, as well those which are presented daily to them by experience, as
those that have been done in Ages past, and are by the benifit of History
preserved from oblivion: of which latter kind give us leave to add one or two
from Authentic Authors, somewhat Resembling this modern one we have here
Related.

An eminent Author in his Comment upon the 15 Chap. of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, tells us of a Rude Debauch in Germany, who amongst other
Extravagancies, had got a habit that the Devil must come in almost every
sentence that past his Lips, if walking he treads awry, if any thing hurt or
anger him; or the like, straight the Devil must be in his Mouth; for which,
though he were often Reproved by some godly Neighbors, yet it was in vain, he
continued his detestable Phrase, till one time passing over a Bridge, he fell
down, or stumbled, and in his fall (instead of calling upon God) uttered these
words, Hoist up with a hundred Devils: which he had no sooner spoken, but the
Devil whom he had so often invoked, did appear and strangled him, and carried
away his Carcass.

A Carter in Staffordshire Riding before on the Shafts as he drove his Teem,
fell into a horrid fit of Swearing and cursing the poor Cattle, wishing a
plague of God for 'um, etc. but going in his fury to leap down to beat them, he
accidentally fell down, and the Wagon being heavy loaded, the Wheels run over
his head and neck, and miserably bruised him to pieces.

A Shoemaker living some years since in London, had a wicked custom of
swearing that horrid Oath, By Gods Blood; one Evening as he was often repeating
it, being in a great Rage with a Prentice, his Nose immediately fell a
bleeding, which by no means could be stanched, so that he bled to Death in that
sad manner.

At St. Gallus, a Town in Helvetia, a poor Man that got his living by whit'ning
Linen, having brutified himself with drink, vomited out many tirrible Curses,
as well against himself, as others; amongst the rest, he wished if ever he went
into the Fields to his old trade, that the Devil might come and break his neck:
but when sleep had allayed the fumes of his Liquor, and sobriety restored his
senses, he went again to his old Trade, remembering indeed his late words, but
not regarding them; however, the Devil to show his diligence, attended him at
the place and asked him if he remembered his offer and engagement, and whether
he might not justly break his neck, and withal struck the poor man, trembling
with fear, over the shoulders, that his feet and hands presently dried up, so
that he was not able to stir, till by the help of men he was carried home, the
Lord not giving Satan so much power as he wished himself, yet permitting him so
far to plague him, for his amendment, and our example.

The Saxon Chronicles relate of Henry Earl of Schwartburg, who used commonly to
wish he might be drowned or stifled in a House of Office, if he did not so, or
so, and as he wished, he was served, being Murdered in the Privy belonging to
St. Peter's Monastry in Erford.

In the year of our Lord.1649. a certain rump-Souldier quartering at Ware, went
down with some persons of the Town into the Meadows, where he would needs go
into the River to wash himself, but seeing the water very shallow, he asked
whether the River were no where deeper that he might swim? whereupon they
showed him another place, but withal told him, it was not only exceeding deep
but dangerous, because there was there a kind of Whirlpool: To whom he
desperately replied, I care not, let it be as deep as Hell I Will in, let it
whirle me to the Devil: And immediately saying this, he jumpt into the River,
but sunk to rights, and was never seen more.

Conradus in his Theatrum Memorabilium, tells upon his own knowledge of a Lady
in Bavaria, that being suspected by her Husband of too much familiarity with a
young Baron dwelling near, and once in particular upon some very violent
suspicions taxed for keeping him company, denied all Correspondence with him,
with a thousand protestations; and being then great with-child, solemnly wished
that she might never be delivered of that Child she then went withal, or that
it might prove a Monster, if she were ever guilty of any undecent or unchaste
Conversation with that Gentleman; With which Asseverations, her Husband being
satisfied, quitted his jealousies, and received her into favor as much as ever.
But about two months after when her time was out, she fell into Labor, and
continued so in extremity of pangs for five whole days, and could by no help
nor Art be delivered, so that at last being just ready to give up the Ghost,
she openly acknowledged it to be a Righteous Judgment both for such her cursed
wish and filthy Adultery. For this the Birth she was then in Travel with, was
not of her Husbands begetting, but the beforementioned Barons, saying which,
she miserably dyed, and being afterward opened, behold a Monster indeed in her
Womb, for it had the perfect body of a Male-child, but the head craftly like an
Owls, and the feet with ^laven (...) like those of an Ox: A dreadful Examples
of Divine vengeance. 1. Against Adultery, and 2ly. Against all such profane
I^^i^^tions; and which may warn all, especially Women, in such a condition, to
set a Watch before their Lips, least God should visit for such R^sh and wicked
speeches, in that terrible hour of pangs and tortures, which Eves Transgression
has entailed on that Sex in Childbearing.

A Fisherman belonging to bright Hempston in Sussex, coming home with his Boat
laden with Mackarells, and they being the first that had been taken that year,
abundant of People flockt about him to buy them, and some of them would needs
go into his Boat; whereat he being mightily enraged, cried out, God confound me
if I do not break your necks, and catching up a pole, went furiously to strike
at them; but fell backward and broke his own Neck, so that he never spoke a
word after words.

A Person in the Lower Helvetia, in the year 1652. having privately borrowed a
sum of money of a friend without any witness, or any thing to show for it,
after he had made use of it a long time, and the Person that furnished him had
occasion for it again, grew so ungratefully (...) deny the Receipt of it, or
that he (...) him any thing, facing down the good (...) Man impudently with
Oaths and protestations, who seeing no Remedy, left him, desiring him to lay
the thing to his Conscience, etc. After he was gone, this Villain being at
dinner with his Wife, began to glory of his exploit, in cheating the man of his
money. To whom the Woman, being of better Principles, answered, I wonder
Husband how you dare do these things! Pish, says he, in scorn, you are a fool,
who dares not forswear himself for such a sum, deserves to dye a Beggar? I Will
warrant thee Wench, a Lie never choaks me. But behold the just hand of God in
this presumptuous wretch, for immediately as he spoke these Words, a piece of
Rind of Bacon, which he was eating, stuck in his Throat, and so continued 24
hours, not to be moved by any Art, till he dyed, being choked, notwithstanding
his impudent bragging with that Lie in his mouth, those being the last Words he
was ever able audibly to utter.

But most opposite is that of a young Courtier of Mansfield, mentioned by
Cyracus in his Treatise, De Elegantijs veteris Adami. This Gallant had a wicked
custom in any earnest Asseveration, to say, The Devil take me if it be not so:
The Devil to gratify (...) took him one day while he slept, and (...) out of a
high window: where, though by (...) providence he received no great harm* (...)
learn thence to bridle his tongue from all such cursed Speeches for the future.

Which use I hope all considerate persons will think of our well-intending
pains in publishing the present Relation.

-- Felix quem faciunt.
FINIS.

