A REPLY TO AN ANSWER To the DEFENSE of AMICIA, Daughter of HVGH CYVELIOK EARL
of Chester.

Wherein it is Proved, That the REASONS Alleged by Sir Peter Leicester. In
his former Book, and also in his said Answer, concerning the Illegitimacy of
the said Amicia, are invalid, and of no weight at all.

By Sir Thomas Mainwating of Peover in CHESHIRE, Baronet.

London, Printed for S. Lowndes over against Exeter-House in the Strand. 1673.

TO Sr PETER LEICESTER, BARONET.
THe Reasons which you and I have alleged for and against Amicia, being now
made public, all Persons may easily judge, whether, (as you believe) it was
only the zeal of my opinion touching her Legitimacy, which caused me to
endeavor to incline the world to concur with me therein, or that what I said
was supported with just Grounds and Reasons; and I doubt not but those of our
County that are understanding Persons, will as easily discern from some of your
omissions, (although I forbear publicly to take notice of them) that it was
something else besides your great love to Truth (pretended by your alleging
the old Rule of Aristotle,) which occasioned you thus to asperse your deceased
Grandmother. But however things are, you have no reason to suspect any
animosities betwixt us, I having in my first Book (as I hope I shall also do in
this) endeavored to avoid all expressions, which I did conceive might be
offensive, and I am confident you have no just cause to be angry with me, for
endeavoring to defend a deceased Grandmother whom I suppose to be very much
injured by you.

I know not how far your memory may fail you therein, but I am sure I have
several times moved you (and particularly came once purposely to you to Tabley)
to desire that you would be contented to deliver what you did conceit
concerning Amicia, as an uncertainty only, (as you had done that of Roger, Son
of Hugh Cyveliok) and did at all those times assure you that if you would so
do, and withal, express that some Judges and Heralds were of a different
judgment from you, that I would never trouble you or the Reader with any Lines
of mine. And the reason why I desired you thus to do, was, because the Reader
would certainly conclude Amicia to be a Bastard, though no reasons were
alleged, if he saw one who was descended of her, to declare her illegitimate
in Print, and did not know that some Learned Men were of a different opinion;
but I could not possibly prevail with you herein. And although what you allege
be true, that there is no medium betwixt being a Bastard and Legitimate, but
that a Man must absolutely be the one or the other, yet, as to the Writer of an
History, the case may be different; for he may be certain, that some,
concerning whom he writes, may be Legitimate, and others may be Bastards, and
accordingly he ought so to place them; but it is possible there may be some
which he is uncertain, whether they be Bastards or not; and in that case the
Historian ought to express it doubtfully, and not to take upon him absolutely
to determine the point upon uncertain grounds.

As to your saying in the fourth page of your Answer, in the Margent, that you
apprehend not why I call Sir Ralph Mainwaring, Chief Justice of Chester, when
in those Ages there was only one Judge at a time there.

My reason wherefore I so did, was because I found that Reginald Gray, who was
Judge of Chester, had taken unto him as an Associate, Ralph Hegham, in the
thirteenth year of King Edward the I as appears page 172. of your Historical
Antiquities: as also, because I found in your said Book, before the time of Sir
Ralph Mainwaring, two Deeds of Randle de Gernoniis, (which seemed to imply,
that there had been sometimes more Justices of Chester than one at a time,) the
one of which as appears, page 128. was directed, Constabulario, Dapifero,
Baronibus, JVSTICIARIIS, etc. and the other, as you may see, page 160. was
directed, Episcopo Cestriae, Dapifero, Baronibus, JVSTICIARIIS, etc. so that I
hope, I am justifiable herein.

And though it was not usual till after ages, to have two Justices of Chester
at one time, and that I have not yet found, that in the time of Ralph
Mainwaring, there was any Justice of Chester, but the said Ralph, yet it being
possible for the reasons aforesaid, that there might be more than one at a
time; I did therefore call the said Ralph, Chief Justice, to show if there were
then two, that he was the chief of them, because he acted as Justice of Chester
alone, as will thus appear from a Roll of ancient Charts, called Doomesday,
remaining in the Castle of Chester, amongst the Records there.

Leuca quae fuit uxor Ranulphi de Kingesleigh veniens in pleno Com. Cestriae
coram Radulpho de Mainwaring tunc Justiciario Cestriae and Baronibus, etc.
quiet. clam. Richardo de Kingesleigh totam villant de Bertherton unde dotata
fuit. And whereas you pretend page 4 and 5. of your Answer, (which is the only
example which you bring to prove what you there allege) that Geffrey de
Dutton, who made the Original Deed of Nether-Tabley had this word Domino,
sometimes prefixed to his Name, when he was a Witness, and yet was no Knight;
and thence would infer, that the word Dominus is no sure rule, to be always
understood of a Knight. I shall before I give an answer unto what you say,
transcribe the said Deed out of your Historical Antiquities, as I find it in
the 355 page of your said Book.

Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Galfridus de Dutton dedi and concessi
and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Margaretae siliae meae, pro homagio and
servitio suo totam villam meam, quae vocatur Parva-Tabley, sine ullo
retenemento, cum Homagiis and Servitiis, cum Villenagiis, cum Boscis, cum
Planis, cum Pratis, and Pascuis, cum Moris and Mariscis, cum Aquis and
Molendinis, cum Viis and Semitis, cum omnibus locis praedictae Villae
pertinentibus: Tenendam and habendam sibi Margaretae, and Haeredibus suis, de
me Galfrido, and Haeredibus meis, libere quiet, and pacisice, cum omnibus
libertatibus, and Aysiamentis praedictae villae pertinentibus: Faciendo inde
mihiforinsecum servitium, quantum pertinet ad duas Bovatas terrae,, unde
trigint a Bovatae Terrae faciunt Feodum unius Militis, and faciendo servitium
de Hauthoner quantum pertinet ad praedictam villam, pro omni seculari servitio,
consuetudine, and demanda, mihi and Haeredibus meis pertinente. Et ego
Galfridus and Haeredes mei praedictam villam, ut praedictum est, praedictae
Margaretae and haered. suis, contra omnes homines and faeminas in perpetuum
warrantizabimus Et ad majorem hujus rei securitatem huic praesenti scripto
Sigillum apposui meum. Hiis Testibus, Domino Thoma de Dutton, Domino Galfrido
de Dutton, Hugone de Lymme, Thoma fratre ejus, Ricardo de Aston, Rogero de
Toft, Willielmo de Waleton, and multis aliis. Now this Geffrey de Dutton, being
that person who did give Little-Tabley, (now called Nether-Tabley, and the
principal Seat of your Family) unto Margaret his Daughter and Heir, who first
was married to Robert de Denbigh, and afterward to Sir Nicholas Leicester, and
so brought Nether-Tabley unto the Leicesters; A Man would think that you should
be very well acquainted with all the Deeds that the said Geffrey made, which
are in your custody, and et I doubt not but to make it appear, that you have
run into several very gross errors, concerning that Geffrey de Dutton, who made
the said Deed; For first, page 4 and 5. of your Answer, you tell us (which is
but your own fancy) that the word Dominus was applied to the better sort of
Gentlemen in those ages who were no Knights, and that in those elder Ages it
was sometimes prefixed, and oftener omitted even to the same Men; as Domino
Galfrido de Dutton, who in the Original Chart of Nether-Tabley writes himself
only -- Ego Galfridus de Dutton dedi, etc. and several other Deeds you have
seen of the same person (who you say was lineal Ancestor to Warburton of Arley)
wherein you dare affirm among the Witnesses subscribed, he has five times and
more the word Dominus omitted, for once that we find it prefixed to his name;
and you are very confident, was not in him, as many others also, to be
construed any more then Master Geffrey Dutton, and that he was no Knight;

To answer which, I shall thus far agree with you, That I believe the said
Geffrey Dutton (Son of Geffrey, Son of Adam) who made the said Deed of Little
or Nether Tabley was no Knight, But I cannot imagine how it is possible that
the said Geffrey de Dutton to that or any other Deeds of his own, could have
his Name either with the word domino, or without, either five times for once,
or at all, amongst the witnesses subscribed, unless you fancy, that he was a
Witness to his own Deeds, which is as gross a thing as I have known; But
besides this, you run into another error, and when you do indeed find the word
dominus prefixed to the name of Geffrey de Dutton as a Witness to other Men's
Deeds, you will needs have that Dominus Galfridus de Dutton to be him, who made
the said Deed of Nether Tabley, whereas it was not he, but his Father, as I
shall presently make very manifest; For it is clear that you have seen no deed
made by any Geffrey de Dutton, in which the word dominus is used by the party
himself, because, you tell us p. 5 and 6. (but erroneously also, as will anon
appear) that the word dominus is never used in old Deeds by the party himself,
but where it is joined with another word, as Ego Willielmus Manwaring Dominus
de Pever, Ego Robertus dominus Moaldiae; and also, p. 5. you only speak of his
Name being subscribed as a Witness, so that all the Proof which you have of a
Dominus Galfridus de Dutton is from his being called so by other persons in
other Men's Deeds: Now, it appearing in your Historical Antiquities, page 250.
that Hugh de Dutton, Son of Hugh, Son of Hodard, had a second Son named Adam de
Dutton, (from whom you say the Warburtons of Arley are descended) and the said
Adam de Dutton as appears in your said Book, page 384. having issue a Son owned
by you to be Sir Geffrey Dutton, which Sir Geffrey, as you confess, page 354
and 355. had issue Geffrey Dutton, who made the said Deed of Tabley, the said
Sir Geffrey Dutton the Father being then living, and a Witness to the said
Deed, you when you find a Dominus Galfridus de Dutton to be a Witness to any
Deed, will not own it (as you ought to do) to be Sir Geffrey Dutton Son of
Adam, who indeed was a Knight, but you will have it to be Geffrey Dutton the
Grandson of Adam, who was no Knight; But though perhaps you may by such devises
as these, impose upon some silly Readers, yet certainly no intelligent person
will believe what you say concerning the same.

Also, I might here ask you, whether the word Dominus when it is prefixed to
the name of a person, who is not a Clergyman, does prove him certainly to be a
Knight, or not? If it do, Why will not you call every Layman a Knight, that
has it so prefixed? and if it do not, Why do you in your Historical
Antiquities p. 330. and 332. own Sir Thomas Mainwaring of Warmincham, upon the
like proof, to be a Knight? And Why (as appears in the 8 Page of your Answer to
my Defense of Amicia) did you fully intend to have called Ralph Mainwaring,
Roger Mainwaring and William Mainwaring, all Knights, but that you know not by
what fate it was forgotten? And, Why do you all along in your later Book
acknowledge them to be Knights?

And whereas you say, p. 5 and 6. that, the word Dominus is never used in old
Deeds, by the party himself, but when it is joined with another word, as Ego
Willielmus Mainwaring Dominus de Pever, Ego Robertus Dominus Moaldiae, but is
only used when the party is subscribed as a witness; Though that be true for
the most part, yet it does not always hold, as will appear by two Deeds of Sir
Thomas Mainwarings of Warmincham, which I have by me, sealed with two Bars in
Green-wax, written about thus, S. Tome le Maynwarig; which Deeds you have seen,
and are as follows;

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Dominus Thomas de Menylgaring dedi
concessi and hac praesenti carta mea confirmavi Hamoni filio Johannis de
Bruerio pro homagio and servitio suo quinque acras terrae in Villa de
Cogishull, illas, scilicet, quas de me prius tenuit ad terminum, cum aumento
perficiendi quinque acras integras sine impedimento, and sicut sepe fossato
metis and bundis circueuntur and continentur, and cum omnibus aliis
pertinentiis suis, and pro tribus marcis and dimid. argenti, quas mihi dedit
praemanibus: Habendum and tenendum de dicto Domino Thoma and haeredibus suis,
dicto Hamoni and haeredibus suis and assignatis, libere, quiet, integre,
haereditarie, imperpetuum, in bosco, in plano, in pratis, in pascuis, in viis,
in semitis, in aquis, in moris, in omnibus communibus, and asyamentis Villae de
Cokishull ubique pertinentibus: Reddendo inde annuatim dicto Domino Thome and
haeredibus suis duos solidos and sex denarios ad duos anni terminos, videlicet,
ad Nativitatem Sancti Johannis Baptistae quindecem denarios, and ad festum
Sancti Martini in yeme quindecem denarios pro omni servitio seculari, exactione
and demanda mihi and haeredibus meis pertinentibus: Et ego vero dictus Dominus
Thomas and haeredes mei dicto Hamoni and haeredibus suis and assignatis totas
praedict as quinque acras terrae cum omnibus pertinentiis suis sicut
praenotatum est contra omnes homines and foeminas warantizabimus and defendemus
imperpetuum. In hujus rei testimonium huic praesenti carta^ sigillum meum
apposui, Hiis Testibus, Hugone de Duram, Willielmo Bernard tunc Seneschallo
domini Thomae de Menylgaring, Richardo Starkye, Roberto de Wynninton, Ranulpho
de Berthorton, Thoma de Queloc, Johanne de Merbury, Rogero clerico, and aliis.

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Dominus Thomas de Menylgaring dedi
concessi and hac praesenti carta mea confirmavi Roberto de Bexeckne pro homagio
and servitio totam illam terram quam mercatus fuit de Hugone de Berdeney sicut
sepe and fossato circuitur and includitur and metis and bundis continetur cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis: Habendum and tenendum de me and haeredibus meis and
assignatis dicto Roberto and haeredibus suis and assignatis, libere, quiet,
integre, haereditarie, in pace, been, in bosco, in plano, in aquis, in viis, in
semitis, in pratis, in pasturis, cum housbold and haybold, and tacfre, de
omnibus propriis porcis suis infra omnes metas de Cokishull, and cum omnibus
aliis communibus and esyamentis praedictae villae spectantibus: Reddendo inde
annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis and meis assignatis quindecem denarios
argenti ad duos anni terminos, videlicet ad nativitatem sancti Johannis
Baptistae septem denarios and obolum and ad festum sancti Martini in yeme
septem denarios and obolum pro omnibus servitiis secularibus exactionibus and
demandis praedictae terrae pertinentibus: Et ego vero Dominus Thomas de
Menilgaring and haeredes mei and assignati mei dicto Roberto and haeredibus
suis and assignatis totam praedictam terram sicut sepe and fossato circuitur
and includitur, and sicut proenotatum est contra omnes homines and faeminas
imperpetuum warrantizabimus and defendemus: Pro hac autem donatione concessione
and cartae meae confirmatione dedit mihi dictus Robertus quatuor solidos
argenti praemanibus: In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti cartae sigillum
meum apposui: Hiis testibus, Richardo Starkey, Willielmo Bernard tunc
Seneschallo Domini Thomae de Menilgaring, Johanne de Merbury, Hugone de eadem,
Hugone silio Hamonis de Comberbach, Ad. de Acton, Roberto de Burwys, Rogero
Clerico, and aliis.

And as to what you say, page 8. of your Answer, that as the word Sir, is in
common discourse applicable to persons of quality from the highest to the
lowest in its larger notion, so Dominus is applicable to any Knight or
Gentleman, as if you should say, Domine quaeso, number hoc verum est quod dieo,
neene?

I grant it to be true, but then as you observe, the word Sir, or the word
Dominus must only so be taken in its larger notion, but that is so far from
weakening what I say, that it does confirm it; For though if I speak to one
whose name is Peter, that is but a Gentleman, I may properly use the word Sir
to him, yet I cannot properly join the word Sir to his name, and call him Sir
Peter, unless the said person be either a Baronet or a Knight, and that is the
case in these old Deeds, where the word Dominus is prefixed to the names of the
said Knights.

Also, if the word Dominus do only signify Master, (as you would have it) What
is the reason, that in some Deeds it is only put before the names of some of
the witnesses, and not before the names of others? although those other persons
to whose names it is not put, many times are Lords of several Manors, and
persons of very great Estate.

As to what you allege, page 6. of your Arswer to my defense of Amicia, that
in the 27 page of my said Defense, Radulfus de Meidnilwaring after his Daughter
Bertrey was marriageable is there named without his Title of Dominus; You your
self have answered that a little before, by confessing (though the word Domino
is usually set to the name of such a person when he is named a witness) that
the word Dominus is never used by the party himself, but where it is joined
with another word, as Ego Willielmus Mainwaring Dominus de Peover, Ego Rogerus
Dominus Moaldiae, which though for the most part it be very true, yet I have
showed that it does not ever hold; But instead of observing that you had given
a full answer to this objection of your own, you strangely fancy, that I would
possibly say, that that Deed was made before the said Ralph was Justice of
Chester; whereas in the 74 page of my said Book, I had told you, that the said
Deed was so far from being made before the said Ralph was Justice of Chester,
that it was made after he had parted with the said Office; And thus you became
guilty of a double levity, first, in making an objection, which you your self
had answered but in the preceding page, and then in framing an answer thereto
for me, directly contrary to what I had formerly said.

And whereas you say, page 8. that you had rather give to any, especially to my
Family, more then is due, then less; I could wish I had just cause to be of
that opinion; For I am sure you have omitted in our Descent, not only Ranulfus,
who is nominated in Doomesday Book, but also Richard Mesnilwaren mentioned in
your Historical Antiquities, pag^ (...) Roger de Menilgarin, and Note. That
page. 117. of your Historical Antiquities, you have placed Randle before
William, contrary to what you have done Pa. 341. and contrary to Monasticon
Anglicanum. Par. 1. Pa. 985.
William and Randle his Sons, spoken of by you page 341. Roger de Menilgarin or
Mainwaring, named by you page 362. Sir Ralph Mainwaring and Sir Roger
Mainwaring his Son, both taken notice of by you pa. 330. and this upon a
pretense, that they were Lords of Warmincham, whereas I am confident you will
not deny but that the Mainwarings of Warmincham were also owners of Over-Peover
or the most part thereof, until Sir Roger Mainwaring gave Peover to his younger
Son Sir William Mainwaring, and it was not long after, that the Mainwarings of
Peover became Heirs male to those Mainwarings of Warmincham, Sir Warine
Mainwaring, Son of Sir Thomas, Son of the said Sir Roger, dying without issue
Male; Also I am sure you denied to do us right in one other particular, when
you did it in the like case for another Family, which had not so clear proof
for it as mine had.

As for your new quarrel, (page 9 of your Answer) with the Herald, for giving
to Sir Randle Mainwaring my great Grandfather six Barrulets, as his most proper
Coat, whereas you say, ever since the time of Sir Roger Mainwaring, as well the
Heirs of the right Line, as also the Mainwarings of Peover (after they became
next Heirs Male) have constantly born the two bars, for some hundreds of
years; I might reply and tell you, that the Mainwarings, of Peover have not
constantly given, Argent, two Bars Gules, since they became Heirs Male to the
Mainwarings of Warmincham, as appears by my Deeds; Neither do I think that Mr.
Cambden did look upon the Six Barrulets, as a Coat most peculiar to us; for, in
his Britannia in his Description of the County of Chester, he names the two
Bars as the Coat most proper to our Family, as appears by these words of his,
when he writes of Astbury Church, viz. Haec enim perpulchra est, cujus porticus
Occidentalis ipsam Ecclesiam, quae sane alta, sua altitudine adaequat, and
pyramidem adjunctam habet. In caemeterio duae jacent sepulchrales Militum
effigies, in quorum scutis sunt duae directae areolae sive Barrae. Verum cum
coloribus suis destituantur non facile quis dixerit fuerintne ex Breretonis,
Mainwaringis, vel de Venables, quae clarissimae sunt in vicinia familiae, and
ejusmodi Barras variantibus coloribus gentilitiis in clypeis gestant.

I rather think that my Great Grandfather having a Fancy to that Coat of Six
Barrulets more than to that of the two Bars, because the most ancient of our
Deeds were sealed therewith, that Mr. Cambden gave him liberty to bear either
the one or the other, which I see not but it might be done, being our Family
had for several generations usually born the one, and the other had been born
by our Ancestor, and had never been used by any other Family, and I am sure,
though you be so captious with us, that you your self have of late years given
a different Crest, from what had for a long time been born by your
Predecessors, because you found a more ancient Crest in some of your Seals: And
whereas you instance in the great Suit, betwixt Scroop and Grosvenour in the
Marshals Court, under Richard the II. concerning the bearing of a Coat of Arms,
whereto both challenged a right and propriety by usage, but no other way; You
thence rightly infer, that usage makes a right in such cases; but when you say,
that usage only makes a right; you are mistaken therein, For (not to mention
the case in hand, where a man's Ancestor has born a Coat, which for sometime
has been laid aside, but never taken up by any other Family) a Man could then
have no right to a Coat, which was given him by a King of Arms.

I am still of opinion, that you have branded several persons in your Book with
Bastardy, without any proof thereof, but shall not yet concern my self for any
(besides my own Ancestor) except such as you give me just occasion to take
notice of; And as for Geva and Richard Bacun's Mother, the first of them is not
yet by you proved to be a Bastard, and I shall certainly hereafter make it
appear, that the second was no Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, so that Amicia is
like to receive no blow at all; And if they were both Bastards, it would be no
prejudice to Amicia, because I have in my former Book fully proved, that the
gift to Geva was not a Gift in Free-Marriage, (as that to Amicia was) and you
do not pretend at all, that any such gift was made to the Mother of Richard
Bacun.

And whereas you tell me you believe that Geva and the wife of Bacun had never
been spoken of, nor suspected, nor doubted of by me, had not the case of Amicia
been concerned I can assure you I should have been of the same opinion
concerning them, if you had never mentioned Amicia; but if you had not
pretended from their Cases, to raise some Arguments against the said Amicia, I
should never have troubled my self about them, and therefore I forbear to tell
you of all mistakes, except such as the case in hand does give me just occasion
to observe. And whereas you say, page 12. that you think you shall make good
what you have alleged, with as much certainty as the nature of the thing and
times will admit. And also page 27. that Geva was certainly a Bastard, by as
good proof us can possibly be expected in such a case; You do thereby
implicitly confess, that you do not make those things appear with any
certainty at all.

I have now done with what you have said concerning my Epistle, and shall now
proceed to consider of your Answer to the Book it self; and because you do in
several places, again say, what you have said heretofore, I hope the Reader
will excuse me, if I be constrained sometimes to repeat the same things, which
I also have formerly said.

In the 14 and 15 pages, you do tell me that I said I would remind you of that
which you had formerly been told, viz. Who those Heralds were that gave to
Mainwaring of Peover the quartering of the Earl of Chester's Coat, in Queen
Elisabeth's time, and withal do say, that I never told you, till long time
after that part of your Book was written, which, perhaps may be true, because
that part of your Book was written very long since, viz. in the year 1647. but
I am sure I have often told you of them, and you have also often seen the
Pedigree it self, under the hands of Mr. Cambden, and Mr. Sampson Erdeswick;
the rest in that place is only the repeating of your former quarrel with them,
for suffering us to quarter the Earl of Chester's Coat, but if we can really
prove, that we are of the Half Blood, whatever you conceive of it, I suppose
all indifferent persons will think it but meet, that we should have the like
liberty that all others have in the like case, in these last ages of ours.

What you say in the 16 and 17 pages, has been some of it formerly said in
your Historical Antiquities, and also in the 15 page of this your Answer, and
there is nothing there that is new, but that you only allege, that as to my
note of Dukes and Earls to have been anciently Judges of Chester, I should have
distinguished the times, for that was not till the Reign of Richard the II.
(who made Deputies to act in their stead) before which time there were no such
great persons Judges there, nor from Henry the Sevenths time downwards; But
what necessity there was for me particularly to distinguish the times in which
those great Dukes and Earls were Judges of Chester, I do not know; For I only
instanced in that to show, that the place of Judge of Chester was anciently a
place of great repute, and though it was some time after the death of John
Scot, before any such great persons were made Judges of Chester, by the Kings
of England, and that in all the times of the Earls of Chester, before that
Earldom was united to the Crown, there could not be any Dukes or Earls made
Judges there, because there were no such persons belonging to the then Earls,
(except John Lacy Constable of Chester, who was not made Earl of Lincoln, as
appears in your Historical Antiquities page 270. till the 23 of November 1232.
which was but four years and upwards before the death of John Scot the last of
the said Earls) yet there were ever anciently persons of good quality that were
Judges of Chester, and if it had not been always a place of great repute, the
Kings of England would never have made such very great persons to have
succeeded them therein.

As to what you allege in the 18, 19, 20, and 21 pages of your Answer, I do
not doubt (though you affirm it can never be proved) but that I have already in
my former Book, given most persons satisfaction, that Amicia was of the
Half-Blood to Earl Randle, by a former wife of Earl Hugh; And whereas you
object, that it is more rational to imagine, that Earl Hugh matching his only
Daughter, which he had by a former Wife, would have married her to as
considerable a person as was either provided by himself, or his Son for his
younger Children by a second venture; I do answer and say, That I am not certain
whether Amicia was the only Daughter that Earl Hugh had by his former Wife;
because, I know some that pretend they can tell of some other Daughter or
Daughters which the said Earl Hugh had by his said Wife; but I do confess, I
have never seen just proof of any but her; but supposing her to be the only
Child by his first Wife; I have in my former Book, pa. 23, 24, and 25. showed
that there is no strength in this Argument of yours; And I may here further
add, that if you will search for examples, you may find very many, where the
elder Sisters, sometimes, because swayed by their affections, and sometimes for
other reasons, have not been married to so great persons as the younger Sisters
have been; neither can you tell what portions Earl Hugh gave to Amicia, or to
any of his other Daughters: neither is there any necessity that the elder
Sister, because by a former wife, must have as great a portion as a younger
Sister by a latter Wife; because, many times persons are not able to give so
great portions in their younger days, as afterward: and because, the Children
of the living Wife are oftentimes better provided for, than those of the dead
Wife; and of this, I could if I pleased, instance in some that I know; and in
case the Father dye, and leave only issue Female by a first, and a Son and
issue Female by a latter wife (as in this case) there is great likelihood
(besides the advantage that the Sisters by the latter wife would have by being
Heirs at Law to their Brother, he dying without issue) that the Brother will
naturally be more kind to those Sisters that are of the Whole-Blood, and about
the same age, and bred up with him, than he will be to her that is but his
Half-Sister, and much older then himself.

And whereas you say, pa. 18, and 19. that the expectation of Earl Randle
Blundevile's Sisters of the Whole Blood (which I conceive added to their
fortunes, whereby they matched to so great persons) could not be much, being
grounded upon great uncertainties, since it could not be foreseen (when they
married) that their Brother should dye without issue, who afterward married
two wives successively, purposely to have issue of his own Body, to inherit his
own Lands; I do think if you consider it, you cannot in good earnest believe,
that the said Earl Randle Blundevil's four Sisters were married before the said
Earl married his first wife, whatever they were when he married his second
wife; For, Bertred the Mother of Randle Blundevil being aged but twenty four
years when her Husband Earl Hugh died, as appears, Rot. de Dominabus pueris,
etc. in Scacc. penes remem. R. sub Tit. Linc. Rot. 1. and the said Randle, as
appears in your Historical Antiquities, page 146. being married to Constance
the Widow of Geffrey, fourth Son of King Henry the II. and Daughter and Heir of
Conan Duke of little Britain, and Earl of Richmond, in the year 1187. at which
time the said Bertred was but about Thirty years old; Can any one think that
all the five Children of the said Bertred were then married?

And whereas you say, that it was I who informed you of the three eminent
Judges, and four Heralds that were of opinion, that Amicia was Legitimate: If
your meaning be, that I was the only person who informed you thereof, I must
impute it to the weakness of your memory, which fails you in this particular;
For, you had many times seen our Pedigree, attested by Mr. Cambden and Mr.
Sampson Erdeswick, who did allow her to be a Legitimate Daughter, and several
years since, two other Heralds, who are yet living, at Chester did declare to
you in my hearing, that she could not be a Bastard, and the one of them then
named to you a Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and a Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England (both now deceased) who did concur with them therein, and
you have also seen an opinion of a Third, Judge under his Hand, together, with
Reasons for the same; and though you speak so slightly of the opinions of
Judges and Heralds, in comparing them to Hands got to a Petition or
Certificate, and pretend it was without hearing the Reasons on the other side;
I very well know (though it seems you have forgotten it) that that hand which
was obtained, was procured, because you seemed to desire to know his opinion in
the case; And I also know that those two Heralds, who at Chester did declare
their judgments against you, did then hear all the reasons that you could then
allege.

As to what you say, pa. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, and part of the 27, in all which
you would willingly prove, that the Common Law is now altered some other way
than by Statute, you do but lose your labor, and can never prove the same; For,
in that Maxim of the Law, where it is said, That whatsoever was at the
Common Law, and is not ousted or taken away by any Statute, remains still;
the words ousted or taken away, must needs be taken conjunctively, and must
necessarily bear this sense, that the Common Law still is the same in all
points, as it was before, except where taken away by Statute; and if those
words should be taken otherwise, then, the meaning would be this, that that
part of the Common Law which does remain, does remain, which would be a very
strange Maxim; And whereas you heretofore urged some places, to prove, that
the Common Law is altered at this day from what it was in former ages, long
after the time of King Henry the II. which you now also urge again in the 24
page of your latter Book; I must give you the same answer which I formerly did,
viz. That those places do not prove that the Common Law at this day does vary
from what it was in former ages, in any particular, but only that it was taken
to be otherways in those days, and that it was but just like some Cases in our
Reports, which have at several times been adjudged directly contrary to each
other; but notwithstanding that, the Common Law was still the same; And that I
might come as near you as I could; I did then acknowledge that though the
Common Law was ever the same, where not altered by Parliament: yet in former
ages, they did in some particulars, take the Law to be otherways than they now
do; And I did also acknowledge, that if you could prove, that they had done so
formerly in this case of Frank-Marriage, that it would have taken off much of
the strength of my Argument from the words in libero Maritagio, because, that
ancient Deeds and Grants (according to what my Lord Coke on Littleton says, fol
8. b. at the bottom) are to be expounded as the Law was taken to be at the time
of the Grant: Now these places which you allege, do not prove a change of the
Common Law, in any particular, other than by Statute, but only that the Law was
sometimes differently taken in one Age, from what it was in another Age; for in
your 24 page, where you cite Coke upon Littleton, fol. 34. Sect. 39. you do not
there say, that my Lord Coke's words were, That the Law was different in
Glanvile's time in the particular you there mention, from what it is now; but
you say, that he says that in ancient times, as it appears by Glanvile, lib.
6. cap. 1. it was taken (that is, the Law was taken) that a Man could not have
endowed his Wife, ad Ostium Ecclesiae, of more than a third part, but of less
he might: but at this day the Law is taken, (as Littleton holds, which is)
That a Man may Endow his Wife ad Ostium Ecclesiae of his whole Land, or of the
half, or other less part, which is the very same thing that I said; And where
you again cite Coke upon Littleton, fol. 8. a. toward the bottom, you bring
him in, saying, that of ancient time the Heir was permitted to have an action
of Debt upon a Bond made to his Ancestor and his Heir, but the Law is not so at
this day; but my Lord Coke does not say as you do, viz. That the Law is not so
at this day, but that the Law is not so holden at this day; so that he still
avoids the expression of the Law being changed. (otherways than by Statute)
although it was differently holden in several Ages; And thus, as you may see
Coke upon Littleton, fol. 21. b. in the Case of Piers de Saltmarsh and others,
it was judged in King Edward the Thirds time, and in King Edward the Fourths
time, That a Man might give Land to his Son in Frankmarriage, but in King Henry
the Eighths time, it was holden otherways, the former Books being not
remembered; But notwithstanding, that this point was judged thus differently,
the Law was still the same and all that can be said, is, that some of the
judges did not judge right, according to the Common Law; and indeed if this
Rule of yours was true, that because the Judges in one Age did take the
Common Law to be otherways, than it was taken in former Ages, that therefore
the Common Law was changed: The Judges then could never do contrary to the
Common Law, For, when they had declared (though erroneously) that the
Common Law ought to be otherways taken, than it was formerly, the Common Law by
your Rule, would be thereupon changed, and what they did, would ever be legal,
The absurdity whereof every one may easily discern.

What you say page 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31. to all those Reasons which I did
give, to show that whenever the word Mulier is used in the case of
Frankmarriage, it shall by common-intendment be understood of a Woman that is
of the Kindred, will, (I believe) give no knowing person any satisfaction at
all; for though you pretend your self to be very pleasant, when you say you
have seldom known (nor you believe any other) any such question as this,
Whether Hugh Cyveliok had a former Wife, to be proved by argument of Scripture,
or nicety of Law, which is merely a question of History, yet certainly the
understanding Reader, will easily perceive that this is but a shift, and will
also discern, that I did not bring that place of Scripture to prove that Hugh
Cyveliok had a former wife, but that I made use of it by way of answer, to take
off what you had alleged, and I do not at all doubt, but that Text will fully
satisfy, that all expressions which seem Universal, are not always to be
expounded without any limitation at all; but as you would extend that
expression of Glanvill too far, so you run to the other extreme concerning this
of Deuteronomy 14.26. and would restrain these words, or for whatsoever thy
soul desires, only to those things there mentioned, viz. Oxen, Sheep, Wine,
and strong Drink, which would be a Tautologie, and several times in the same
verse give them liberty to make use of Oxen, Sheep, Wine, or strong Drink,
whereas undoubtedly the Jews at their said Feasts had also liberty to eat the
Goat the Heart, Roe-Buck, Fallow Deer, Wild Goat, Pigarg, Wild Ox, the Chamois,
as also all clean Fowls, Fishes, and other clean meats whatsoever, allowed them
by their Law; and therefore this expression being as universal as that of
Glanvill, and yet being to be expounded, so as to agree with the Laws of that
Kingdom, why should not this seeming universal expression of Glanvill be so
expounded, as to agree with the Laws of our Kingdom? And if so, sure what I say
is to the point in hand.

Also, If this Text of Scripture should be restrained as you would have it, it
would not contradict, but confirm what I said; For, what expression can seem
more universal than this, viz. whatsoever thy soul desires, and yet you
confess it ought not to be understood without some limitation, and indeed, you
restrain it more than I do.

And though it be true, that Bastards both were and yet are capable of
receiving Lands after they have gained a name by reputation, yet they are not
capable of having Lands passed with them in libero maritogio, though it be
passed with them by the name of Daughter, without the addition of Bastard; and
though you pretend that Amicia had gained a name by reputation, yet you do not,
nor cannot tell what it is, for certainly Amicia and Daughter are not any
reputed names.

Neither do I put my argument about Glanvil's contradicting himself, as you put
it, as will appear, pa. 34, and 35. of my former Book, so that you leave what I
there say, wholly unanswered. Neither do I say, that the Lawyers of latter ages
do expound the Law, that Lands cannot pass in Free-marriage with Bastards now,
ergo, it was so taken in Glanvil's time; but I have given you many reasons, why
the Law was taken in the time of Glanvill, in the point of Free-Marriage, as it
is taken now; to which you give no other answer, but that you will leave it to
wise Men to judge, who will take the pains to scan them, whether they be
pertinent; And I do willingly appeal to all wise men, whether that be an Answer
to those Eight Reasons, for if it be I am much mistaken therein.

But what will you say, (though I did admit it to be so, because I would put
the Case as hard as I could upon my self) if Glanvil by those words of his,
Lib. 7. cap. 1. Quilibet liber homo quandam partem terrae suae cum filia sua,
vel cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere dare potest in Maritagium, sive habuerit
haeredem, sive non, velit haeres vel non, imo and eo contradicente did not say
or mean that a man might give lands in Free-marriage with any woman whatsoever,
but only that he might give lands with any woman in that kind of Marriage,
which was not free; For, if you observe him well, he does not there say, that
any man whatsoever can give Lands in liberum maritagium with any woman
whatsoever, but only that it may be so given with any woman in Maritagium; Now
that Maritagium is twofold, Glanvil himself tells you, Lib. 7. cap. 18. where
he says, Maritagium autem, aliud nominatur liberum, aliud servitio obnoxiums
liberum dicitur Maritagium quando aliquis liber homo aliquam partem terrae suae
dat cum aliqua muliere alicui in Maritagium ita quod ab omni servitio terra
illa sit quieta, and a se and haeredibus suis, versus capitalem dominum
acquietanda, and in hac quidem liberate, ita stabit terra illa usque ad
tertium haeredem nec interim tenebuntur haeredes inde facere aliquod homagium,
post tertium vero haeredem, ad debitum servitium terra ipsa revertetur, and
homagium inde capietur. Many of which words of Glanvil you may also find cited
by my Lord Coke on Littleton, fol. 21. b. Now if you well observe it, Glanvil
does not there say that a man may give Lands in liberum Maritagium cum qualibet
muliere, but only in Maritagium; But when he speaks of Free-marriage he uses
the expression cum aliqua muliere, with some woman, viz. one of the Kindred so
that without doubt he using the same expression with Mr. Bracton who was the
next Writer after him, he also understands it in the like manner, as the other
did; But if Mr. Glanvill's expressions ( Lib. 7. cap. 1.) had concerned
Free-marriage, yet I have formerly showed, that the word Mulier in that case,
could only have been understood of a woman of the Kindred: Also my Lord Coke
upon Littleton, fol. 21. b. when he has told you that one of the four things
incident to a Frank-marriage is, that the Woman or Man that is the cause of
the Gift, be of the blood of the Donour, not long after on the Margent of the
same Page quotes Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 1. (the place on which you build) which
he would never have done, if that place had been contradictory to his opinion,
and certainly, if Glanvills words in that place are to be understood as you
would have them, they do contradict what my Lord Coke there says, unless the
Law in that point was taken after one manner in Glanvil's time, and after
another manner in my Lord Coke's time, which if it had been so, my Lord Coke
had been concerned to have taken notice thereof, having no otherway to
reconcile it with what he had said.

What you say, page 32 and 33. is not at all to the purpose; For, you there
tell us, that Bastard Sons, bastard Daughters, bastard Brothers, etc. in all
Settlements and Conveyances of these last ancient Ages, are termed Bastards,
but you say that was never used in the Ancient Ages; But, this is only your
bare saying, without any proof at all, so that your word herein will not pass,
unless you had showed us several ancient Settlements and Conveyances, in which,
bastard Sons, bastard Daughters, bastard Brothers, etc. are named without the
word Bastard joined to them, which I am confident you cannot do, unless when
very great persons are named, who by reason of their greatness, are usually
excepted in such cases as those; And indeed you do not only want proof to make
good what you here say, but I have formerly brought proof of the contrary, from
Sir Henry Spelman, who in his Glossary on the word Bastardus, says, Quoties
enim agitur de honor vel commodo filiorum, appellatione siliorum non
comprehenduntur bastardi. And as to what you affirm, that Bastards be of the
blood both now and in former ages, though the Law will not allow them so,
because they now are esteemed in the eye of the Law quasi nullius filius; For
if A. have a Bastard Son or Daughter, which is really his, they must needs be
of his blood: for no Law can extinguish Nature; though by common Law they are
not now esteemed so; There is no force in what you so say, Because, in this
case Children are looked at, as they are in Law, and not as they are really,
because, it cannot be known what they are really; And therefore if A. have a
bastard child which is really his, yet it shall not inherit, because it is in
Law nullius filius; and on the other side, If A. have a Wife who does play
false with him, and has a Child begotten of her body by another man, yet this
Child shall inherit, because it is in Law the Child of A. And whereas you also
ask the Question, What if you say that the reason why in the Deeds of those
elder Ages, they were called Daughters, without any addition of Bastard,
whereby the party owned them to be of their blood, was, that the Lands passed
in libero maritagio with such might descend to their heirs? For our Lawyers
now tell us, that Bastards are capable of receiving Lands, after they have
gained a Name by reputation; Why may not then Bastards, having gained the names
of Daughters, receive a grant from their owned Fathers, either in
Frank-marriage or otherwise?

Your Question will be easily answered, because the consideration of the Gift
in Free-marriage is the blood that is betwixt the Donour, and that Donee with
whom the Land is given; But a Bastard is not de sanguine patris ( Dyer, Fol.
374. b.) and the calling of any person Daughter, who is not so in Law, will not
make her of the blood, for if that would serve, a Man might call any other
Woman his Daughter, that is not so, and then give Lands with her in
Frank-marriage: Besides, to what purpose should such tricks as these be used,
which will not hold, when though a Man cannot give Lands in Free-marriage with
his Bastard Daughter, yet there are other ways, whereby any Man that pleases
and has a disposing power, may settle Lands on a Bastard Daughter and her
heirs: Also, if Glanvills words did prove, as you would pretend they do, To
what purpose should men in those ages, leave the word Bastard out of their
Deeds of Free-marriage to their bastard Daughters, with design thereby to cause
such lands to continue to them and their heirs, if such gifts might be made
with any woman whatsoever; so that you never observe how finely you have argued
here, against your self.

Where you say, in the 34, 35, 36 and 37 Pages of your Book, that though you
do not find Geva called a Bastard in express terms, yet you find it employed in
an Author contemporary (meaning Ordericus) by certain and sure consequence,
which you believe can never be fully answered; and for the fortifying of which,
you pretend to give some reasons; Give me leave (since you give the occasion)
again to say, what I have formerly said, viz. that though Ordericus, speaking
of Hugh Lupus his death, does add these words, Richardus autem pulcherrimus
puer quem solum ex Ermentrude filia Hugonis de Claramonte genuit. I am not yet
satisfied, but that he might as well mean, that he was the only Son which Earl
Hugh had by Ermentrude, as that he was the only child that he had by her; For
there is no necessity to take the word solum adverbially, neither is it marked
as an Adverb in Ordericus his Book, though it be so in yours, and yet in his
Book, Adverbs are usually marked; And though you alleadg that Ordericus does
not say quem solum filium, as I interpret him, but indefinitly, quent solum ex
Ermentrude genuit, and so, whether solum be understood adverbially, or whether
it be taken for a Noun, no more can be made of it in English than thus, Richard
a beautiful youth whom only Earl Hugh begot on Ermentrude, etc. and so, whether
we English it, whom only he begot, or whom he only begot, it retains the same
sense, and shows that no other person, either Son or Daughter, was begotten on
Ermentrude by Earl Hugh. You must give me leave to dissent from you herein;
For, I conceive this expression of quem solum genuit, does amount to as much as
if he had said quem solum filium genuit, which if it do, then (notwithstanding
the said expression) Earl Hugh might possibly have a Daughter or Daughters by
the said Ermentrude; For, to what Antecedent can the word quem so properly
relate, as to the word puer? and if so, then quem solum puerum is as much as
quem solum filium, and so does not exclude him from having a Daughter or
Daughters by the said Ermentrude; For, though the word puer be by some
understood to signify a Child of either Sex, as you also seem to take it in
your Historical Antiquities, p. 113 and 114. (But misprinted 121 and 122.) Yet
Mr. Gouldman in his Dictionary will tell you that it is a mistake, where on the
word puer he thus writes, Nonnullis habetur communis generis, sed male, ex
Ovidiano illo Carmine, de Iphide puella in puerum mutata;

Dona puer solvit quae faeminavoverat Iphis. And though you say, that Geva
could not be by any former Wife, because Earl Hugh had never any other Wife;
Yet that is more than either you or I know, for, there were many things done in
those Ages which never came to our knowledges. And therefore I do not take upon
me to tell, whether Geva was by a former Wife than Ermentrude, or whether she
was by Ermentrude, or whether she was a Bastard, But I say, she might be any of
the three, for any thing that you have yet proved, and so long as it is
uncertain what she was, you can bring no considerable Argument from her against
Amicia; And if you could prove her a Bastard, it would signify nothing,
because the Deed made to her, is not a gift in Frank-marriage (as has formerly
and will hereafter appear.)

And whereas you ask, p. 36. Being I expound the words of Ordericus to be, that
Earl Hugh had no other Son, What advantage it is to my purpose, unless Geva was
that Daughter, and was legitimate? I answer, That possibly Geva might be that
Daughter, or possibly Geva might be by a former Wife, and that Daughter which
Earl Hugh had by Ermentrude, might die before Earl Richard, so that nothing of
certainty can be gathered from such Arguments as these.

As to what you say, p. 38, 39, 40 and 41. that I am not to argue upon
possibilities, and because it might possibly be so, to say, that the Earldome
of Chester was anciently entayled on the heirs Males; I Answer, That I do not
positively aver any such thing, But let the case be how it will, and
whethersoever Geva or Randle de Meschines was the heir general to Richard Earl
of Chester, it seems to me that the said Earldome, did not come by descent, to
the heir general, whoever that was; For, it clearly appears that Geva had it
not, and Randle de Meschines had it not by descent; For, if what James York in
his Union of Honor, p. 105. says, be true, Randle de Meschines was made Earl
by Grant of King Henry the First; and Ordericus p. 876. tells us, that he
restored to the said King Henry, all the Land which he had by his Wife the
Widow of Roger de Romara, for the Earldom of Chester; which was more than was
needful for him to do, if he had a good title thereto by descent.

And whereas you ask me, Why may I think that the King (though he gave it to
Randle) did not give the honor and lands unto him, as in whom was the greatest
right to have it? and do say, that to this I give no answer at all. I may well
tell you, that I could not give an Answer, until you did ask the Question, and
you never asked the Question in your former Book; But the Answer which I shall
now give to this Question, is, That I suppose, Kings in such cases do that,
which to them seems most just, but yet Kings in these cases, as well as in
others, are of different Judgments from one another very many times, and indeed
the very same Princes will be sometimes of one mind, and sometimes of another
mind, concerning the same thing; And thus we see, when Randle Blundevile Earl
of Chester dyed, which was in the year 1232. King Henry the Third did suffer
the four Sisters of the said Earl Randle, who were of the whole blood, to
inherit that estate, and the said Earldome went to John Scot son of David Earl
of Huntingdon in right of Maud his Mother, the eldest of the said four Sisters;
But when the said John Scot dyed, which was in the year 1237, the said King
Henry the Third would not suffer the said Earldome of Chester to come to any of
the Sons of any of the Sisters of the said John Scot, though he had before
permitted it to come to the Son of the eldest Sister of the said Randle
Blundevile.

And whereas you say, that if Geva had been but of the half-blood, she woul'd
by all probability have busled hard for so great an Estate in those Ages,
before she had lost it. I do wonder very much at what you say, Because, any
Cosen that is of the whole blood (how many degrees soever the distance is) will
inherit at Law, before a Brother or Sister that is but of the half-blood; And
whereas you say, I am come to an excellent way of arguing, by ifs, and ands,
and possibilities, by which means Answers may be made to any thing even to
eternity. I do not offer from those kinds of Arguments or Answers, to determine
any thing certainly, but only make use of them to show the uncertainty of
several things which you urge; But, you pretend certainties from such kind of
Arguments, and particularly in this case of Amicia: For, all the reasons which
you alleadg against her would not prove her to be a Bastard, if those Arguments
that are brought on her behalf were all laid aside.

In your Answer to my Defense of Amicia, p. 42 and 43. you again cavil with me,
without any just cause, and say, that the case that I did there put, comes as
near to the case of Geva, as an Apple to an Oyster, But whether it be so as you
say, let the Reader judge. In your Historical Antiquities, p. 136. (which words
of yours are also in the 10 and 11 pages of my Defense of Amicia) you have
these words, viz. And howbeit many Earldomes have descended to the heirs
Males, and not to the heirs general, yet in this case were no heirs Male, but
two Females, an Aunt legitimate, who had it, and a Sister not legitimate, and
show me a precedent wherever the heirs of an Aunt inherited before the heirs
of a Sister, both legally born and no heires-male left, unless in case of
forfeiture by Treason, or some other great cause to hinder the same. From these
words of yours, I did not offer to raise any cavil, by telling you, that though
honors or lands may be given to any persons whatsoever, by those who have
power to dispose of the same, that yet they cannot properly be said to descend
to any but to the next heirs, and therefore in point of descent, it is
impossible that any one that is further off, should be preferred before another
that is nearer; Neither did I tell you, how you did name an Aunt legitimate, in
stead of the Son of an Aunt legitimate that had it; But I supposing (as I think
any other would have done from these words of yours) that your meaning was,
that Randle de Meschines must needs have more right to succeed in that Earldom
of Chester than Geva had, because, the said Randle did enjoy the same, and that
you thought it to be very clear, that whenever there were no heirs-Male left,
if the honor went to any of the Kindred, the King did always prefer that
person who was next of blood to it, except in case of Treason, or the like, and
did thereupon desire me to show you a precedent to the contrary, if I so could,
and you instancing in the Earldome, and not in the Lands, I did thereupon show
you where one that was a Baron by Writ, dyed without heir Male, leaving two
Sisters only, and the Baronry came to the Husband of the younger Sister, and
not to the Husband of the elder Sister, it being the pleasure of the King to
call Sir Hunt Bourcher, who had Married the younger Sister, to the Parliament,
and not to call Sir Thomas Nevil, who had Married the elder Sister; And if this
be not a like case to that of Geva and Earl Randle (if Geva was legitimate) I
am still very much mistaken; And whereas you now demand of me, If Geva was
legitimate, Why the Lands of Richard Earl of Chester did not come to her,
whatever the Earldom did: Though I cannot give you the certain reason, because
the thing was done so long since, yet I can show you several possibilities why
they might not; For, either it might be the will and pleasure of the then King,
that Randle de Meschines should have the Estate as well as Earldome, and that
Geva should have recompense made her some other way, (as the Sisters of John
Scot Earl of Chester in the like case afterward had) or perhaps she might be
of the half-blood to Earl Richard, and Randle de Meschines be heir at Law
before her, or perhaps the said Ear I Richard having a greater kindness for the
said Earl Randle than he had for Geva, (there being sometimes great
unkindnesses betwixt Brothers and Sisters) might give his Estate to the said
Randle de Meschines.

Those Arguments of mine which you mention p. 44. and are pretended to be
Answered by you, page 45, 46 and 47. remain yet in their greatest strength, and
are not at all answered by you, nay, the one of them is so far from being
answered, that it is not understood by you, unless you only pretend not to
understand it, because, you perceive you cannot give an answer to it, and I
rather think that to be the truth of the case, Because you have not recited my
Argument as I did express it; For you recite it thus; Because Coke upon
Littleton, fo. 21. b. tells us that these words in liberum Maritaginm are words
of Art, and so are necessarily required: and there you break off abruptly;
Whereas I told you that the Deed which you alleged to be made to Geva would
not at all concern Amicia, if Geva was a bastard, because it was no gift in
Frank-marriage, as that gift to Amicia was; And for a proof thereof I told you,
that my Lord Coke upon Littleton in the place abovesaid did tell you, that
these words in liberum maritagium are such words of Art, and so necessarily
required (in these kind of gifts) as they cannot be expressed by words
equipollent, or amounting to as much; And he also there gave you the reason,
which was, that these words in liberum Maritagium did create an Estate of
Inheritance, against the general Rule of the Law, and therefore the Law
required, that it should be legally pursued; And to explain this, he also said,
that if a man give Lands to another with his Daughter, in connubio soluto ab
omni servitio, etc. yet there passes in this case but an Estate for life; For
although those words be the same in sense, as the words in libero maritagio be,
yet being not the very same words, they do not create an Estate of Inheritance;
But you contrary to all this, would not believe my Lord Coke, if he should have
said that the words in libero conjugio did make but an Estate for life, (which
he has indeed by consequence said) But you will have the words liberum
conjugium to create an Estate of Inheritance, as well as the words liberum
maritagium (which no man before you ever said) Whereas no words that are
equipollent, or amounting to as much can do it, it being impossible to make an
Estate in Free-marriage, if there be wanting either the word liberum, or the
word Maritagium.

Also, as the words in libero conjugio can make but an Estate for life, so it
is also clear, that in your Deed of Earl Randle to Ceva, there was no more
intended than an Estate for life, it running all along in the singular number
Et teneat been and in pace. etc. ut melius and liberius tenuit, And it is
likely the Deed of Earl Hugh did run after the same manner, by that expression
sicuti Comes Hughes ei in libero conjugio dedit, But I believe the Bassets did
afterward enjoy the said lands, though how, or by virtue of what Deed, I am
not able to declare; For, in Monasticon Anglicanum, Part 1. p. 439, and in your
Historical Antiquities, p. 113. (but misprinted 121.) I find Geffrey Ridell and
Ralph Basset called the heirs of the said Geva; Now if those persons were the
heirs of her body, and the aforesaid Deed a Gift in Frank-marriage, Why did
not Earl Randle confirm or grant those lands to her heirs, as well as to her,
And if they were not the heirs of her body, she could not be a bastard, For, as
my Lord Coke on Littleton, fol. 3. b. tells you, A Bastard can have no heir but
of his own body.

And whereas I brought another Argument to prove that this Gift of Geva could
not be a Gift in Frank-marriage, Because my Lord Coke says, that one of the
things incident to a Frankmarriage is, that the Donees shall hold freely of the
Donour till the fourth degree be past, which cannot be in Geva's case, Because
there was no Donees, but one Donee only, and the Estate could not continue
until the Fourth degree was past, because it was only for Geva's life; You
tell me that my Lord Coke upon Littleton, fol. 21. b. cites Peter Saltmarch's
Case, and Fitz-Herbert de natura brevium, fol. 172. that lands may be given by
a Man to his Son in Free-marriage, and why not to his Daughter alone in
Free-marriage? But I pray you, How can there be a Gift in Free-marriage, if
there be no Marriage at all? and, How can there be a Marriage, if the Man or
Woman be alone? But you misunderstand this place (as you do many others) For,
my Lord Coke, if you observe him well, does not there say, that such a Gift can
be made with a Man alone, or with a Woman alone, But there tells you, that a
gift in free-marriage may be either to a Man with a woman, or as some have
held, to a Woman with a Man, and for proof thereof, cites Peter Saltmarsh his
case, and Fitz-Herbert; And this is no more than what I said in the 49 Page of
my former Book, where I also showed you how Bracton did therewith accord; But
there is none of them that says as you do, That land may be given in
Frankmarriage to a Man without a Woman, or to a Woman without a Man.

In your 48 and 49 Pages, you would willingly persuade the Reader that Earl
Randle de Gernoniis Father to Earl Hugh Cyveliok was Married by Robert Earl of
Gloucester unto Maude his Daughter, thereby to draw him to the part of Queen
Maude his Sister, about the very year 1139. before which time we find no
mention in our ancient Historians of Randle's acting against King Stephen, but
in that very year we do, and then by some of them styled Son-in-law to the Earl
of Gloucester. But I pray you, Why is it not full as likely, that before that
time, Randle de Gernoniis was Married to the Daughter of the said Earl of
Gloucester, and thereby was the more easily drawn to that party, to which he
stood so near related, as that, that match should be made purposely to draw him
to that party? And how could you hear much of that Earl Randle's actings
against King Stephen, before the year 1139? seeing Gervasius a Benedictine
Monk of Canterbury (who lived in the Reign of King John) tells us, in his
Chronicles or Annalls, col. 1345. l. 60. that it was in the year 1138, when
Robert Earl of Gloucester did begin to quarrel with the said King Stephen.

And whereas you yet seem unsatisfied that Earl Hugh was of such an age as
probably to have had another Wife before Bertred, and do now say, p. 49. if we
reckon by utmost possibilities, that Earl Hugh could not possibly be above
sixteen or seventeen years older than Bertred; I do very much wonder thereat,
seeing I have formerly from the Argument which you used to prove it to be
otherwise, made it manifest, that he might possibly be several years above
double her age, and that so clearly, that I am confident, no man besides your
self, will offer to deny the same; For I then told you that whether the
Marriage of Robert Earl of Gloucester with Mabill Daughter and heir of Robert
Fitz-Hamon was according to Seldom in the year 1109. or according to Stow in
the year 1110. the said Mabill might have Maude her second Daughter in the year
1112, which Maude if she was Married to Earl Randle de Gernoniis in the year
1128, when she was sixteen years of age, might have her Son Hugh Cyvelick in
the year 1129. which if true, the said Earl Hugh was fifty two years old at his
death, For he died in the year 1181, and if so, then he was four years above
twice the age of Bertred, For she was but Twenty four years old when the said
Earl Hugh died, as appears, Rot. de Dominabus pueris, etc. in Scacc. penes
Remem. R. sub Tit. Linc. Rot. 1. And it is certain, that the said Earl Hugh was
Earl of Chester about four years before his Wife Bertred was born, besides
what age he was of, when his Father died, and his Daughter Amicia was Married
in his life time, and none knows how many years before his death. And if the
Marriage of the said Robert Earl of Gloucester with the said Mabill was in the
year 1109. then he might possibly be Five years above double the age of his
Wife Bertred; And this is the more likely to be true, Because, though Mr.
Seldom be a later Writer, than Mr. Stow is, yet Mr. Seldom cites one that
lived long before Mr. Stow, as will appear by the old English Rithmical Story,
attributed to one Robert of Gloucester, and recited in the 647. Page of Mr.
Seldens Titles of Honor.

In your Answer, page 50, 51, 52 and 53. you endeavor to weaken the Third and
Fourth reasons which were brought as concurrent proof on the behalf of Amicia,
by saying, that Hugh Cyveliok 's Wife was a witness to her Husbands Deed, which
a Wife cannot now be, she being not capable to be a Witness, either for or
against her Husband, whereby you would insinuate a change of the Law in that
particular from what it was formerly, and you also say, that if Hugh Cyveliok
had had a former Wife, sure Raph Mainwaring would have called his Daughter
after her, and not after the then Countess; And you there make nothing of Roger
Mainwaring's calling Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln his Uncle in a Deed,
nor of Henry de Audley's being a Witness to the Deeds of Randle Earl of Chester
and Lincoln, and of Robert de Ferrars, (which later you say is far fetched) nor
of Raph Mainwarings and Roger Mainwarings being Witnesses to so many Deeds of
those that were Earls of Chester in their times.

But to these things, I say, that the Law is still the same as it was formerly,
in the particular by you here mentioned; For, both anciently and at this day
also, I know nothing that hinders, but that the Wife may subscribe as a Witness
to a Deed which her Husband does make, and though she neither anciently could,
nor yet can be a witness for or against her Husband, yet there is this use of
it, that if the Wife survive her Husband, and it come to be controverted
amongst other parties, whether such a Deed was Sealed by him, or not, she in
the time of her VVidowhood, may be a good VVitness for the proving of the same.

And as to the calling of Sir Raph Mainwarings Daughter by the name of Bertred
after the present Countess, and not after the name of Hugh Cyvelioks first
Wife; That is no wonder at all, it being more ordinary to call Daughters after
their Godmothers Names, than after the names of their own Grandmothers, and
especially when the Godmothers are of great quality; Now the said Amicia's
Daughter being called Bertred (which is a very unusual name) it is more than
probable, (according to what you expressed to me under your hand in April
1664.) that Bertred the Countess was Godmother to the said Bertred Mainwaring,
And if so, it is very unlikely that Amicia was illegitimate; For Wives are
seldom Godmothers to their Husbands Bastards, or to the Children of such
Bastards.

Also, Sir Raph Mainwaring and Sir Roger Mainwaring and Henry de Audley the
Sou-in-law of the said Sir Raph Mainwaring being so often VVitnesses to the
Deeds of the Earls of Chester, and to the Deeds of their very near Relations,
does certainly show there was then a very great and constant intimacy betwixt
the said Families.

And though you pretend that Sir Raph Mainwaring was very conversant with the
Earl, because he was Judge, and therefore came so often to be a VVitness, and
say, that we may find the like number of Charters or more, to which Philip
Orreby Judge of Chester was witness in like nature; I conceive that you are
deceived therein, although Philip Orreby was Judge of Chester perhaps longer
than Sir Raph Mainwaring was; For I do believe that I can make it to appear by
what Deeds I have, and what Deeds I have seen of others, that Sir Raph
Maeinwaring and his Son Sir Roger Mainwaring were witnesses to more Deeds of
Hugh Cyvelioks and Randle Blundevil than any other persons of any one Family
were; Add hereunto (which I have in my former Book mentioned) that Sir Roger
Mainwaring in a Deed of his own calls Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln his
Uncle, and how I did there observe, that though the VVriters of Histories, did
sometimes give to Bastards, the name of Cosen, Brother, Uncle, Son, and
Daughter, I did believe you could hardly find any one that you could certainly
prove to be a Bastard, or the Son of a Bastard, that did presume in a Deed to
call so great a person as the Earl of Chester was, his Brother or Uncle, unless
he came to be a very great Person himself; And this is so true, that in the 53
Page you are forced to confess that such Precedents are scant, but yet you
think you have found one, viz. Randle de Estbury, or Astbury, who in a Deed
mentioned in the Addenda of your Historical Antiquities is called, the Earl of
Chester 's Nephew, and is put the last of all the witnesses, and was certainly
but an ordinary Gentleman, nor Knight nor Lord. But this Precedent will fail
you, for two Reasons, First, Because you do as good as confess that you cannot
prove him to be a Bastard, (and he might perhaps be a younger Brother, or Son
of a younger Brother, and so not necessarily a Knight or a Lord) And Secondly.
Because he does not call himself the Earls Nephew, but is called so by others,
and that is so far from contradicting, that it does confirm what I said in my
former Book; Also if you observe it, there were no VVitnesses to the said Deed,
besides the said Randle de Astbury, except David de Malpas (whom I conceive was
Baron of Malpas) and William his Son.

And whereas you say, you should be glad to find out the Extraction of the said
Randle de Astbury, if he were not a Bastard. Though it be perhaps impossible
now to tell you his Extraction certainly, because he lived so long since, and
we only find him mentioned as a witness in one Ded, Yet I doubt not but to
satisfy the Reader, that he and his Father and Mother might all be Legitimate,
For, (not to say, that he might be a Son of some other Daughter of the said
Hugh Cyveliok by his former Wife) he might possibly be the Son of Roger, Son
of Hugh Cyveliok; And I know no great reason why the said Roger should by you
be suspected to be a bastard, For, you only find him (as appears by your
Historical Antiquities, p. 134. and in my First Book, p. 1.) mentioned as a
Witness to a Deed of his Brother Randle 's, to the Abbey of Saint VVerburge: So
that you conceive him to be a bastard, Because neither he, nor any issue-Male
of his, succeeded in the Earldome of Chester after the death of Randle
Blundevil, Whereas the said Roger might be lawful, and be Father to this
Randle de Astbury, and yet both he and the said Randle de Astbury might dye
before the said Randle de Blundevil, For he lived very long, and was Earl of
Chester above Fifty years; Also it is very strange, if Amicia was a Bastard,
and the Father or Mother of the said Randle de Astbury was also a Bastard, that
those Bastards could find none to call their Children after, but the then
Countess, and the then Earl, For the Daughter of Amicia was called Bertred
after Randle Blundevill's Mother, and Randle de Astbury was of the same Name
with the said Earl; But admitting that the said Roger was a Bastard, Why might
not Randle de Astbury however be his Son? and then, What necessity (of what you
say in your Addenda) of either finding out another Base Son, or another Base
Daughter of the said Hugh Cyveliok; But you have been very willing to charge
him with many Bastards both Sons and Daughters, although I find no great Reason
to suspect that he had any at all unless Paganus de Milton, and it is possible
in that case, you having neither the Deed, nor a Copy of the Deed by you, that
you might take Hugh Cyveliok for Hugh Lupus, as well as in another Deed (as
will anon appear) you did take Randle Blundevil for Randle de Gernoniis.

I am still of the same opinion that I was formerly of, viz. That Richard
Bacuns Mother was not a Base Daughter of Hugh Gyveliok, nor any Daughter of his
at all, but that she was daughter to Randle Meschines, and Sister to Randle de
Gernoniis; And I think those reasons which I have given in my former Book do
fully prove the same. And albeit you tell me in the 54, 55, and 56 pages of
your latter Book, that truly I am deceived in it, yet I do not doubt but to
satisfy all the world, that it is you (and not I) that are deceived therein;
And whereas you say, it is true (as I observe) that there was no such
Archbishop of York called Will. nor Bishop of Chester, whose Christian name
began with R. both living at one time, either in the time of Randle de
Blundevill or Randle de Gernoniis. I answer, I did make no such observation at
all, but the contrary, For, I showed you that in the time of Randle de
Gernoniis; William, Sisters Son to King Stephen, was Archbishop of York, for a
time, viz. about 1142 or 1143. (though he was afterward ousted of it again
till 1152. or 1153.) and Roger Clinton was Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
(which then was the same with the Bishop of Chester) from the year 1128, until
the year 1148 or 1149. And I then also told you, that there was no William,
Archbishop of York at anytime during the life of Randle Blundevill, nor any man
Bishop of Chester, whose Christian name began with R. except Richard Peche, who
died about the time that Hugh Cyveliok died, viz. in 1182 (though some say, in
1181. and some in 1183.) at which time Randle Blundevill could not be of age to
Seal any kind of Deed, because Bertred the said Randle's Mother, was then but
about Twenty five years old; and this Argument you perceive to be so strong
against you in this point, that you have no way to avoid it, but by giving a
strange answer to it, which is, that you do conceive the Roll from whence the
Deed in Monasticon (Par. 2. Pa. 267.) is written, is mistaken in Will, and R.
and miswrit therein from the Original Chart it self; Which liberty if a Man
might take, he might answer any thing in the world; and your reason for so
saying is, Because Richard Bacun in his said Deed does say, that he had
procured the warranty of Randle Earl of Chester his Uncle, for the ratifying of
that Grant; and the very next Deed following in the Roll, and transcribed in
the Monasticon, is the Deed of Randle Earl of Chester, with Confirmation and
Warranty accordingly, whereunto Roger Lacy, Constable of Cheshire is a witness,
who only lived in the time of Randle Blundevill, and no other Earl of Chester,
as I may see clearly proved among the Barons of Halton in your Book, nor is
there any other Deed of Confirmation and Warranty to be found by any Earl, save
this; wherefore (you say) certainly it must be Randle Blundevil whom Richard
Bacun calls Uncle in his own Deed of the Foundation of the said Priory. And
you also say, the Bishop of Chester ( being also Bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry at that time) he was not then subject to the jurisdiction of York but
Canterbury; and you also say, That there was no Archbishop of York called Will.
nor Bishop of Chester, whose Christian name began with R. both living at one
time, either in the time of Randle Blundevill or Randle de Gernoniis, that you
can find.

To which I answer, That it is not to be doubted, but that Richard Bacun did
obtain the Warranty and Confirmation of that Randle Earl of Chester, who was
his Uncle, and then living; neither is it to be doubted, but that the Deed, to
which Roger Constable of Cheshire was a witness, was the Deed of Randle
Blundevil, I having proved it to be so, in the 56 page of my former Book,
because Roger Constable of Cheshire was living in the time of no other Randle
but Randle Blundevil, so that you did not need to send me to see that clearly
proved among the Barons of Halton in your Book; but the Deed of Confirmation of
that Earl who was Uncle of Richard Bacun, is not in the Monasticon, but was
probably lost, as many other ancient Deeds were: and that Deed of Randle
Blundevill, which is there, is but another Deed of Confirmation, according to
the mode of those times, when, it was usual to obtain such, from several
Princes, several Generations one after another; and for proof hereof, I did
desire you to read Monasticon Anglicanum, Par. 2 Pa. 24, and 25. where you
might find King Henry the I. reciting and confirming what had been given to the
Priory of Huntendune, and pa. 27. how King Henry the III. did the like, and yet
there was a greater space betwixt King Henry the I. and King Henry the III.
than there was betwixt Randle de Gernoniis and Randle de Blundevil; and very
many others of the like nature, may be found, by those who will take the pains
to make search in the several Monasticons.

Also, it is very strange, that you should fancy that the Roll, where the said
Deed in Monasticon was written, should be mistaken both in Will. and R.
especially since the word Will. was the first word in the said Deed; neither is
it a badge of any mistake in the said Deed, because the Archbishop of York is
named in it, though the Bishop of Chester (being at that time the same with the
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield) was not then subject to the Jurisdiction of
York, but Canterbury; For, the Archbishop of York was not named upon that
account, but, because some of the places mentioned in the said Deed, were
within the Province and Diocese of York, as particularly Rosington was, it
being within the Westriding of Yorkshire; but I suppose your principal reason
why you suspect the Roll was mistaken is, because you say, there was no such
Archbishop of York, called Will. nor Bishop of Chester, whose Christian name
began with R. both living at one time, either in the time of Randle Blundevill
or Randle de Gernoniis, that you can find. Which saying of yours seems very
strange to me, but I believe all your doubt is about the Will. that was
Archbishop of York, because Dr. Heylin (a late Writer) in his Catalogue of
Bishops does not mention the said Williams being chosen Archbishop immediately
upon the death of Thurstan; for I am consident that you are well satisfied that
Roger Clinton was Bishop of Chester (as appears by the Third Part of the
Monasticon, page 218. as also by Bishop Godwin, Jsaackson, Doctor Heylin,
Simeon Dunelmensis, Matt. Paris, and many other ancient Authors) from about
1128. until about the year 1148. or 1149. which fell out to be in the time of
Randle de Gernoniis, for he was Earl, (as appears in your Book) from about the
year 1128, till about the year 1153. And I doubt not but to make it as clear,
that a William was Archbishop of York in the time of the said Randle de
Gernoniis and Roger Clinton, and though the said William was afterward ousted,
yet whilst he enjoyed that Archbishopric, he was, and would in Deeds, and
otherways, be owned as Archbishop of York;

Now that a William was Archbishop of York, in the time of the said Earl and
the said Bishop, I have already showed you in my former Book, out of
Isaackson's Chronology, and shall thus make it further to appear;

If you look into Bishop Godwin's Catalogue of the Bishops of England, printed
at London 1615, page 581. in the life of Heny Murdack, Archbishop of York, you
may find him saying thus.

King Stephen had a kinsman named William, 1142. Stephen 8.
( that was Son unto Emma his Sister, by Earl Herbert) a Man no less noble in
Mind and Virtue, then Stock and Lineage. He being Treasurer of York. was now
elected unto the Archbishopric, and having obtained Consecration also, sent to
Rome for his Pall. His speed there was not so good as he looked for; by some
Adversaries many exceptions were taken against him, whereby it came to pass,
not only his Suit was put off, and stayed for that time, but also Process
awarded to admonish him to come thither in Person to answer the accusations
laid against him. At his coming to Rome, he found his Adversaries many and
Mighty. And among the rest it is remembered, that St. Bernard, then living, was
very earnest against him. Eugenius the Pope, had been brought up in the Abbey
of Clareual under St. Bernard, together with Henry Murdac, whom Williams
adversaries had set up to be a Suitor for his Archbishopric. The Pope being
thus carried away with the persuasion of his old Acquaintance, and some show of
matter, was content to deprive William, and to place Henry Murdac in his room,
whom he caused to be Consecrated presently, and sent him home into England with
his Pall. King Stephen hearing this News, was much grieved with the disgrace
of his Nephew, which all Men judged undeserved. Therefore He stood upon Terms
with the new Archbishop, and required him to Swear unto Him fealty in some
extraordinary manner; and when he denied, easily took occasion of displeasure
against him. The Townsmen of York that loved William exceedingly for his
Gentleness and Virtuous behavior amongst them; hearing how the King was
affected; refused to receive Murdac into their City. For this resistance he
suspended them: which notwithstanding, Eustach the King's Son, commanded
Service to be said as at all other times was accustomed. By means hereof, as
also by reason that the King's Officers were very terrible and heavy enemies
unto all that had labored for the Deprivation of William: Seditions and
Tumults were daily raised in the City, amongst which a certain Archdeacon, a
Friend of the Archbishop, was slain. Two or three years these stirs continued,
till at last, the Kings wrath (by means) being appeased, York-men were content
to receive their Archbishop peaceably. He governed very austerely the space of
ten years, dyed October. 14. 1153. at Sherborne, and was buried in his Cathedral
Church. And when Bishop Godwin has thus said, he presently after tells you,
how the said William (there called Saint William) after the death of Henry
Murdac was again restored to the said Archbishopric.

Also, if you look in John Brompton's Chronicon, col. 1028. l. 63. in the life
of King Stephen, you may find him thus saying;

Dicto autem Thurstino Eboracensi Archiepiscopo Monasterii Fontanensis
aliorumque octo fundatore, ut dictum est, decedente (and he dyed, says the
said Brompton, col. 1028: l. 25. in the year 1140. with which Bishop Godwin
does accord) Singuli Ecclesiae Eboracensis Canonici, beatum Willielmum ejusdem
Ecclesiae Thesaurarium praeferunt, tam pro honestate morum, quam excellentia
meritorum. Iste namque Willielmus ex spectabili prosapia Regis Stephani ortus,
praeclaris natalium titulis fuerat insignitus; erat enim silius potentissimi
viri Comitis Herberti. Qui quamvis post decessum dicti Archiepiscopi Thurstani,
ad sedem Eboracensem electus fuerat; invidia tamen and impetuosus amor
dominandi quemdam ejusdem Ecclesiae Archilevitam adeo in regionem
dissimilitudinis traxerant, ut inter eligentes discidium excitavit, ipsum
Willielmum a saniori part eiectum impediens licet de ejus electione clerus and
populus acclamassent laudum praeconia, suspenditur igitur causa ad Apostolicae
sedis examen provocata. See also the said Brompton to the same purpose, Col.
1041. l. 10.

Also Roger Hoveden who lived in the time of King Henry the Second, King
Richard the First, and King John; in the First Part of his Annalls, Printed at
Frankfort 1601. Page 490. l. 51. writes thus of the Restitution of the said
William, eodem anno obiit Henricus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, quo defuncto,
Willielmus Archiepiscopus, quem Papa Eugenius suspenderat, Romam profectus est,
and invenit gratiam apud Anastasium Papam, and redditus est ei Archiepiscopatus
Eboracensis. And I think it is not to be doubted, though I have not yet found
the place, but that the said Hoveden does speak of his being chosen after the
death of Thurstan, because Isaakson in his Chronology, cites Hoveden for what
he there says, but he names not the Pages.

Also, Thomas Stubbs (a Dominican) writing of the Archbishops of York, col.
1721. l. 15. thus says,

Vicessimus nonus successit in Archiepiscopatum Eboracensis ecclesiae Henricus
Murdak ^isterciensis ordinis Monachus ae professor probatissimus, vir magnae
sanctitatis and abstinentiae laudabilis. Defuncto namque, ut praemittitur,
Thurstino Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, convocatisque ad electionem pontificis
Canonicis ecclesiae Eboracensis, Willielmus ejusdem Ecelesiae Thesaurarius and
Canonicus exigentibus suis meritis a Majori and saniore part in Archiepiscopum
est electus. Erat enim strenuissimi Comitis Herberti filius ex Emma sorore
Regis Anglorum Stephani progenitus. Vir quidem genere nobilis sed morum
excellentia and vita mundissima incomparabiliter insignis. Interea vero
Osbertus archidiaconus Eboracensis invidiae stimulo agitatus, facta inter
eligentes dissentione, confirmationem ipsius electi licet ab omnibus dignus
haberetur pertinaciter impedivit: suspenso igitur negotio partibusque coram
Romano pontifice super hujus electionis discussione personditer vocatis, idem
Willielmus persequentibus illum adversariis suis and injuste accusantibus
conseerationis gratiam minime potuit optimere. Lite ergo in curia Romana sub
Papa Innocentio secundo, Celestino secundo, and Lucio secundo per annos quinque
and amplius del ito processu currente, nichil inventum est quod ejus
consecrationem deberet elongare. Verum summus Pastor Eugenius Cisterciensis
ordinis Monachus anno Dominicae incarnationis M. C. xlvi. in Papam consecratus
electionem dicti Willielmi non ratione personalis inhahabilitatis, mmo pro
libito suaevoluntatis cassavit, etc. And there he also after speaks of the
Restoration of the said William to the said Archbishopric: so that it seems
by this Author that the said William held the said Archbishopric upon his
first election, till after the deaths of Pope Innocent the Second, Pope
Celestine the Second, and Pope Lucius the Second, viz. till about the year
1146. but was then ousted by Pope Eugenius, and restored again by Pope
Anastasius, after the death of Henry Murdac about the year 1153.

Also Gulielmus Neubricensis, who lived in the Reigns of King Richard the
First, and King John, page 368. l. 10. thus writes,

Venerabili Trustino defuncto, Eboracensis Ecclesiae Pontificatum suscepit
Gulielmus ejusdem Ecclesiae Thesaurarius, vir plane secundum carnem nobilis,
and morum ingenua lenitate amabilis. Qui cum ad sedem Apostolicam respensales
idoneos propetendo solemniter pallio direxisset: emergentibus adversariis and
multa contra eum proponentibus negatum est. Jussusque ad eandem sedem in
propria persona accedere and pro semetipso tanquam aetatem habens allegare:
causis tamen ingravescentibus atque invalescentibus adversariis, piae quoque
memoriae Papa Eugenio contra eum, sive per veritatem, sive per surreptionem
implacabiliter irritato depositus est, etc. So also Gervasius a Benedictine
Monk of Canterbury, who lived in the time of King John, Col. 1357. l. 52. in
the year 1142. thus says,

Rex autem Stephanus dedit Archiepiscopatum Eboracensis ecclesiae cuidem
clerico nomine VVillielmo, quibusdam clericis ejusdem Ecclesiae
consentientibus, aliis vero ut audebant reclamantibus, unde factum est ut cum
Theodbaldus Cantuariensis archiepiscopus sie factae non consentiret electioni,
Henricus frater Regis VVintoniensis episcopus apostolicae sedis legatus,
praesumptuosa semper magnanimitate famam colligens, praedictum electum apud
VVintoniam consecraret. Abiit itaque novus sacratus Eboracum, and vix duobus
annis sedit in pace. Also, Radulsus de Diceto, who was Dean of Paul's, and lived
in the time of King John, Col. 508. l. 11. thus writes, Thurstino Eboracensi
archiepiscopo suc cessit Willielmus.

Also, Matt. Paris (who lived in the time of King Henry the Third) in his
Greater History put out by Doctor Watts, Page 78. says thus in the year 1139.
Tune defuncto Turstano Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, Willielmus ejusdem Ecclesiae
Thesaurarius successit.

Also, Simeon Dunelmensis, a Benedictine Monk, who lived in the Reign of King
Stephen, and in the time of the said William, Col. 79. l. 39. speaking of the
Archbishops of York, thus says; Post Oswaldum isti sibi ordine successerunt,
Aldulfus, Vulstanus, Eelfricus, Kinsius, Aldredus, Thomas Girardus, Thomas,
Turstinus, Willielmus, Henricus, Rogerus; There placing the aforesaid William
before Henry Murdac.

And John Prior of Hagulstald, in his Continuation of the History of the said
Simeon, Col. 268. l. 41. thus writes; Anno M.C. xlii. Post mortem Turstini
archiepiscopi clerici Eboracenses secundum desideria cordis sui varia and vaga
sententia circumacti fuerant toto anno super electione facienda. Elegerant
autem persuadente legato Henrico Wintoniae nepotem Regis Stephani Henricum de
Coilli. Qui quia praefuit abbatiae Kadomensi, noluit dominus apostolicus eum
praefici archiepiscopatui nisi renunciaret priori honori. Mense Januario iterum
de electione tractantes, in personam Willielmi Thesaurarii plurimi
consenserunt. And presently after, l. 60. further says, Perductum itaque
electum ad Lincolniam rex libenter suscepit, and in terris and possessionibus
Eboracensibus confirmavit.

Now though a lesser number of Authors might have served to prove that there
was a William Archbishop of York, living in the time both of Randle de
Gernoniis and Roger Clinton, yet I thought fit to cite all these, to let the
world see that it was nothing else, which made you that you could not find it
to be so, but because you would not find it to be so; For, I know, you have
most (if not all) of the said Authors, and if you would have made search, you
might easily have found what is here said.

But besides what is here alleged, if you had but observed those Deeds of
Richard Bacun and Randle Blundevil which are mentioned Monasticon Anglicanum,
Part 2. Page 267 and 268. and the Deeds of Randle de Gernoniis that are in your
own Historical Antiquities, you would easily have known that the said Richard
Bacun did live in the time of the said Randle de Gernoniis; For to the said
Deed of Richard Bacun, Hugo Wac, Willielmus Constabularius de Donington,
Thurstanus Banastre, Willielmus Bacoun, Robertus Bacoun, Willielmus de
Colevile, Richardus Pincerna, Willielmus de Binulle, Galfridus Dispensarius,
Willielmus Capellanus, and Johannes Capellanus are Witnesses: and to the said
Deed of Randle Blundevil, Rogerus Constabularius Cestriae, Rogerus de Montealto
Seneschallus Cestriae, Simon de Kyma, Thomas Dispensarius, Simon de Thochet,
Willielmus de Hardreshulle, Hugo de Nevilla, Henricus de Longo Campo, Philippus
de Horreby, Sampson Prior de Trentham, and Thomas Clericus are witnesses.

Now as it would appear probable (if there were nothing else in the case) that
this Deed of Richard Bacun was not made in the time of Randle Blundevil,
because there is not any one person a witness to the said Deed of Richard
Bacun, who was a witness to the said Deed of Randle Blundevil (or to any other
Deed of his, that I can find) So it certainly appears from your Historical
Antiquities, that those who were witnesses to Richard Bacuns said Deed, did
live in the time of Earl Randle de Gernoniis, and not in the time of Randle
Blundevil; For, as you may there see, Page 126 and 127. in the Deed made by
Henry Duke of Normandy, to the said Randle de Gernoniis, the aforesaid Hugh
Wac, and Richard Pincerna were then witnesses on the behalf of the said Randle,
also Page 128. to one Deed of the said Randle, the said William Colevile was a
witness, and to another of the said Randle's Deeds the said Willielmus
Capellanus and Richardus Pincerna were witnesses, and Page 160 and 161. to
another Deed of the said Randle de Gernoniis the said Thurstan Banaster,
Richard Pincerna, and William the Chaplain were witnesses; and so also the said
Richard Pincerna, Thurstanus Banaster, and Willielmus Capellanus were witnesses
to another Deed of the said Randle de Gernoniis concerning Neither-Whitley,
mentioned by you, Page 387. Though you there run upon a mistake, and say that
Randle Blundevil made that Deed, which cannot be, Because those witnesses (as
appears before) did live in the time of Randle de Gernoniis, and not in the
time of the said Randle Blundevil, they being no witnesses at any time to any
Deed of Randle Blundevils that I can find, although he was Earl of Chester
above fifty years, so that nothing can possibly be more clear than this is.

As to the word aspersed which you fault me for using, I do not apprehend that
it signifies a malicious seeking to throw dirt in another face unjustly; For,
to asperse, properly signifies but to besprinkle, with which, malice will
seldom rest satisfied: and I will do you this right, to declare that I believe
it is not malice, but a desire to divulge your supposed new Discovery, which
occasioned you thus to do.

That way of Arguing which you use in the 57 Page is very odd; For, Because you
suppose the Respondent will deny your Minor, you would have him give over
answering, and turn Opponent, and so endeavor to disprove what you ought to
prove; But what you say, Page 58. that you have proved Amicia to be a Bastard,
unless Hugh Cyveliok had a former Wife, and also Page 59. that if he had no
other Wife but Bertred, and she no Daughter to Bertred, then certainly if she
be a Daughter and so called, she must needs be a Bastard, is undoubtedly true;
For Amicia must needs be a bastard, unless she was legitimate.

You grant in your 59 Page, That my proving Amicia to be called a daughter so
long since, she ought to be presumed legitimate, till the contrary appear; But
why therefore do not you presume her so to be? And though you pretend there are
many strong reasons to the contrary, yet I have showed the invalidity of them
all, and therefore what I have formerly said stands good, and is to the point,
viz. That the proving that she was not by Bertred, does not prove that she was
a bastard, but only proves that she was either a bastard, or by a former wife.

And as to what you alleadg, Page 60. that, though the Law allows not this in
pleadings, what hinders but Bastardy may be proved by History or Argumentation
after the parties death? As, supppose in a Register-Book you find such a
Bastard Christened one hundred years ago, may not you justly call that person
a bastard, whom you find so Registered? I do answer and say, That even in that
case, though it be good proof, that there was then a Bastard of that name, yet
if in any Deed (or otherwise) in the same Age you find one of that name, you
are not to be too positive that that Man was that Bastard, because, there might
be more persons than one of the same Name, whose Fathers might also be of the
same Name each with other; and though these mistakes might easily be cleared by
the party concerned whilst he was alive, yet it may be difficult sometimes to
do it after he is dead: And that is (as I suppose) one reason why the Law gives
no liberty to prove Bastardy against any Man after his death. But the cases of
the children of John of Gaunt by Katherine Swynford are not like to this case,
For you certainly know that they were born Bastards, but afterward
legitimated; and I think, after their legitimation, they might have had the
same remedies against any that did call them Bastards, that persons lawfully
born might have.

Whereas I tell you out of Sir Henry Spelman, that in cases of honor and profit
(by the customs of Normandy) appellatione filiorum non comprehenduntur
bastardi; You answer and say; that in other cases, and formerly by the
appellation of sons, bastards were comprehended, and that this makes directly
against me; But how this makes against me, in what cases soever bastards were
formerly comprehended by the appellation of Sons and Daughters, if they were
not comprehended in cases of honor and profit, I cannot tell, feeing that
Amicia is called a Daughter, and that in a case of so great profit, that you
will needs have it to be her whole Portion.

And whereas you mention the next words of Spelman, viz. that the ancient
Northern people admitted bastards to succeed in their inheritance; and that
William the Conqueror was not ashamed of that title, who began his Letter to
Alan Earl of Little-Britaine as he did many others, Ego Willielmus cognomento
Bastardus.

I do not know how you can apply those expressions to the case in hand, and if
you could, they would make against you; For, when Bastard children were so much
esteemed, as to be admitted to succeed in the inheritance, then certainly
illegitimate Daughters would have great Portions as well as those that were
legitimate, And why should not Amicia, if she was a Bastard, be so called, as
well as Paganus was? (who, as you say, was the Son of Hugh Cyveliok) Or why
should Hugh Cyveliok himself, be more ashamed to call her so, than William the
Conqueror was to style himself a Bastard:

What else you have said, Page 61, 62 and 63. has been said over and over
again by you, and has formerly received a full Answer.

In the 64 and 65 Pages you recite and endeavor to fortify an Argument of
mine, which I brought not as a good Argument, but compared it to one of yours,
to show the invalidity thereof; neither did I at all doubt, but that William,
Randle and Wydo (Sons of the aforesaid Roger Mainwaring) were all legitimate,
it being good proof thereof, that in so ancient a Record, they are all three
called Sons of the said Roger; But I showed you by the Rule by which you went
viz. that none should be believed lawful, unless we could directly and in
terminis prove their Fathers to be married, that the said William, Randle, and
Wido, and most persons that lived in the First and Second Centuries might be
concluded to be Bastards; And though you tell me, that I here argue well (which
must needs be, because this Argument of mine is so like to yours) and that you
would say to my Minor, that Roger had a Wife though we yet know not who she
was; and that this appears certainly, because the Lands descended from heir to
heir, and that you tell me, how you would frame your affirmative part more
formally; Yet in stead of trying whether you could in terminis prove (which by
this your Rule you ought to do) whether William who was the eldest of the three
Sons of the said Roger, was his lawful Son, or but a bastard, you beg what you
should prove, and take it for granted that he was the Son and Heir, and say,
that if the Son and Heir of Roger succeeded by descent in his Fathers
Inheritance, then Roger had a Wise; whereas if William was the Son and Heir of
Roger, the said Roger his Father must needs have a Wife, whethersoever William
succeeded in the Inheritance by descent, or was disinherited; For, none but a
lawful Son, can be a Son and Heir; and the same question you beg, when you
pretend ( p. 65.) to prove the sequel of your Major. For in that Argument you
say, Ergo, if the Son and Heir of Roger succeeded by descent in the
Inheritance, then Roger must needs have a Wife, and nothing appears here of a
^al settlement; But besides you begging of the Question, the only reason which
you bring to prove the said William did succeed by descent (and by consequence
that his Father was Married) is, betause, nothing appears here of a special
settlement; But this is not a proving certainly and in terminis that the said
Roger had a Wife, for though no special settlement does appear yet, if we must
be tied to this your way of proving, William might possibly be a Bastard, and
might come in by special settlement, though the said settlement be now lost; So
that this retorted Argument is but weakly answered.

What you say, Page 66, 67, 68 and 69, is but what you have formerly said and I
have abundantly answered, and your alleging that Amicia being of the first
venture, is therefore more worthy than those of the second, is sufficiently
confuted by those words of mine, which you repeat in your 70 Page; For though
it be true that if a Man die, and leave only Daughters, which are by several
Wives, that those of the first venture, shall be more worthy than those of the
second, yet if a Brother dye (as in this case) and have no issue of his own,
nor any Brother, but only leave Sisters, which were by two several venters, if
that Brother was of the second venture, (as Randle Blundevile was) then those
Sisters that were of the second venture, shall be preferred before those of the
first, Because, those were of the whole blood to their Brother, whereas the
Sisters by the first venture were but of the half blood.

What you allege, Page 71, 72 and 73, does not prove that Earl Hugh's Grant,
was a Release of the Service of one Knights-Fee; But that, and all the rest in
those Pages (as you truly say) being nothing to the argument in hand, I will
not trouble my self or the Reader therewith: Only let me obseve, that there is
no probability at all, but that Sir Raph Mainwaring had a far greater Portion
with his Wife than those Services; For, the having the service of three
Knights-Fees, doing the service of two Knights-fees, was in effect the having
the service but of one Knights-Fee, and as I told you in my former Book, was
not a Portion suitable to the Estate of a very mean Gentleman; so that it was
certainly a free-gift of the said Earl, after the said Marriage was past and
consummated; And that Grant to him is so far from proving, that he had no
greater Portion, that you your self, when you are told, it is like he had a
great deal more, do confess ( Page 71.) it may be so, What then? And if it be
so, that he had a greater Portion, and it does not appear how much that Portion
was, you can raise no Argument from thence, so that this your second Reason is
very invalid.

Also it is very probable that the Lordship of Henbury in Cheshire might be
part of the Portion of the said Amicia; For as appears in your Historical
Antiquities, Page 107. Henbury was one of those Towns which Hugh Lupus held in
Demaine, And I do not find that any Mainwaring was possessed thereof, before
Sir Raph Mainwaring, who was Husband to the said Amicia neither have I ever yet
seen or heard of any Record or Deed which shows how Henbury first came to the
Mainwarings.

And whereas you tell me, ( Page 74, when you speak of your Third and last
Reason) that I might have done well to have answered your first Reason better;
I shall appeal to the Reader, whether your Third Reason, which you your self
confess not to be evincing, be not as strong as your first, and upon the matter
the same with it; as also, whether I have not given both your first and third
Reasons a very full answer, in the 62, 63, 66 and 67 Pages of my former Book,
and therefore it will not be taken off without better reason given by you, then
your bare denying it to be a substantial Answer; So that all your three Reasons
against Amicia, are of no weight at all.

Also, what I have there said will give full satisfaction to the Question you
did please to ask, viz. Whether I find that the Historians have left out any of
Earl Hughes legitimate Children, except this whom I suppose to be legitimate?
For, those Historians only taking upon them to Record who were heirs to Randle
Blundevil; If Hugh Cyveliok had had never so many Daughters by his former Wife,
they would never have taken notice of any of them.

And whereas you observe, Page 75. How I say, that Mr. Cambden has mentioned
Amicia, though not among the Coheires, yet without the brand of a Bastard, and
do reply, that I know well that he is but of late standing, and not an
Historian contemporary with Amicia, and that you and I do also mention her. It
is very strange that you should thus say, whereas the only reason why I did
speak of Mr. Cambden, was, because, you had said, That he was one of those
Historians who had taken no notice of the said Amicia, and I only named him to
show you your mistake therein.

The rest which you say in the 75 and 76 Pages, is but what you have formerly
said, and has received an answer before.

In your 77, 78 and 79 Pages, you are also so far from answering that Argument
of mine, which is contained between the 69 and 75 Pages of my former Book, that
that which you pretend to be an Answer (if rightly understood) is the very
Argument which I there frame against you; For, though what you say, Page 78. be
true, that sometimes the Justice is put after the Constable and Dapifer, and
sometimes before the Constable and Dapifer, yet all the Justices of Chester,
except Sir Ralph Mainwaring, are named in the Charts of the Earls of Chester,
after the Constable and Dapifer, and are also named after the Constable and
Dapifer, when they were witnesses to any Deeds; But it is only in the time of
the said Sir Ralph Mainwaring, when the Justice is named before the Constable
and Dapifer, in the Charts of the said Earls, and it is only he who is named
as a witness, and that frequently before the Constable and Dapifer, as I have
proved by several Deeds, which I then mentioned both out of your former Book,
and elsewhere, and does also further appear by another Deed in your Historical
Antiquities, Page 205. where the said Sir Ralph Mainwaring is also named as a
Witness before the then Dapifer, Ralph de Montealto; And this respect was
showed to the said Sir Ralph Mainwaring, although, as you may see in your said
Book, Page 160 and 161. that the Constable by Charter was to go next the Earl,
and had his office in Fee, and that the Steward was to go next after the
Constable, and had his Office also in Fee; But when Philip Orreby, who did
succeed the said Sir Ralph Mainwaring, was Justice of Chester, then, according
to the old usual way, as appears in the 162. Page of your First Book, the
Constable and Dapifer were again named in the Earls Chart before the Justice
of Chester, and also as you may see at the bottom of the 144 Page, and the top
of the 145 Page of your said Book, the said Constable was named as a Witness
before Philip de Orreby, though then Justice of Chester; And I believe you
cannot show any Chart of any of the Earls of Chester, in which any other
Justice of Chester had the like preeminence; neither do I think you can show
any Deeds in which any other Justice is named as a Witness before the Constable
or Dapifer, and if any such single precedent can perchance be found, I am
confident it will prove to be a Deed wherein the said Philip de Orreby is named
as a Witness, and was occasioned by the simplicity of the Clark, who did write
the said Deed, who finding Sir Ralph Mainwaring Justice of Chester (the
immediate Predecessor of the said Philip de Orreby) to be written as a Witness
before the Constable and Dapifer, might thereupon think that Philip de Orreby
should also be so placed; But it appears by the aforesaid proofs, and by
several other Deeds, that it was not allowed to the said Philip; And although
you truly object, in the 78 Page, How great the uncertainty of subscription of
Witnesses was in old Deeds, sometimes putting one before another in one Deed,
and after putting the same person after the other in another Deed; yet, that
will be nothing in this case; for, you your self confess, Page 160 and 161. of
your Historical Antiquities; notwithstanding the uncertainty of subscription of
Witnesses, that after certain Offices were annexed to certain Barons, that the
matter was without controversy (as to the Constable and Dapifer) and that the
Constable of Cheshire in Fee carried it clear by his Office, which was annexed
to his Barony, and that the Steward was the next after him; And therefore this
preeminence being thus given to the said Sir Ralph, and to him only; and he
also, so far as I have found, being ever named before all the other Barons of
Cheshire, after he had Married the said Amicia, as well when he had parted with
his Office of Justice, as before; I think I may still say, it will be difficult
to give a Reason thereof, if he did not Marry a lawful daughter of the
aforesaid Earl.

I have now done, but cannot concur with you, that the Honor of our
Grandmother (the Mother of Amicia) is a trivial thing; However, I am glad to
Read, That you take your leave for ever of this Controversy, because I hope
all occasion of future Contest will be thereby taken away betwixt You and Him
who is,

SIR, Your Affectionate Kinsman and very humble Servant Thomas Mainwaring.
Baddeley, August 5 1673.
FINIS.

