Practical Perspective; OR Perspective made easy. Teaching By the Optics, How
to Delineate all Bodies, Buildings, or Landskips, etc. By the Catoptricks, How
to Delineate confused Appearences, so as when seen in a Mirror or Pollisht Body
of any intended shape, the reflection shall show a Design. By the Dioptircks,
How to draw parts of many Figures into one, when seen through a Glass or
Crystal cut into many Faces.
Useful for all Painters, Engravers Architects, etc. and all others that are
any ways inclined to Speculatory Ingenuity.

By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON. Printed by Joseph Moxon, and sold at his shop in Russel street, at the
Sign of Atlas. 1670.

To the Worshipful WILLIAM ROPER Esquire.
Sir,
I Present you with this piece of Practical Perspective: Not that I think you
unskilful in this Science, for I know your affections to Mathematical Arts are
great, and your perfections therein greater than to learn any thing from me.
But as you are a general incourager of ingenuous Studies, and have expressed a
particular respect to me by your many Civilities, I always reckoned my self
bound to an humble acknowledgement; which Sir, if you will accept this as a
token of, it will yet more oblige me to be

Sir, Your most humble servant: Joseph Moxon.

To the Reader.
AMong the ingenuous Sciences practiced in this Nation Perspective ought not in
right to have the least esteem; For that it is full of most ravishing
Speculations I think none that knows what it is will deny. But that it is most
absolutely necessary for all Painters, Engravers, Architects and others that
have occasion to draw Drafts etc. all must confess: For indeed without it the
Painter can neither paint Landskips, Houses or other Figures proportionable and
true, or the Architect design any more than an Orthographick Structure on his
Ground-plot. But on the contrary, If an Artist works by the Rules of
Perspective, he may paint a remote piece with many Figures in it, and give
every Figure its true place and size, and so shadow his work that shall seem
more like the thing it represents than a representation of the thing: And the
Architect may draw on his Ground plot the appearance of several sides of his
Building, and place on them either doors, windows, Balconies, etc. each in its
proper shape and situation.

Since therefore it is both necessary and delightful, I have for the
accommodation of English Artists taken the pains to write this following
discourse of Practical Perspective: And I was the rather induced hereunto,
because as yet nothing of this nature has been published in English except
Sebastian Serlio, who though he where a man of skill and fame, yet his book
being originally written in Italian, was first translated into Dutch, and
afterward from Dutch into English: One of which translators (if not both)
doubtless understood the language better than the Art; for therein (as the
generallity of Ingenuous Artists do with me confess) the words are translated,
but not the Science.

In this work to save my self the trouble of making all new designs I have
collected from several Authors such Figures as I found most useful for the
Instructions of a learner, as from Albert Durer, Neceron, Jean Cousin,
Desargues, but the generallity from Hondius, who had them as himself says (and
you may see) from Marolois.

Such has been my care in writing these Instructions, that I dare promise thee
they are all true: Such my curiosity in choosing the Terms that some good
Authors, and able Artists as well as my self have thought them most
significant. And such my desire that thou should learn by this Book, that all
along in it I have observed my wonted plainness, so that by it (as I say in the
Title) is Perspective made easy.

Farewell.
Joseph Moxon.

CHAPTER. I.
Containing the Definition of Perspective, and its Species.

OPTIC in Greek is PERSPECTIVE in Latin; and both words (according to
Grammarians) signify in English Seeing, or Sight.

But the Optics, or Perspective, (which as you see is all one) has yet a more
sublime signification than barely Seeing, or Sight, (that being common to all
sensative Creatures,) For

DEFINITION I.
Perspective is a Mathematical Science, that Speculates, and Contemplates, the
manner and properties of all Radiations, Direct, Reflected, and Broken.

DEFINITION II.
By Direct Radiations is meant that branch of Perspective or Optics, wherein
is considered the Direct or Straight beam that passes between the Ey and the
Object. This Specie of Perspective is many times (alone) called the Optics.

DEFINITION III.
By Reflect Radiations. Is meant the Art Catoptrick, wherein is considered the
Reflection of Beams, and their shape, upon any Pollisht Body; as a Globe, a
Cone, a Cilinder, a Piramid. etc.

DEFINITION IIII.
By Broken Radiations. Is meant the Art Dioptrick, wherein is considered the
breaking of beams as they be seen through a Glass or Crystal cut into several
Plains, or Faces.

This Art or Science is by curious wits brought into Theory and Practice. The
Theory is defined as aforesaid. And

DEFINITION V.
The Practice I may define to be an Art Manual, whereby the Theory is reduced
to Act. This Manual Art is compounded of Ichnographie, Orthographie, and
Scenographie.

DEFINITION VI.
Ichnographie is the Base or Bottom whereon any Body or Building is erected.
And therefore the Office of Ichnographie is to describe the Bottom or Base of
any Body, or Building.

There be two sorts of Ichnographies named in this Book, viz. the Geometrick
Ichnographie, and the Scenographick Ichnographie.

DEFINITION VII.
By the Geometrick Ichnographie is meant the true Geometrick Bottom or Base of
any Body or Building; as a Circle is the Base of a Column, and a Square of four
equal sides is the Base of a Pedestal etc. This Geometrick Ichnographie is not
seen in Section, or through a Glass, unless it be a Glass that lies parallel to
the Base, and therefore makes no Section with it. But

DEFINITION VIII.
The Scenographick Ichnographie is the appearence of the same Base in Section,
or through a Glass erected perpendicularly on the Plain whereon it stands: As
allowing the Circle a to be the Geometrick Ichnographie of a Column, the
Scenographick Circles b c d shall be the Shortened Ichnographies of the same
Column.



DEFINITION IX.
The Orthographie of any Body or Building, is the fore-right side of any Plain.
That is, The side or Plain that lies parallel to a straight line that may be
imagined to pass through the outward unequal points of your two Eyes, continued
to a convenient length. As the Plain of the Cube in Oper. XIX. marked L is the
Orthographick Plain of that Cube. Therefore the Office of Orthographie is to
Delineate the fore-right Plain.

DEFINITION X.
The Scenographick Appearence of any Figure, Body, or Building, is that side
that declines from, or makes angles with that straight line imagined to pass
through the two outward unequal points of your two Eyes aforesaid. Workmen
generally call it the Return of a fore-right side. As the Plains M and N of the
same Cube in Oper. XIX. are the Scenographick Plains or sides of that Cube.
Therefore the Office of Scenographie is to describe a Plain, or other Figure
that declines from the Orthographick Plain. That is, makes angles with the
Plain of the Orthographie.

The knowledge of Scenographie comprehends so much of the Art of Perspective,
that without scruple many Authors call it Perspective, when in their works they
frequently say the Perspective appearence, though they only treat of a
Scenographick Figure: As if they concluded, that he who arrives to so great a
perfection in Perspective, as Scenographie understands or with difficulty may
understand the whole Art of Perspective.

The Scenographick Appearence differs from the Orthographick in this; The
Orthographick represents the side of a Body, or Building, as it is seen when
the Plain of the Glass stands parallel to that side. But Scenographie
represents the side of a Body, or Building, as it seems through a Glass erected
not parallel to that side.

These foregoing Definitions serve to show you who the Lady Perspective is, and
her (...) Handmaids Ichnographie, Orthographie, and Scen^graphie: who all of
them in their several ^^pacities dress her so curiously, that he wh^^ever
admitted her presence, shall see a (...) beautiful enough to commit a rape
upon (...) Ey. But she has a Language by her self, (...) is one reason she is
no better understood; yet (...) is very easy to learn, and to make it appear
so, (...) have composed this small Dictionary following.

CHAPTER. II.
Containing Definitions used in this Art:

DEFINITION I.
The Base. Is the Plain whereon any Object is placed, which for Example sake we
will suppose to be a huge great plain Field, or if you will (...) the flat
Floor or Pavement of some Hall (...) Chamber. As in Defin. VI. of this Chapter,
f g ^^ is the Plain: This Plain or Floor we shall all along hereafter in this
Book call the Base.

DEFINITION II.
The Height. Is the Perpendicular distance between the Base and the Ey, or
which is all one The Height of the Visual point above the Base, because the Ey
lies always in the Horizontal line, as well as the Visual point. Thus the
height from a to b in the aforesaid Figure is called the Height of the Ey.

DEFINITION III.
The Visual Point. This point is not that point the Ey is placed in, (as most
young Studients in this Art are apt to think:) But is a point in the Horizontal
line wherein all the Occular rays unite. For Example, If you look on a long
straight Brick wall, you will perceive the several lays of Mortar between the
several courses of Bricks seem to incline toward each other, as if they ran
into one common Center: Or as if you were in a long straight Gallerey where the
two Sides, the Floor, and Ceiling, seem to incline and touch each other in a
point or common Center, which point reflected on a Glass erected
perpendicularly on the Base, is called the Visual point. This you may
experiment if you lay the Muscovie Glass in Definition VI. flat upon the Object
a b c d, for then so much of your Scenographick Figure as is made of Visual
rays, as the lines a b and c d, shall run into a point opposite to the point
e: which point elevated to the height of the Ey is the Visual point, as a
foresaid. This point is by some Authors called also the Center: and by others
the Principal Point.

Note, that where an Object is reflected, it is also reverted, as you may see
in Looking Glasses and clear water. And for this reason it is that
Orthographick Figures are inverted in their Scenographic. As you may see in
most of the Figures throughout this Book.

DEFINITION IIII.
The Hozriontal Line. By the Horizontal line is not meant the Base or Line of
Earth, though in Astronomy etc. it is generally so taken; But it is a Line
proceeding from the Ey, (which in Men of a common size is placed about five
foot above the Base or Ground they stand upon,) into the Visual point, and is
Parallel to the Base, as the Line b c in Chap. 1. Defin. 8. is the Horizontal
Line.

DEFINITION V.
The Distance. The Distance is that space on the Base contained between the
Glass and the point in the Base that lies directly under the Ey. As from the
point a in the Base, to o at the Glass is called the Distance. Note that in
many Figures two points of Distance is required, as in Operation 10, 15, 16,
17, 18, and several others throughout this Book.

DEFINITION VI.
The Section Is a Plain of transparent matter erected Perpendicularly on the
plain of the Base, and stands directly before you, that is is Parallel to a
straight line imagined to pass through the unequal points of your two Eyes: As is
this Plain of Muscovie Glass erected before the Figure e. This Plain is by some
Authors called the Section, by others the Table, and by others the Glass. They
that call it a Section call it most properly, Because it cuts or intersects the
Plain whereon it stands, as here it cuts the Plain or Base a b c d. And they
that call it a Table, call it so allusively as they do other Planis whereon any
thing is either painted or written. But they that call it a Glass have some
good reason for it too, Because we know as yet no other matter so apt to
demonstrate the changing of an Orthographick Figure into a Scenographick as
Glass: And therefore though I confess the word Section to be more proper than
the word Glass, yet because (as I said before) my design is Practice: I shall
all along in this Book (when I have occasion to name this Plain) call it Glass
and not Section.

This Glass or Section is absolutely necessary to be understood by all young
Studients in the Art of Perspective. Because (as by what has already been
said) without knowing what it is they cannot know what Perspective means:
Neither can they know the reason why the Scenographick Figure alters from the
Orthographick, or one Scenographick Figure from another. But by rightly
understanding this Glass they may easily perceive the Various affections of
Scenographick appearences. For first, If the Glass be placed near the Visual
point and far from the Object, the Figure appearing therein will be very small:
Because all the rays which enclose both Orthographick and Scenographick
Figures though wider asunder at the Object run into the Visual point as into a
common Center: As you may see in the first Figure, where the Circle a appears
much smaler in the Plain or Glass d e f g, which stands near the Visual point
and farther from the Object than in the Glass h i k l, which stands farther
from the Visual point and nearer the Object. Secondly, If the Visual point be
placed higher, though at the same distance from the Object the greater the
Scenographick form appears: As you may see if you place the Visual point at m,
and delineate the same Circle Scenographically as d, it becomes bigger in
length and breadth; for the Visual rays being elevated the several
Perpendiculars erected on the Glass intersect them in wider distances, Because
futher from the Glass. As you may see in the Scenographick Circle d. Thirdly,
If this Glass were set oblique to the Plain, the Figure would again alter; For
if it Incline to the Visual point the Scenographick appearence of this Circle
(for Example,) shall on the Glass lengthen between the Visual point and the
Object: Because the Plain of the Glass gathers in more of the Visual rays: And
if the Glass Recline from the Visual point the Scenographick appearence shall
grow rounder and more like the Orthographick Figure. But if the Glass be placed
parallel to the Plain the Object lies on, the Scenographick and Orthographick
Figure shall appear the same; Because the Figure is not seen in Section. And
all this you may easily experiment by erecting the Muscovy Glass in Defin. VI.
of this Chap. between your Ey and the Figure: For if you keep your Ey steady in
one point, and with a black-lead pencil trace about the edges of the same
Figure as you find it on the Glass, you will have the true Scenographie of that
Figure: As you may try by comparing it afterward with the same Figure drawn by
the Rules of Perspective, as they are taught in this Book.

DEFINITION VII.
The Visual Rays, or Diametrals, are those lines which proceed from the Visual
point through a Glass to any point either above or below the Horizon. As in
Oper. II. the line c f e is a Visual Raie or a Diametral: So is the lines c k
g, and c l f in Oper. III.

DEFINITION VIII.
Lines of Distance, or Diagonals, are those Lines that are drawn from the point
of Distance, to any point either above or below the Horizon. As in Oper. III.
the line b k i, is a line of Distance: So is the lines b d l h.

DEFINITION IX.
The Object. The Object is that Figure, Body, or Building you intend to
describe in Perspective. As in Oper. II. the point d is the Object: So are the
Squares d e f g, and l m n o, in Oper. IIII.

CHAPTER III.
Several Methodical Rules and Observations, that may facilitate your Practice
in Perspective.

1. ALL Lines that in the Object or Geometrick Figure are straight lines, are
in Scenographie also straight lines.

2. All Lines that in a Geometrick Figure are Perpendiculars, must in
Scenographie also be Perpendiculars.

3. All Lines that in a Geometrick Figure are Parallel to its Base, must in
Scenographie be also Parallel to the Base.

4. All Lines that in Geometrick Figures return at Right Angles from the
Orthographick or fore-right side, must in Scenographick Figures be drawn from
the Visual point.

5. All Right Lines that in a Geometrick Figure return from the Orthographick
or fore-right side, in a Scenographick Figure run into the Horizontal Line. And

6. All Lines that in the Geometrick Figure are Parallel to that return-line,
shall in a Scenographick Figure be drawn from that point found in the Horizon.

7. If a Right Angle having one of its sides against the Base be to be cut off,
so as the two sides of it shall remain equal: Then a line drawn from the point
of Distance shall so cut it off.

8. If the Figure you design to draw stands on your right hand, you must place
it on the right hand of the Visual point. If on your left hand, you must place
it on the left hand of the Visual point. But if on neither hand, the Visual
point must be placed in the middle of it.

9. If you set off the Height of Columns, Posts, or other things, you must
measure the designed Height from the Base-line upwards in the Front or
Orthographie, and a Visual raie drawn from that point in the Front shall show
the Height of your Columns, or Posts, all the way behind the Orthographie, even
to the Visual point. As in Oper. XXIX. etc. This is a Rule in all Figures,
as well wherein there is an Orthographick side placed before it, as where there
is none.

10. If you are to make Circles, Arches, Crosses, Cross-Arches, or any other
Figure in the Roof of any Room, you must first project the same on the
Ichnographie, and so with Perpendiculars from the eminent points of the same,
carry it up into the Ceiling: as in Oper. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
And then from those several points carry on your Circle, or Arch etc. As in
Oper. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 25, 26, etc.

11. If you would find the middle point of any Scenographick Square, Cross it
in the Diagonal Angles with two lines, and in the point where they cut each
other is the middle of the Square. As in Oper. 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, etc.

12. A Ground Plain of Squares is the same above the Horizontal line it is
below: Only if it be farther distant above or below the Horizon the Squares
will be so much the wider. As in Oper. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, etc. and
all other wherein Roofs, or Ceilings are described.

These brief Rules will much help you in your Practice.

A Caution or two for your more profitable reading this Book.
YOu must take special notice of the several shapes of Letters wherewith the
several points of each Figure is marked; for in some Figures there come so many
Letters, that I was forced to reitterate them: But then the Letters are made in
an other shape; either in Capitals, as A, B, or small Romian, as a, b: when as
otherwise they are set down in Italick Letters, thus, a, b. For if you do not
take notice that the Letter you seek in the Figure be of the same sort with
that you read in the Operation, you may easily mistake one part of the Figure
for another.

Secondly, The different Letters are sometimes made to show the corrospondent
points of the Geometrick and Scenographick Figures; as in Oper. VI. the several
points in the Geometrick Hexagon are marked with Italick Letters, thus, d e f g
h i, but in the Scenographick Hexagon the respondent points are marked with
Romain Letters thus d e f g h i.

You are sometimes directed in this Book to draw a line from the Point a b c d,
etc. when the point intended is not in the Plate, but lies out of the Plate in
the Horizontal line. As in Oper. XXXIII. you are directed to draw a line from
the point c, but it is thereby meant you should draw a line from that point
where c should stand, viz. where the line d 13 c if continued would cut the
Horizontal line, which is the Visual point; and is in that Figure marked c.

Take this advice in Drawing a Perspective Figure, wherein there comes many
Lines: For I have observed one main thing that makes Perspective be thought so
difficult, is the mixture of many Lines directing to many designed points:
Therefore when you draw some busy piece in Perspective, you may for the
directing your Ey, Draw the Diagonals in Red, the Visual Rays in Black,
Perpendiculars in Green, or any other different Coullers from that you intend
your Perspective Figure shall be of.

There may be some more Rules worth your Notice: but as yet not comeing to my
memory, Take these for the present; and as the rest offer themselves to me, I
shall present them to you. In the mean time, If you meet with any words of Art
you understand not, Look over the Leaf, where I have digested them in an
Alphabetical order, and to them annexed their explanation.

An Explanation of such Un-usual words as you may find in this Book.
Arch. A piece of a Circle. As in Oper. 2 c d is an Arch of a Circle. Axis. is
that straight line whereon any Body moves circularly, as in the line a a in
Operat. 21. is the Axis of the Door.

Base. See Chap. 2 Defin. 1 Broken beams. See Chap. 1 Defin. 4.

Capital. The top of a Column. Catuzes. e f in fig. 22 are Catuzes. Catoptrick.
See Chap. 1 Defin. 3. Center. The middle point of a Circle, or any other
figure. Cilinder. A straight round Body, flat at either end. Fig. 53.

Column. The upright Pillars marked x a b y c t in fig. 30. Composite Order. an
Order in Architect. See Vignola. Cone. Fig. 54. Corinthian Order. An Order in
Architect. See Vignola. Cube. A Square Body of six equal sides, as I K L in
fig. 19 are Cubes.

Diagonals. See Chap. 2 Defin. 8. Diagonal Squares. The squares in fig. 16. are
all Diagonal Squares, because all their sides are Diagonal lines. Diametrial.
See Chap. 2 Defin. 7. Dioptrick. See Chap. 1. Defin. 4. Direct beam. See Chap.
1. Defin. 2. Distance. See Chap. 2 Defin. 5. Dorick Order. An Order in
Architect. See Vignola.

Equilateral Triangle. A Triangle of equal sides, as are the Triangles d e f in
fig. 5.

Geometrick Figure or Body. is a Figure or Body that has its true demensions.

Ground line. See Operat. 51. Ground-plain. A plain full of Squares as fig. 15.
16.

Height. See Chap. 2 Defin. 2. Hexagon. A figure of six equal sides is a
Hexagon; as the two figures in fig. 6. are Hexagons. Horizon. See Chap. 2.
Defin. 4.

Ichnography. See Chap. 1 Defin. 6. Intersection. Two lines crossing one
another are said to intersect each other. Ionick Order. An Order in Architect.
See Vignola.

Luminious Body. Light body, as in fig. 51. 52. to 56. at a is the Luminous
body.

Newel. is the upright post a pair of winding stairs wind about.

Object. See Chap. Defin. 9. Occult. Occult lines or Arches are dark lines or
Arches: which are only drawn for direction to make the Figure up by: these are
throughout this book represented by pricked lines and arches. Octagon, a Figure
of eight equal sides is an Octagon. As are the two Figures in Fig. 8. Opacous
body. A Dark body As in Fig. 51. 51. 53. 54. 55. 56. the bodies obstructing
beams of Light are Opacous bodies. Optic. See Perspective. Chap. 1 Defin. 1.
Orthography. See Chap. 1 Defin. 9.

Parallel. Parallel lines are straight lines that are all the way equally
distant from one another; as the Base and Horizon throughout this book, are all
parallel to to one another. Parallellepippedon. is a square body that has its
four sides longer than its two ends, As in fig. 56. the square body f g.
Pedestal. A square body whereon a Column is set, as d in fig. 28. Pentagon. A
Figure of five equal sides, as are the two figures in fig. 7. Perpendicular. A
line that falls plumb upon another line, without leaning to one side or another
is a Perpendicular line. Perspective. See Chap. 2 Defin. 1. Pilasters. Square
Pillars that usually stand behind Columns to bear Arches etc.

Quadrat. A square figure of four equal sides. Quadrant. A figure containing
the fourth part of a Circle.

Radius. Half the Diameter of a Circle. Reflected beams. See Chap. 1 Defin. 3.
Right Angle. is made by two lines exactly Perpendicular to one another.

Scenography. See Chap. 1 Defin. 10. Section. See Chap. 2 Defin 6. Semicircle.
Half a Circle. Station. The place you stand on.

Tetrahedron. is a Body whose four Plains are four Triangles, as in fig. 55.
Tube. a long hollow instrument wherein is usually a Glass fitted, to observe
objects through. Tuscan Order. An Order in Architect. See Vignola.

Visual point. See Chap. 2 Defin. 3. Visual rays. See Chap. 2 Defin. 7.

OPERATION. I.
Height and Distance given, To find the situation first of a Point, secondly
of a Line, and thirdly of a Square, in the Glass or Section.

THe given Height from the ground to the Ey, or which is all one from the Base
to the Horizon is a b, the Distance from the Foot to the Glass is a c. The
given point or Object to be represented in the Glass or Section is d. The Glass
erected perpendicularly on the Base is e f g h. Draw a Visual ray from the Ey
at the point b to the Object at the point d, as b d, and another line from the
point of Station a to the same point d, as a d; then erect a Perpeneicular on
the point where this line a d cuts the line of Section as at c, and where this
Perpendicular cuts the Visual ray b d as here it does in i is the point that
the Object d appears in the Glass.

To find the Situation of a Line in the Section or Glass, You must have the
Height given, as a b, and the Distance as a c, And as you were taught before to
find the place of one point in the Glass, so now by the same Rule the Operation
must be doubled to find the place of two points in the Glass, and then a
straight line drawn between those two points is the line required. Example.

The given Line is d e, Therefore from the Visual point b I draw two straight
lines or Visual rays to the two points at the two ends of the line d e, and two
other straight lines from the point of Station a to the same points d e, And
from the points where these two lines intersect the Glass (as here they do in
the points c f) I erect Perpendiculars into the two Visual rays, and where
these Perpendiculars intersect the two Visual rays (as here they do at g h) is
the points d e represented in the Glass, and a straight line drawn between the
points g and h represents in the Glass the straight line d e.

To find the situation of a Square figure in the Glass. You have the given
Height a b, the Distance c. Draw Visual rays from the Visual point b to every
angle of the Square d e f g, and draw also lines from the point of Station a to
every angle of the Square: and where these lines of Station cut the line of
Section (as here they do in the points h i k l) erect Perpendiculars into each
respective Visual ray, and where these Perpendiculars cut each respective
Visual ray (as here in the points m n o p) shall be each respective point of
the Square in the Glass, and straight lines drawn from point to point shall
include the Square.

These three Operations (though in effect but one) are sufficient to show the
nature and quality of the Appearence in Section or Glass: but this way is not
much used among Artists; nor is it so ready for use as laying the Figure along
on the Base-line drawn Parallel to the Horizon; because this way you must draw
several Base-lines, even so many as you have given points in your Figure; for
in this Square you have four Base-lines, as the lines d a, e a, f a, g a, are
all Base-lines, which together with the line of Section and the several
Perpendiculars erected on them would so pester a large Design that it would be
both tedious to draw and difficult to understand when drawn: Therefore I shall
hereafter in the rest of this Book leave out the Glass thus erected, and show
you how to perform the same by laying the Figure along on the Base.

OPERATION II.
Height and Distance given, to find the true Scenographick place of a given
Point.

THe given Height is a b, the Distance given is b c. The Point given is d. To
set this Point in its true Scenographick place, Draw a line to represent the
Base, and at the given Height a b above it draw a line parallel to the Base, to
represent the Horizon, as c b; Then draw a Perpendicular to the Base a a and
Horizon as b c into a as the line b a, and placing one foot of your Compasses
on the point a open the other to the point d, and describe the pricked arch d e;
then lay a straight Ruler to the point of Distance b and to e, and by the side
of it draw the line c e (which we shall call a Diagonal line) and where this
Diagonal line cuts the Perpendicular b d a (as here it does in f) is the
Scenographick place of the point d.

OPERATION III.
Height and Distance given to describe the Scenographick appearence of a Line.

THe given Height is a b, the given Distance is c b, the given Line to be
delineated in Scenographie is d e. Therefore from the given points d e let fall
Perpendiculars into the Base, as d f and e g, and placing one point of your
Compasses in f open the other to d, and set off that distance on the Base, as
at h, then place one foot of your Compasses in g and the other to e, and set
off that distance also on the Base, as at i; then to the perpendicular points f
and g draw the Diametrals as c f and c g, and from the transferred Distances h
and i draw Diagonals as b h and b i, and where the Diagonals intersect the
Diametrals (as here in k and l) shall be two points, between which the straight
line k l being drawn shall be the Scenographick appearance of the line d e.

If you understand these two Operations rightly, you have already made a good
progress in Perspective; for knowing how to place every point and line, you
must needs know how to draw all Lines Figures and Bodies: Lines being but a
progression of points. And all Figures are made of Lines, and all Bodies made
of Figures, according to the Definition of Geometers.

Having showed you how to draw a Point and a Line: I come next to Figures, for
the drawing of which Scenographically, I shall give you this general method,
which after (by a little practice) you have made your self familiar with, will
serve you to draw all manner of Figures.

Having considered your Height and Distance, and in what Position your Figure
shall stand, and drawn it accordingly, either with its Side or Angle against
the Base: Erect Perpendiculars from the several Angles, or other designed
points in your Figure into the Base, and transfer the length of each
Perpendicular from the point where it touches the Base, to the Base on the side
contrary to the Point of Distance: For then Diametrals drawn to the
Perpendiculars in the Base, and Diagonals to the several transferred distances
shall at the intersection with their respective Diametrals give the Angles of
the Figure. That is, where any Diagonal drawn from any transferred distance on
the Base, shall intersect the Diametral drawn from the Perpendicular on the
Base of that transferred distance, shall be the point where the Angle shall be
placed, that represents in Scenographic the Angle from whence the Perpendicular
was erected on the Geometrick Figure: and lines drawn from point to point,
shall enclose the Scenographick Figure.

This is a sure method and plain; yet because I will make it more casic, I
shall give you several Examples of this way of working in several Figures; viz.
the Square, a Triangle, a Hexagon, a Pentagon, an Octagon, a Circle, an Oval,
and an irregular Figure in several Positions.

OPERATION IIII.
Height and Distance given to describe the Scenographick apearance of a
Quadrat, or Square, in two Positions; one with its Side against the Base, and
the other with an Angle against the Base.

THe given height is a b, and the distance c b. First draw the Base, and
Parallel to it at the given height a b, draw the Horizontal line: under the
Base erect a square Figure, with one of its sides against the Base, as d e f g
and transfer the distance of the angles from the Base into the Base, by placing
one foot of your Compasses in the angles of the square, at the Base as at e,
and extend the other to the point f, and transfer this perpendicular distance
of the point f into the Base as at h: then remove your Compasses to the point
d, placing one foot there, and extend the other to the point perpendicularly
under it, as to g, and transfer that distance also into the Base, as at e: Then
draw Diametrals from the point c to the perpendiculars e f and d g in the Base,
and Diagonals from the transferred distances f h and g e, and where these
Diagonals intersect the Diametrals, as here in i k, shall be two angles of the
Square, and a line drawn from k to i shall be one side of the Square, and so
much of the Diametral as is comprehended between k e is another side of the
square: also so much of the Diametral as is contained between i d is another
side of the square: and the other side of the square lies in the Base, as you
may see by the line d e.

Here is also laid down a Geometrick Square of four equal sides, having its
angle l placed against the Base. To describe this in Scenographie, draw lines
from the angles m n o Perpendicularly up to the Base, as at the points p q, and
upon these points measure the distance of the angles m n o from the Base, and
transfer those distances into the Base, as the distance of p m falls on l, the
distance of l n falls on r, and the distance of o q falls at r, for Diametrals
drawn from the Perpendiculars in the Base, and Diagonals from the transferred
distances in the Base, shall intersect each other in the points s t v l, which
are the four angles of the Scenographick Square: and straight lines drawn from
t to v, from v to l, from l to s, and from s to t, shall include the Square.
Where the Diagonal b r intersects the Diametral c q, is the angle v, and a line
drawn from l to v shall represent the side l o; where the Diagonal b r
intersects the Diametral c l, is the angle t, and a line drawn from v to t
represents the side o n: and where the Diagonal b l intersects the Diametral c
p is the angle s, and a line drawn from t to s represents the side m n: And
lastly a line drawn from s to l represents the side m l, and incloses the
Scenographick Square, according to the former height and distance given.

OPERATION V.
Height and Distance given, to describe in Scenographie the Appearance of two
Equilateral Triangles: One with one of its Angles against the Base, and the
other with one of its Sides against the Base.

DRaw the Base a a, and Parallel to it the Horizontal line b b, at the given
Height a b: place your Visiual point in this line as at c, then draw your
Triangle (as d e f) under the Base with one of its Angles (as d) against it,
and from the other two Angles erect Perpendiculars up to the Base, as e g and f
h, and transfer the distance of those Perpendiculars from the Base to the Base,
by placing one foot of your Compasses first at g, and opening the other foot to
e, and so set off the occult line e i; then remove one foot of your Compsses to
the point h, and extend the other to the point f, which distance h f transfer
also into the Base, as to k: Then draw Visual lines from the point c to the
Perpendiculars g e and h f, and Diagonal lines from the point b (on your right
hand) to the transferred distances i k in the Base; and where the Diagonal b i
cuts the Diametral c g, as here it does at l, shall be the Angle in
Scenographie that represents the Angle e in the Geometrick Triangle: and where
the Diagonal b k cuts the Diametral c h as here it does in m, shall be the
Angle in Scenographie that represents the Angle f in the Geometrick Triangle.
The other Angle in Scenographie lies at the Base, at the Angle d of the
Geometrick Triangle: therefore a straight line drawn from d to m, shall be the
representative of the side d f; and another straight line drawn from d to l,
shall be the representative of the side d e, and another straight line drawn
from l to m shall be the representative of the side e f.

In the other Triangle with one of its Sides against the Base; you see there is
no more to do but to erect a Perpendicular from the Angular point e into the
Base as e g, and transfer that distance into the Base as to i, for then by
drawing a Diametral from c to g and a Diagonal from b to i: you have at the
intersection of the Diametral with the Diagonal (as at h,) the three Angles of
your Scenographick Triangle: h represents e in the Geometrick Triangle, and d
and f are the same, and straight lines drawn from h to d, and from h to f,
together with part of the Base d f be the Sides of the Scenographick Triangle.

OPERATION VI.
Height and Distance given, to describe the Scenographie of an Hexagon in two
positions, one with an Angle against the Base, the other with a Side against
the Base.

DRaw your Base as a a, and at your given Height the Horizontal line as b b,
and in it place your Visual point as at c, and points of distance as b b, place
your Hexagon as d e f g h i with one of its Angles under the Base as the Angle
d: then draw Perpendiculars from each Angle of the Hexagon into the Base as f e
k, g d, and h i l, and transfer the distance of each Angle from the Base to the
Base, as before in the several operations: for then Diametral lines drawn from
the points where the Perpendiculars touch the Base, and Diagonals from the
transferred points in the Base shall by their mutual intersection, give the
Angles of the Scenographick Hexagon: and straight lines drawn from Angle to
Angle shall show the Figure. The several Angles of the corresponding Figure are
marked with Roman Letters as e f g h i.

The other Hexagon with one of its sides against the Base, is also made by
erecting Perpendiculars from each Angular point in the Figure, and transferring
the distance of each Angular point from the Base to the Base, for then
Diametrals drawn from the Perpendiculars in the Base, and Diagonals from the
transferred distances in the Base shall at the intersection of each Diametral
with its respective Diagonal give the Angles of the Figure: That is, where the
Diametral drawn from any Perpendicular shall intersect that Diagonal that is
drawn from the transferred distance of that Perpendicular shall be the point
where the Angle shall be placed that represents in Scenography the Angle from
whence the Perpendicular was erected on the Geometrick Figure. As you may see
by the corresponding Roman and Italick Letters.

OPERATION VII.
To describe the Scenographie of a Pentagon, in two several Positions, one with
a Side, another with an Angle against the Base.

DEscribe your Base as a a, and Parallel to it at your intended Height as a b,
describe the Horizontal line as b b, and elect your Visual point as at c, and
on either side as at b b your points of distance; then draw a Geometrical
Pentagon with one of its Angles as d against the Base, and from all the rest of
its Angles viz. e f g h erect Perpendiculars into the Base, which Perpendicular
distances from the Bass transfer into the Base, (as you have in the foregoing
Oper. already been taught.) Then from the Visual point c, draw Diametrals to
the Perpendiculars in the Base, and Diagonals from the point of distance b on
your right hand to the several transferred distances on the Base, and the
intersections of these Diagonals with the respective Diametrals shall be the
respective Angles of the Scenographick Pentagon: And straight lines drawn from
Angle to Angle shall include the Scenographick Figure.

The other Pentagon with one of its Sides against the Base, is also made by
erecting Perpendiculars into the Base, and transferring the length of each
perpendicular from the point where it cuts the Base to the Base; for then
Diametrals drawn to the Perpendiculars in the Base, and Diagonals to the
several transferred distances shall at the intersection of each Diagonal with
its respective Diametral give the Angles of the Figure: That is, where any
Diagonal (drawn from any transferred distance on the Base,) shall intersect the
Diametral drawn from the Perpendicular (on the Base,) of that transferred
distance, shall be the point where the Angle shall be placed that represents in
Scenographie the Angle from whence the Perpendicular was erected on the
Geometrick Figure: and straight lines drawn from Angle to Angle shall enclose
the Scenographick Figure. As you may see by the corresponding Romain and
Italick Letters.

OPERATION VIII.
Height and Distance given, to Describe the Scenography of an Octagon, with one
of its Angles against the Base: and another with one of its Sides against the
Base.

THis Operation is also performed as the other, viz. by drawing Perpendiculars
from the Angles up to the Base, and setting off the distance of the Angles from
the Base on the Base: For then by drawing Diametrals from the Visual point to
the Perpendiculars on the Base, and Diagonals from the point of distance set
off on the Base, you have in their mutual Intersections given the Angles of the
Scenographick Octagon; and straight lines drawn from Angle to Angle shall show
the Figure. As you may see by the corresponding Romain and Itallick Letters.

The other Octagon is also made by drawing Perpendiculars from each Angle up to
the Base: And (as before) transfer the Perpendicular distances of every Angle
from the Base to the Base: Then from the Visual point draw Diametrals to the
Perpendiculars in the Base, and from the point of distance Diagonals to every
transferred distance on the Base., so shall the mutual intersections of each
Diametral, and Diagonal give the Angles of the Octagon, and so much of the
Visual rays and lines of distance as are comprehended between every two Angles
shall be the several Sides of the whole Figure.

By this Operation therefore you may perceive an Octagon with one of its Side
against the Base, is readier to be drawn than any other Figure: Because in all
other Figures after you have found the several Angles of the Figure, you must
draw straight lines from Angle to Angle to represent the Sides: But herein you
describe the Angles and Sides all at once. And hereby you may (if you will
consider it) apprehend the nature and quality of the three most principal Lines
used in Perspective viz. the Parallel or Fore-right Line, the Return Line, and
Diagonal Line: For as was said in the Preface, those Lines that are Parallel to
the Base in a Geometrick Figure, must be Parallel to the Base in the
Scenographick Figure: And those Lines that return from the Base right Angularly
in the Geometrick Figure, must in the Scenographick Figure be drawn from the
Visual point, and Diagonal Lines viz. those lines that cut off a part of the
two sides of the Right Angle at equal distance from the Angle in the Geometrick
Figure, shall be drawn from the points of distance. Thus you see the Lines d e
and ih in the Geometrick Figure are Parallel to the Horizon: so are their
representatives de and ih in the Scenographick Figure: And thus you see the
lines f g and l k in the Geometrick Figure Perpendiculars, and their
representatives fg and lk in Scenographie are drawn from the Visual point. Also
thus you see the Diagonal Lines of, gh, ik, ld, in the Geometrick Figure
represented by part of the Diagonals of, gh, ik, ld, in the Scenographick
Figure.

OPERATION IX.
Height and Distance given, to Describe a Circle in Perspective.

DEscribe first a Geometrick Circle, and divide it into twelve equal parts as
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, through each one of which divisions let
fall a line Perpendicularly on the Base, as through the point 1, draw the line
which also runs through the point 7, through the point 2 which also passes
through the point 6: and so for the rest, as you may see in the Figure.

Then from the point 2 to 3 draw a Diagonal Line and continue it into the Base,
and from the point 1 to 4 draw another Diagonal Line, which also continue into
the Base. So is the Ichnography of your Circle fitted for your purpose.

For describing the Scenographie of this Circle, let fall a Perpendicular upon
the Base from the Visual point c, and from that Perpendicular set off on the
Base each way the distance of each Perpendicular from the point 1 in the
Geometrick Circle; and to those distances draw Diametrals Lines from the Visual
point c: then set off on the Base the distances of the several Diagonal Lines
from the point 1 in the Geometrick Circle, and to those distances draw Diagonal
Lines from the point of distance b. And the intersections of those Diagonal
Lines with the respective Diametral Lines are the points through which the
Scenographie of the Circle is to pass.

Note, That though this Geometrick Circle be placed on the Base, it is all one
in effect as if it had been placed under the Base, as the other Geometrick
Figures delineated in Perspective are: for the distance of every point from the
Base would be the same. In the foregoing Figures you have all the points of the
Figures drawn up into the Base by Perpendiculars erected, and in this for want
of room to place it under the Base the several points are transferred downwards
to the Base from the point 7, on either side the Perpendicular 17.

OPERATION X.
Another way to draw the Perspective of a Circle at any Assigned Height and
Distance.

DRaw your Base and Horizon, as has been taught before: and having assigned
your Visual point, and points Distance, Draw on a Center in the Base a
Semicircle; This Semicircle must be included in half a Quadrat, as in the
Figure; and divided into as many equal parts as you please, (the more the
better) this Figure is Divided into eight, as d e f g h i k l m, and through
every point of division must be a line drawn Perpendicular to the Base and
continued to the outmost verge of the half Quadrat: These several
Perpendiculars must be crossed at right Angles with other lines Parallel to the
Base, and drawn through those points of division in the Semicircle that are
equidistant to one another: So is your Geometrick Semicircle finished. Then
from the Visual point draw Diametral lines to the several points where every
Perpendicular touches the Base, and also two Diagonal lines from the points of
distance b b to the points where the Semicircle touches the Base, so shall the
intersections of those two lines with the Visual lines be the points through
which you must draw lines above the Base Parallel to the Base (as in Oper. XV.)
and the intersections of those respective Parallels with the respective
Diametral or Visual lines are the points through which the Scenographick
Semicircle is to run, as at defghiklm, which is one half of the Scenographick
Ground. The other Scenographick Semicircle is drawn through the intersections
of the Diametrals with the Parallels in the under half of the Scenographick
Ground.

OPERATION XI.
Height and Distance given, to Draw the Perspective of a Flat Oval.

DIvide the Circumference of the Oval into so many equal parts as you please,
the more the better; (In this example we have 16,) and mark them with 1 2 3 4 5
etc. from these points raise Perpendiculars into the Base, and transfer the
distance of each Perpendicular from the Lase to the Base: Then from the point
of distance c draw Diametrals to the several Perpendiculars in the Base, and
Diagonals to the transferred distances of those Perpendiculars, and the mutual
interfections of the Diagonals with the respective Diametrals shall give the
several points through which the Scenographick Oval must pass: as where the
Diagonal drawn to the point 1 on the Base cuts the Diametral drawn to the point
1 is one point through which part of the Circumference of the Scenographick
Oval must be drawn: and where the Diagonal drawn to the point 2 on the Base
cuts the Diametral drawn to the point 2 is another point through which part of
the Circumference of the Scenographick Oval must pass. The like is to be
understood of all the other Diametral and Diagonal Intersections.

OPERATION XII.
To Describe an irregular Figure in Perspective, Height and Distance given.

THe Angles of this Figure are d e f g h i k l m n o, which erect
Perpendicularly into the Base (as before,) and also transfer their
Perpendicular distances from the Base into the Base, for then Diametrals drawn
to the Perpendiculars and Diagonals to the transferred distances cut each other
respectively in the Scenographick points where the Angles of the Figure must be
placed, and lines drawn from Angle to Angle shall include the Figure. As you
may see by the corresponding Romain and Itallick Letters.

OPERATION XIII.
To begirt the former Figure with Parallel Lines about it, in Perspective:
Height and Distance given.

THese two Figures are inserted to show that whether your Figures are regular
or irregular, Circumscribed or not Circumscribed, the working remains the same
in all respects: For as in the foregoing Figures, so in this, Perpendiculars
erected from the Angles, and the distance of the Angles from the Base
transferred to the Base, and Diametrals drawn to the Perpendiculars in the
Base, and Diagonals to the transferred distances cut each other in those points
the Scenographick Angles must be placed, from whence lines drawn to each other
respectively shall begirt the former Figure with a line Scenographically
Parallel to it.

I have been the more copious upon these Figures because they come often in use
in the designing of Ground Plots, whereon to raise any Structure in Gardening,
and in Fortifications. etc.

OPERATION XIIII.
Showing that from one Geometrick Figure you may make two or more Scenographick
Figures by Elevating of the Horizon.

YOu were taught in Oper. VIII. to reduce the Geometrick Octagon d e f g h i k
l into Scenographic, which is here also noted with its corresponding Romain
Letters. But you may make yet another appearance of this Figure, if you alter
the Height though you observe the same distance, for here the Horizontal line
is elevated into the upper b c, and Diametrals drawn to the same
Perpendiculars, and Diagonals to the same transferred distances, by their
mutual interfections give the points F G H I K L which are the Angles of the
second Octagon, and lines drawn from each Angle to its next shall include the
Figure.

This way of working may be of great use in drawing Covers for Boxes, Covers
for Pulpits, and for several other designs, for according to your purpose you
may either elevate or depress the Horizontal line, or make as many elevations
as you please.

OPERATION XV.
To Describe the Scenographie of a Plain with Seven Quadrats or Squares in
Length, and Seven in Breadth therein: Height and Distance given.

THe given Height is a b, and the given Distance c b, draw the Base a a and
Parallel to it at the given Height the Horizontal line b b, then set off the
distance with your Compasses from the middle of the Horizontal line both ways,
as from the Visual point c to b b: And keeping one foot of your Compasses still
in the Visual point, set off your designed length of the Base as at a a on
either side making small occult arches or marks on the Base; then draw two
Diagonal lines from the points of distance b b to the points a a, and two
Diametrals from the Visual point c to the points a a, and where the Diagonals b
a cut the Diametrals e a, as here in the points d d and a a shall be the four
Angles of this Scenographick Plain, and a straight line drawn from d to d shall
be one side of this Plain: The Base line a a another side, and two lines drawn
viz. one from a to d on the right hand, and another from a to d on the left
hand shall be the other two sides that include this Square. Then divide the
Base into Seven equal parts, as from a to e f g h i k a; and by laying a Ruler
on the Visual point c and each of these parts e f g h i k draw by the side of
it Diametral lines through the Plain, and to the points where those Diametral
lines intersect the two Diagonal lines b a and b a (as here they do in 1 2 3 4
5 6 d. 1 2 3 4 5 6 d) lay a Ruler and draw lines by the side of it Parallel to
the Base, so shall your work be finished.

OPERATION. XVI.
Height and Distance given, To Describe the Scenographie of a Plain full of
Squares with their Angles pointing against the Base.

THe given Height is a b, the given distance c b: Draw the Base a a as before,
and at the given Height Parallel to it the Horizontal line as b b; then take
the middle of the Horizontal line for the Visual point as at c, and set off
your distance as at b on either side c: Then let fall a Perpendicular through
the Base as c d, and from the point d divide your Base into as many equal parts
as you please both ways (as here into 6 each way marked with 1 2 3 4 5 a;)
Then draw the two Diametrals to the points a a, and two Diagonals from the
points of Distance b b to a a, and where these two Diagonals a b cut the
Diametrals c a (as here in e e and aa) shall be the four angles of the
Scenographick Plain; and a straight line drawn from e to e shall be one side of
the Plain, the Base a a is another side, and part of the Diametrals viz. from a
to e on either side shall be the two other sides of this Scenographick Plain.
Then laying a straight Ruler to both the points of Distance and all the
devisions on the Base, Draw lines from those devisions to the Diagonals, so
shall half your Plain be filled with Squares. To fill the other half, You must
lay your straight Ruler to the several intersections of the Diagonals with the
two Diametrals on either side the Plain, and draw straight lines into the side
of the Plain e e, so shall the other half of your Plain be filled also.

The making of these two Scenographick Plains full of Squares is of great use
in Perspective, for the ready designing and placing all sorts of Buildings and
movables in their proper distances one from another, and in their various
appearences to the Ey: For in the designing of Stools, Tables, Crosses, and
many other Figures your labor is as much facilitated as by coppying a Picture
when it and what you draw on arc divided into squares, and is indeed vertually
the same thing. For instance, If you design each side of one of these Squares
to be an Inch, a Foot, or a Yard etc. long; then what Object soever is placed
one Square distant from another is said to be either an Inch a Foot or a Yard
etc. distant: What Object is placed two Squares off is placed two Inches etc.
distant. And so for any number of Squares.

Again, For the various appearence to the Ey. All Buildings or Movables whose
fore-sides are situate in an Orthographick Plain are drawn upon the Squares in
Operat. XV. because the fore and back sides of those Squares ly in an
Orthographick line. As you may see the Cubes in Operat. XIX. and the Buildings
in Operat. XX. XXI. XXII. XXIII. XXIIII. XXV. XXVI. XXVIII. XXIX. XXX. XXXI.
XXXVIII. and the Movables in Operat. XXXIX. But those Buildings or Movables
whose corners ly in the Orthographick Plain, that is, whose front declines from
an Orthographick line are best placed on this Scenographick Plain that has its
angles against the Base. As you may see in Operat. XL. XLI. XLII. and XLIX.

In these two Plains you may see how the several distances of the Object alters
its appearence: for all the several appearences of those Squares are but the
several appearences of the Squares g h l m in the last Operation, and d f g h
in this, whose points are transferred into the Base, and made as in the
foregoing Operations.

OPERATION XVII.
Height and Distance given, to Draw a Scenographick Ground-plain in Squares,
each Square being begirt with Frame-work.

DRaw first the Base a b, and Parallel to it at the given Height the Horizontal
line, in which from your elected Visual point set off your distance as c d,
then place one foot of your Compasses in the Visual point and extend the other
on either side the Base to what width you intend your Geometrick Squares with
its Frame-work about it shall be, as to a and b: Then draw your Geometrick
Squares with its Frame-work: but you need not draw the whole Geometrick work in
depth; for the Visual point being placed just Perpendicularly over the middle
of the Geometrick Draft each half is exactly alike, and therefore one half will
serve as well as both. Having drawn your Geometrick Draft, draw first Diametral
lines from the Visual point to the points a and b, which shall be the limits of
the length of the Scenographick Ground-plain: Then draw Diagonal lines from the
point of distance d on either side the Visual point also to the points a b; and
where those Diagonal lines intersect the Visual or Diametral lines as in e f,
draw a line Parallel to the Base: and it shall limit the depth of the
Scenographick Ground-plain: then draw Diametral lines from the Visual point to
every point where each Perpendicular of the Geometrick Figure touches the Base,
and if to those points where these several Diametral lines cut the two Diagonal
lines you lay a Ruler and draw a line by the side of it those lines will be
Parallel to the Base, and show the true Scenographie of the whole Geometrick
Figure.

OPERATION XVIII.
Height and Distance given, to Draw in Scenographie a Ground-plain full of
Squares, with their Angles against the Base: each Square being begirt with
Frame-work.

HAving described half the Square a b c with the Angle against the Base, draw
the Base d d, and Horizontal line e e as by the last Oper. and set off your
points of Distance e e from the Visual point f, then continue the straight
lines of your Frame-work bg, eg, and all the other lines Parallel to them into
the Base; and Diagonal lines drawn from the points of distance e e, to the
points g h i k a l m n g shall perform your Operation: as you may see in the
Figure.

These two Figures are of great use in the Designing of Buildings, for placing
Columns, Pilasters, Peers, etc. or for dividing of Houses, Rooms, etc.

OPERATION XIX.
To describe the Appearance of three Cubes in Perspective standing directly
forwards on the Base.

DRaw a Ground-plain of six Squares as you were taught by Oper. XV. Then draw a
Geometrick Square standing on the Base as 1, whose Angles are marked with a b c
d, and from the points e f, erect two Perpendiculars as e g, f h, then draw
Diamerrals from the Visual point v to b and c, and the intersections of those
Diametral lines with the Perpendiculars a b, c d, e g, f h, shall be the points
from whence straight lines drawn (as you may see in the Figure) shall include
the Cube.

The Cube K standing more directly before the Ey has another Appearance, yet is
the manner of working with Diagonals and Perpendiculars the same.

The Cube L being a hollow Cube (or as it were a) Box without a top-cover,
stands also on a Square, as l o n m, whereon the Perpendiculars l l o o n n m m
must be erected, and Diametrals drawn from the Visual point to the intersection
of these Perpendiculars, so shall straight lines drawn from these intersections
(as in the Figure) include the Cube: But the thickness of the Boards you must
set off in the bottom of the Cube Parallel to the Base as q p and r s, and make
of these another Scenographick Square, by drawing Diametral lines q r p s, and
in the Angles of this second Square erect the four Perpendiculars q q r r p p s
s and from the Visual point draw Diametrals to intersect them in the top of the
Box as p q s r, and straight lines drawn from intersection to intersection
shall include the thickness of the Boards as they appear from the height v and
distance t.

OPERATION XX.
To describe the Scenographick appearence of the inside of a Chamber.

THis is performed by help of a Ground-plain of Squares made by lines drawn
from the Visual point a, and the point of Distance b to the Base, as by Operat.
XV. This Ground-plain contains seven Squares in length, and seven in breadth,
whereof the thickness of the wall on either side takes up one quarter of a
Square, as is seen at a b. In the Wall is made a Door, containing in breadth
three Squares on the Ground-plain, as s x t v; and if you draw two lines from
the opposite angles of the Door, where they intersect each other shall be the
middle of the Door; as you may try on the other side of the Wall, where lines
drawn from f h and g i intersect each other at k, which by the Perpendicular k
l you may find falls in the middle between six Scenographick Squares: that is,
three is contained between l and i, and three between l and f.

In the furthermost side of the Wall is a Thorow-fare made of the same height
the Door is, by drawing the Diametral t v from the Visual point a and
continuing it to e at the angle of the two Walls, and from thence by drawing
the line e d y parallel to the Horizon, which Thorow-fare (being of the width
of three Squares, as between e and g j is described by erecting Perpendiculars
from the points e z to cut the Parallel d y in the points d y, as you may see
in the Figure: And so the Thorow-fare d y e z Orthographically becomes equal to
the Scenographical Door t v s x.

To bear up the Roof of the Chamber, here is described five Joysts laid upon
the side of the Wall, q h the depth of which Joysts are described by the
Perpendiculars q r and p o, and the breadth by m q and o h; each Joyst is of
equal breadth, and lies of equal distance one from another, so that by laying a
Ruler to the Visual point and the points m q r, you may draw the lines f m, g
q, h r, to represent the three corners of the first Joyst, The fourth corner
lies out of sight. Do the like for the rest of the Joysts, all but the
middlemost, which because the Ey lies just under it shows but two of its
corners; as you may see in the Figure at n. Then if you will cover these Joysts
with Boards, or Plancks athwart, you may for your better guidance divide the
Ceeling into four Scenographick parts by drawing lines from the Angles h i to
the Angles r p; for where they intersect one another as in the point k, draw a
line Parallel to r p, and that line divides the Ceeling into two Scenographick
halfs: And other lines drawn from the points h i r p to the two ends of this
Parallel (...) do by their intersections give points on the middle Joysts
through which two lines drawn Parallel to the line r p divide the whole Ceeling
into four Scenographick parts as you may see in the Figure.

I have been the more Copious upon this Operation, because it is the first in
this Book that shows the drawing of inward Edisices: And I would have you well
understand it; because I intend instead of Repetition to refer you to this
Operation when I shall have occasion to speak of things of the like nature.

OPERATION. XXI.
To describe the inside of a Chamber with three Doors, one on either side, and
one right before.

THis is performed upon a Ground-plain of nine Squares in length and nine in
breadth, (drawn as by Operat. XV.) I shall not need say any thing of the sides
of the Wall, it having been taught in the last Operation: But the Doors
standing partly open and partly shut require a little instruction to show the
designing of them in Perspective.

You must understand that a Door being hung upon hinges describes in its
opening and shutting a Semicircle. As for Example, If it stand wide open with
the back side of it against the Wall, it fetches the sweep of a Semicircle
before it can shut upon the Doorframe that runs range with the Wall. Therefore
having the width you intend your Door shall be of, and pitched upon what place
in the side of a Wall it shall move, (as on its Axis,) you need but describe on
a loose paper a Geometrick Semicircle in the same number of Squares that you
intend your Door shall describe its Semicircle in, and observe the points of
the Parallels and Perpendiculars that this Semicircle cuts, for the
Scenographick Semicircle must pass through the same points of the Diametral
and Diagonal lines described on the Scenographick Ground-plain: As you may see
the Door a a d d, containing six Squares (as from the center a to e three, and
from a to f three) describes on the Ground-plain the Semicircle e l h i d g f,
which if you draw a Geometrick Semicircle in six Squares you will find that
this Scenographick Semicircle passes through the same points of Diametrals and
Diagonals as your Geometrick Semi circle does through Parallels and
Perpendiculars. Then consider how near open or shut the Door is you intend to
describe; that is, what angle it makes with the Wall; for the same quantity you
must set off on your Scenographick Semicircle; as here it stands open by the
distance f d g: Therefore draw a straight line between a the center the Door
moves on and d the edge of the Door, and prolong it into the Horizon, and that
line d a shall be the under side of the Door: Then describe the same
Semicircle over the Door that there is on the Ground-plain, by erecting
Perpendiculars from as many points as you please of the Semicircle on the
Ground-plain, and by drawing straight lines from each of those points into the
center a and prolonging them into the Horizon; for where the Perpendiculars cut
straight lines drawn from those several points in the Horizon through the upper
center a of the Door and so prolonged shall be the points that the upper
Scenographick Semicircle e l i h d g f must run through.

If you would have the Door stand wider open that you may see more of the
entrance as at i i, Draw (as before) a straight line from i to the center a and
prolong it into the Horizon, as i a k, so shall i be the under edge of the
Door; and if from the point i you erect the Perpendicular i i for the edge of
the Door, a straight line drawn from the point k in the Horizon to the point a
in the upper center of the Door and prolonged shall give the line i a for the
upper edge of the Door.

Thus may you describe a Door standing open to what width you please, as at a
are the Door stands wide open with its back side against the Wall; at a a l l
it shows less open; at h h it shows a Door whose edge lies almost in the same
line its Axis does, and so the Door shuts nearer and nearer, as at g g a a the
Door appears quite shut: the Door on the other side is made just after the same
manner, and therefore needs no more Descriptions.

The Door in the middle stands also on three Squares, and also opens through
six, and if you describe the Scenographick Semicircle m p q as you were taught
just now you may set this Door also open to what width you please. Thus, Erecta
Perpendicular on the point of the Semicircle you intend to open the Door to,
and prolong it quite through the Door as r n s, and with your Compasses measure
on the Perpendicular, the distance between that point in the Semicircle and
the Diameter of the Semicircle, which is the line m n, where the Squares end;
for that distance set off on the same Perpendicular from the Base as from r,
shall give a point through which a straight line drawn from the Center of the
Door o to the Horizon shall be the point in the Horizon from whence a straight
line drawn to the upper end of the Doors Axis shall give the shortning of the
upper edge of the Door, and the points where the two straight lines cut the
Perpendicular shall be the points that shall show the shortning of the fore
edge of the Door.

Above this Door is made a round Hole of the same width the Door is, and of the
thickness of the wall; which because the lines by which it is made, are so
plain and the manner of working so easy I shall forbear farther Instructions
on it.

Under this Arched Roof are drawn Parallel pricked lines to show the devisions
of the Roof: and by these devisions either with Compasses, or else a steady
hand, you may describe the Arches as you may see them in the Figure.

By the making the foresaid Doors may be understood how to make Casements
standing open at any width; and several other Operations pleasant and necessary
for all that Study Perspective.

OPERATION XXII.
To Describe in Perspective the inside of two Chambers one above the other.

THis is also performed by help of a Ground-plain, as in the former Figure: but
the difference between this and the former is. I. This has another Chamber
over it. 2. A Portal and Hole on one side of the Wall, and another right before
you on the middle of the Ground-plain. 3. Steps placed just within this Portal.
4. A square Hole in the middle of the Ground-plain. 5. Shelves on the other
side of the Chamber.

1. For what concerns barely the Chamber over the lowermost Room you may see by
the Figure that its Operation is the same with the former; where you see all
the three sides of the Chamber wholey, but because the Ceeling a b c d of the
lower Room lies so much above the Ey, you only see so much of the upper Chamber
as is un-obscured by the Ceeling. That is, all above the Catuzes a d resting on
the two Catuzes e f: the rest are only noted with pricked lines, as they would
appear if the Ceeling were not interposed between the Ey and them: and the
Joysts over head are wrought as in the last Operat.

2. For the Portal on the side of the Wall you may see that it stands on three
Squares on the Ground-plain, as does the Portal right before you. Now to make
the Arch over this Portal correspond with the Arch of the Portal right before
you, viz. of the same height as that Portal is do thus. Draw a line just where
the Arching begins parallel to the Horizon as g h, and prolong it to the corner
of the fore-right Wall as at g: Then laying a Ruler to the Visual point and the
point g describe the line m g, then draw another Parallel line on the top of
the Arch of the Portal and prolong it also to the corner of the fore-right Wall
as to i, and laying a Ruler to that point i and the Visual point draw the
Diametral line n o i, then erect two Perpendiculars n l and o m from the sides
of the Portal to intersect these Diametrals, so shall you by crossing the
Angles of intersection have the Center p, and upper and lower bounds of the
Arch; which a steady hand may easily reduce into form.

This way of working is exact enough for Painters or other Artisicers. But if
you will be yet more precise, See Oper. XXV. XXVI.

The Hole in the side of the Wall in the upper Chamber is made after the same
way, viz by crecting Perpendiculars to the designed width, as here it is three
Squares on the Ground-plain, (the same with the Portal) and by drawing
Diametrals from the Visual point for the depth of the Hole; for where the
Perpendiculars and Diametrals intersect each other shall be the Angles of the
Square that includes the Hole, and straight lines drawn from Angle to Angle
shall intersect each other in the Center of the Hole.

By the same way of working you have the back side of this round Hole described
to the thickness of the Wall, and also the back side of the Portal (as you may
see in the Figure.

In the other side of the Wall on the Ground-plain is made another half-round
Hole; which being performed after the same manner needs no further Explanation.

3. Just within the Portal are placed four Steps going straight upwards; which
are thus made. Draw the two slope lines q q and r r (to what slope you please)
parallel to each other for the width of the Steps: then assign a depth for the
first Step, as to s, and Parallel to the Base draw a line for the breadth of the
Step, as t s, then draw Diametrals from the points s and t to the slope line q
q, so shall the first Step be made. The rest of the Steps are made after the
same manner; observing that all the several Steps on their several
Perpendiculars are equal in depth to the first.

4. In the middle of the Ground-plain is made a square Hole as v x z z, which
may serve for an Entrance down a pair of Stairs leading to some Vault or
Cellar. These Stairs are in length three Squares, and in depth the transferred
distance of one Square, as you may see the depth of the first Step downwards is
v x, which is the transferred distance of v y, the breadth of the Step is x, a
so that a Diametral drawn from the Visual point to x and so prolonged directs
you to the second Step at b, and by placing one foot of your Compasses at the
point c, which is in the same Diametral the point v is, and extending the other
to the point d (which also is in the same Diametral the point y is) you
transfer the distance of d c to c b which is the distance y v transferred to v
x; and another Perpendicular erected from the point b to c shows the depth of
the second Step. 'The rest of the Steps are made after the same manner.

5. On the other side of the Chamber against the Wall is set three Shelves, two
above the Horizontal line, and one below, as e f g: The further ends of them
rests in the Wall right before you, and the higher end is fastened to a Post
erected Perpendicularly on the Ground-plain; the breadth of these Shelves are
one Square on the Ground-plain, as you may see by the line h i, from which
Diametrals prolonged to the Post the several Shelves are described.

Here you may note that by the several places of these three Shelves you have
several appearances of them; for the Shelf g lying under the Horizon shows its
upper Plain. The Shelf f lying a little above the Horizon shows its under
Plain, though much fore-shortned. The Shelf e lying pretty high above the
Horizon discovers the under Plain more entirely. But on the other side the Wall
you have the Shelf k, which because it stands just in the Horizontal line
discovers neither the upper or under Plain, but only the very edge of the Shelf.

OPERATION XXIII.
The manner of placing Columns behind one another in Perspective.

THough this may be performed by a Ground-plain of Scenographick Squares, (as
before,) yet because in this Operation no work comes between the two rows of
Collumns we shall need describe no more of the Ground-plain than will serve our
turn.

Therefore having drawn your Horizontal line to your designed Height above the
Base, and set off your points of Distance at equal distance on either side the
Visual point, Draw the Diametrals a a, b b, c c, d d, Then from the points of
Distance draw the Diagonals e d, and f a, and at the points of interfection of
these Diagonals with the Diametrals draw straight lines parallel to the Base,
and these straight lines continued to the outmost Diametrals shall make four
Scenographick Squares, whereon four Columns must be placed; as here the Squares
a b and c d and g and h etc.

If you would have more Columns stand behind these four, Draw Diagonal lines
from the innermost Angle of the hindmost Squares already made, as from g and h,
and those Diagonals shall intersect the Diametrals in c d and b a, from which
angles of intersection straight lines drawn parallel to the Base and Horizon
shall make the Scenographick Squares whereon two other Columns shall stand.

By this manner of working you may set more Columns behind these, till you
almost fill the whole Ground-plain.

Having thus projected these Scenographick Squares whereon the Columns must
stand, you must erect Perpendiculars from every angle of these Squares through
the Horizontal line and so upwards to the height your outmost Column ought to
be, as here to the line i k parallel to the Horizon; for the points where
Diametrals intersect this line and the Perpendiculars a i and d k shall be
angles impending perpendicularly over the respective angles of each respective
Square in the Ground-plain: As here the angle i hangs directly over the angle
a, and the angle k hangs directly over the angle d: Then from the points of
Distance draw Diagonal lines to the points i k, and where those Diagonals
intersect the Perpendiculars erected on the Diagonal angles of the Square in
the Ground-plain must another line be drawn parallel to the Horizon, and also
other Diagonal lines which shall include the Squares that hang over the two
first Squares in the Ground-plain.

The other Squares are found after the same way, viz. by the mutual
intersections of the Diagonals with the Perpendiculars. As may be seen in the
Figure.

The Arches over these Columns are very easily made: for by drawing the
Perpendicular through the Visual point in the Horizon into l you have all the
lines drawn parallel to the Horizon divided into two equal parts, And by
placing one foot of your Compasses in the middle of the respective Parallel
lines and opening the other to the angles of the Square that lies in the same
Parallel line you may describe those respective Arches. As for example. If you
place one foot of your Compasses in the middle point on the line i k and extend
the other to the point i or k you may describe the outmost Semicircle, and by
closing the Compasses to the other angle of the Square which lies in the same
line, you describe the second Semicircle; for the third Semicircle you may
place one foot of your Compasses in the middle of the next parallel line and
extend the other to the point o in the same line, and describe the Semicircle
o p. This work is so plain and easy to be understood by the Figure, that I
need discourse no further upon it.

In this Figure you may note, what correspondence the Squares above the Horizon
have with those below the Horizon. Yet as the Squares above the Horizon have a
greater distance from the Horizon than those below the Horizon have, it falls
out that the upper Squares are larger than the under Squares: The reason
whereof you may easily see by consulting the Figure.

And as the Squares have a correspondence, so also have the Diagonals; for the
crossings of the Diagonals above the Horizon respond with the crossings of the
Diagonals below the Horizon.

OPERATION XXIIII.
To describe in Perspective the appearance of four Pilasters, with four Beams
upon them; And to make an Arch over them.

THis is also performed by a Ground-plain of Squares, which consists of seven
in breadth and seven in depth: Described as by Operat. X V. The Pilasters a b
and c d standing each on one Square erected perpendicularly on the angles of
the Ground-plain, and divided upwards into three equal parts, as 1 2 3 with
straight lines parallel to the Horizon drawn through the fore side of them: But
the lines that devide the inside the Pilasters are Diametrals drawn from the
Visual point to the inmost corner of the foreside of the Pilaster. As you may
see by the Figure.

Upon these Pilasters is laid a Frame off our Beams, serving for bond to the
Pilasters, as e f g h, two of which viz. f h are drawn from the Visual point.
And over these four Pilasters is erected the Arches i k l and m n o to be seen
quite through; which Arches being to be made as those in Operat. XXI. XXIII.
need here no further discourse on them. Only you must note, that what lines of
devisions you make on the Orthographick or fore-side of the Arch you must draw
from the center of each respective Arch, and the devisions on the under side of
the Arch must be drawn by the side of a Ruler laid to the Visual point and to
the devision on the corner of the foreside the Arch, as the devisions of the
Pilasters are.

OPERATION XXV.
The manner of making Side Arches in Perspective.

HAving drawn an Horizontal line, describe a Ground-plain of Squares, (as by
Operat. XV.) and thereon draw a Scenographick Circle (as you were taught by
Operat. IX. X.) and mark it from the middle line with 1 2 3 4 5 on the Base;
and on the side with a b c d e f g h: Then erect a Perpendicular on the corner
of the Ground-plain of the height you intend your side Wall shall be as h i,
and erect another Perpendicular on the corner of the Ground-plain as 5 5, and
by drawing two Diametrals through the Visual point the point i and the point 5
on the top, and from the Visual point through h to 5 on the Base, you shall
have the Scenographick appearance of the side of the Wall wherein the Arch
shall be made. Then from the point h (which you may see by the Orthographick or
fore-right Arch is the point where the Arching begins,) draw another Diametral
into the Perpendicular line 5 5 as h i, and you will find the same distance
between 1 5 on the Perpendicular as there is between 1 5 on the Base: But the
rest of the distances you must transfer, as the Distance between 1 2 on the
Base you must transfer from 1 to 2 on the Perpedicular, and the distance 1 3 on
the Base you must transfer from 1 to 3 on the Perpenicular: And so for the rest.

Then from the points a b c d e f g on the Ground-plain erect Perpendiculars
into the Ceeling and where Diametrals drawn from the points 1 2 3 4 5 intersect
these several Perpendiculars shall be the points through which the Arch must
pass. For Example. Where the Diametral drawn from the point 2 on the
Perpendicular intersects the Perpendicular erected on the point a on the Base,
as here it does in a, shall be one point through which the arching must pass,
and where the Diametrals drawn from the point 3 intersects the Perpendicular
erected on the point b on the Base, as here at b shall be another point through
which the Arch must pass: And so also the intersections from 4 and 5 with the
Perperdiculars c d in the points c d, are points through which the Arch must
pass.

For finding the other points through which the Arch must pass, you must go
back again to 4 and see where that Diametral intersects the Perpendicular e for
there shall be another point, and where the Diametrals from 3 2 1 intersects
the Perpendiculars f g h shall be the other points through which the Arch is
carried.

Having finished this Arch the other Arch is easily made, for by drawing
Parallels through the points 1 2 3 4 5 in the top to the points k l m n o, and
also Parallels from the points a b c d e f g h, Diametrals drawn to the points
k l m n o will intersect the Parallels drawn from a b c d e f g h in the points
through which that Arch must also pass.

On the Ceiling is made a Circle as it lies below on the Ground-plain of the
Floor, as it appears in Perspective at that Height.

On the right hand of the Ground-plain is erected the same two Arches that are
on the left hand, whose Operation is in all respects the same: Only on the
right hand is drawn straight lines from point to point, and on the left arching
lines which makes this on the right hand represent it self (not as an Arch,
but) as part of a Figure made up of eight Squares.

OPERATION XXVI.
The making of Cross Arches in Perspective.

IN this Figure is described four Arches, viz. one Orthographick Arch, which is
the great Semicircle marked 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9, an Arch behind it Perspectively
deminished, marked 9 a b, and the two side Arches, whose Diametrals are 1 9 and
b 9. These four Arches are required to be made before you can make
Cross-arching, As in the Operation you will find. Therefore having described
the two side Arches (as by the last Operation) you must devide the
Orthographick Arch or Semicircle into eight equal parts, and from the Visual
point draw Diametrals to every one of them, as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9, Then from the
points where the Perpendiculars cut the Diametrals of the side Arch, as in 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9, Draw lines parallel to the Horizon to intersect the respective
Diametrals of the Semicircle; for those respective intersections shall be the
points through which the Cross-arching must be drawn. As for Example. Draw a
line parallel to the Horizon from the point 2 in the side Arch to the Diametral
2 in the Orthographick Arch, and that shall be one point through which the line
of Cross-arching must run: Then draw another parallel line from the point 3 in
the side Arch to the Diametral 3 of the Orthographick Arch, and there shall be
another point through which the Cross arch must run. Then draw another Parallel
line from the point 4 in the side Arch to the Diametral 4 of the Orthographick
Arch, and there shall be another point through which the Cross-arch must run.
Do the like from the points 6 7 8 9, so shall you have all the points through
which one of the lines of the Cross-arch must run.

The other Cross-arching viz. the Arch b 8 9 on the other side, is drawn by
continuing the Parallels which you drew from the points 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 of the
side Arch into the Diametrals 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1, for at the intersections of
the Parallels with these Diametrals shall be the points through which the line
of Cross-arching must pass; which is indeed nothing but the Arch on the other
side reversed.

This way of working is very easy, and the truth of it very perspicuous. For
as this line of Cross-Arching impends the Diagonals k l m n on the
Ground-plain, so would you find that if Perpendiculars were erected from the
points o p etc. on the Ground-plain, they would run into the points where the
Parallels and Diametrals cut each other above in the Crossing of the Ceeling
which is a proof sufficient to verify the truth of this Operation.

OPERATION XXVII.
To erect a Structure on an Octagonal Ichnographie.

THe Height is a b, the distance b c. Having described your Ground-plain
Scenographically, as by Operat. VIII. Erect on the two Orthographick Angles
thereof d d e e Perpendiculars to include the side, and through these two
Perpendiculars draw a line parallel to the Base and Horizon, at the height you
intend your upright work shall break off, as d e: And at the intersection of
this line with the Perpendiculars d d e e, draw lines from the points of
Distance b on your left hand to d, and from b on your right hand to e, and from
the points where those lines of Distance or Diagonals cut the Perpendiculars l
l and f f, draw Visual lines to the Perpendiculars k k and g g; then from the
point of Distance b on your left hand draw a Diagonal from g to the
Perpendicular h h: And from the point of Distance b on your right hand draw
another Diagonal from k to the Perpendicular i i. And lastly from i to h draw,
a line Parallel to the Base and Horizon, so shall the Scenographick
Ichnographie of this Building be transferred to the top and all the sides of
your Perpendicular Building shall have their Scenographick Heights. You must
note that those sides of the Ichnographies that ly behind the Orthographie are
to be drawn with obscure lines only, to direct you in the more true placing the
Moldings, etc. in the rest of the work.

The hollow of the Ichnographie is found in the Roof, by erecting
Perpendiculars from every point of the Geometrick Circle, and every point of
transferred distance to the line of the Roof d e, for then by drawing Diagonals
through every point of transferred distance aforesaid, those Diagonals shall
cut the Perpendiculars in the several points through which the Circle in the
Roof must pass.

The Frame-work of the Spire (as you see) is raised on the upright Angles of
the Figure in the Roof, and meets at the Perpendicular erected on the Center of
the Scenographick Ichnogrophie, which you may find as by Operat. XX. etc.

OPERATION XXVIII.
To describe a Fabric supported with Columns.

DRaw a Ground-plain of Squares, as by Operat. X V. and on the Squares at the
four corners of the Ground-plain, and also on your middle Square erect your
Pedestals and Columns, of the true height the Order of the Column you pitch
upon ought to be: That is, that the Column Pedestal and Capital contain so many
Models in length as a Column Pedestal and Capital of the Tuscan, Dorick,
Ionick, Corinthian, or the Composite Order ought to do. Allow also all the
Members on the Orthographie or Front their Architect Demensions: and all lines
that are parallel to the Base in the Fabric make parallel in the Figure; and
all lines that are perpendicular in the Fabric make perpendicular in the
Figure.

By lines Parallel to the Base I mean Lines on the Front, or Directly opposite
to the Front behind, which must be drawn Parallel to the Base, and not the
lines on either side the Front, although indeed they are in the Fabric as well
Parallel to the Base as those in the Front. But those lines in Scenographie are
all drawn from the Visual point, and (as you may see in the Figure)
fore-shorten those sides they represent.

If you list to erect more Columns behind these, you may draw the Ground-plain
of Squares nearer to the Visual point, and by the Rules you have already placed
these, set as many as you think good.

OPERATION XXIX.
To Describe in Perspective the Appearance of several Columns placed behind one
another.

ALthough you have hitherto been directed to draw a Ground-plain of Squares,
yet may it more readily be performed (as you may see in this Figure) by
Diametrals and Diagonals without drawing the whole Ground-plain: For by
Diametrals drawn from the Visual point c, you have the range of the whole row
of Columns, and also the range of every member on the Column, and by the
Diagonals drawn from b b you have the fore-shortning bounded.

As for Example. Having on the Base set off the breadth of the Pedestal as a d
from the Visual point c, draw a Diametral, and that Diametral shall be the
range of the whole row of Columns: And by drawing a Diagonal from the point of
Distance to the point a you have at the intersection of the Diametral with the
Diagonal in the point e the fore-shortning of the inside of the Pedestal d e,
then by erecting the two Perpendiculars d f and a g for the height of the
Pedestal, and by erecting the Perpendicular e h at the point of intersection
with the Diametral c e d and the Diagonal b e a, and by drawing the lines f g
and h i Parallel to the Base, and the Diametrals h f and i g you have the
Pedestal included in all its visible sides, and the Square h i f g shall be the
Scenographick Plain of the top of the Pedestal, and the intersection of the
Diagonals h g and i f shall be the Center of the Plain as at k.

By this way of working all the other Pedestals are erected, and all their
visible and invisible Sides and Angles found. For Example. The black lines are
the bounds of the visible Sides and Angles, and the pricked lines the invisible,
viz. of those Sides and Angles that ly behind the Orthographie or foreside of
the Pedestal.

Having thus placed the Pedestals you must erect your Columns thereon, and over
them the Capitals by erecting Perpediculars from the Center of every Square
plain on the upper side of each Pedestal, and as the several Bases are bounded
by Diametrals, Diagonals, and Parallels: so are the several Capitals, and the
Centers of their several Plains found by Diametrals, Diagonals, and Parallels;
as in the Figure you see the Capitals l m n o p: which being so very plain
needs no further description, especially considering that on the left hand you
have the work finished up according to its true Perspective appearance.

OPERATION XXX.
To Describe in Perspective the Appearance of a Stately Structure.

HEre you have on a Ground-plain of Squares described, first, an Ascent of two
steps, and on them a Porch with four Columns, as a b c d, and arched over with
cross-arches. The placing and ordering the Columns has already been taught in
Operat. XIX. XXIII. XXIIII. The chief thing remaining to be treated of is the
Cross-arches, which that you may the better understand how to describe in
Perspective, You may consider that all Cross-arches are made upon four Columns
which stand upon the four Angles of a Geometrick Square, (though here we set
them on a Scenographick Square) and that the two Arches that cross each other
proceed from the two Columns that stand corner-wise against each other: so that
each Semicircle is cut by the other into two Quadrants. The Orthographick
appearance of these Semi-circles viz. the Semicircle e f and g h, are
described as has been taught in Operat. XVII. XIX. XX. XXII. XXIIII. where you
may see they are only Arches of Circles, and therefore need no more comment on
them, and the other Arches are thus found. Draw a Diametral from the middle of
the Semicircle e f as at i, and in that Diametral shall be all the
intersections of the several Arches that intersect each other, (which as was
said before are only those Arches that are made over the Columns that stand
corner-wise from one another) Then draw another Diametral from the Center of
the same Orthographick Arch e f as at k, and prolong it toward the Visual
point as through l and m to n, for in this Diametral shall be the Center of the
Arch o p, as here in l, the Center of the Arch q r, here in m, the Center of
the Arch q h, here in n. For the Arches o s and g s you must cross the corner
Columns a d and b c in the Floor with two straight lines, and they will
intersect each other in c, from which point erect a Perpendicular; then from
the point i in the Orthographick Semicircle draw a Diametral, and where that
Diametral intersects, the Perpendicular as here in s, shall be the point where
the Arches shall cross each other; and for describing the arch which is always
a Quadrant of a Circle, measure with your Compasses the distance between o and
s, and on a loose paper (or other thing) make a Geometrick Square whose Sides
shall be equal to that measure, and with a straight Ruler cross that Geometrick
Square in its Diagonal Angles; and the distance between the intersection of
these two straight lines, and one of the Angles of the Square shall be the
Radius to a Circle of the same sweep the Arch o s shall be of, and the Center
of that Arch is found by placing one foot of your Compasses first in the point
o, and with the other describe an occult Arch, as at v, afterward remove one
foot of your Compasses to the other end of the Quadrant and with the other foot
describe another occult Arch to cut the former, and in that point of inter
section shall be the Center of the Arch o s. Use the same way to describe the
Arch g s.

The Columns x a b y are all set Perpendicularly over the Columns x a b y and
the two Pinacles over the Columns c d, as you may see by the pricked
Perpendicular lines: so that what remains to be said of this Figure may be
understood by the Figure it self, as well as by many words upon it.

OPERATION XXXI.
To describe a Square with Ascents of Steps about it.

A Square that has Steps to ascend on all four sides has all the sides of
those Steps parallel to the undermost Step: Therefore in making the
Ichnographie of this Figure you must include so many Squares as you think good
within your outmost Square, all equidistant from and parallel to the outmost
Square: And from one half of the Ichnographie produce the Scenographick
Ground-plain for what Height and Distance you please.

Having therefore designed the Height a b of the first Step b c, Describe a
parallel Scale, Thus, Draw a straight line from the Base to any convenient part
of the Horizon, as here to d e, then prolong the line b c into this line, as
into f, then from the Visual point draw a line through f into the Base, as at
g, and from the point g draw a line to the point e in the Horizon, Then
transfer the distances a h, a i, and a k on the Diagonal line in the
Scenographick Ichnographie to the Diagonal line a l in the Structure, as to a
h, a i, a k, and from those points on that Diagonal line raise the
Perpendiculars h m n, i o p, k q r, Then from the point b draw the Diagonal b
m, and where that Diagonal b m cuts the Perpendicular h m shall be the bottom
of the under Step m s, which Parallel line must be continued into t, for by
drawing the Visual ray from t to the Visual point you will cut the line d e in
v, from whence the line v n drawn parallel to the Horizon gives the top of the
second Step: Then by drawing the Diagonal n o you have the bottom of the third
Step at o, from which point a Parallel drawn into g e and a Visual ray drawn
from that point in g e shall cut d e, from which intersection in d e a Parallel
drawn into p shall give the top of the third Step. The like you must do for the
fourth Step. Then lastly, draw a Visual ray from the point a and a Diagonal
from the point x to y, and where the foresaid Visual ray cuts this Diagonal
erect a Perpendicular into the Visual ray b z, and from the point z draw a line
parallel to the Horizon as far as the second Step, which shall show how much of
the hind part of the first Step will be seen. The same way you may find how
much of the other Steps appear, as you may see in the Figure: for where the
Diagonal x y cuts the several Visual rays, in those points the Perpendiculars
erected into the Visual rays before, it shows how much of the hind part of
each respective Step appears.

On these Steps you may place a Fountain; a Pyramid, or a Column, as is lately
erected in Covent Garden in the middle of the Pietzo.

This Parallel Scale is of great use, for by help of it you may set any Object
in its true place, as well as with a Ground-plain of Squares: But you must
remember to place your Perpendicular at the point of Distance, and so let it
fall into the Base, for then by drawing a slope line from the point of Distance
to any devision of the Base, and by drawing a Diametral to the Prependicular in
the Base, where the Diametral cuts the slope line shall be the Height of the
first parallel line of the Scale: and by drawing another Diametral to the point
where the first Parallel cuts the Perpendicular the Diametral shall cut the
slope line in a point through which a Parallel drawn shall be the second
Parallel line, etc.

OPERATION XXXII.
How an Object that is to be placed high above the Horizontal line, shall be
made that it appear equal to an Object placed but a little above the Horizontal
line.

BEcause those Visual Rays that proceed from the Center of the Ey straight and
directly forwards are more strong than those that decline toward the right or
left hand, or are either elevated or depressed above or below the Horizontal
line. Therefore any Object that stands at a convenient distance in the
Horizontal line directly before the middle of the Ball of the Ey appears more
perfect and true in shape and demension than if it were placed any where else;
as may be proved by placing two Objects of the same shape and demension one in
the Horizontal line just before you on a Wall, and the other right above it at
some considerable height on the same Wall; for you will find that the Object
thus elevated will appear less than that which is placed on the Horizontal
line: and that if the same Object be placed yet higher it will appear yet less
and less. Therefore to know how big you shall make an Object for any given
Height and Distance above the Horizontal line that it appear equal to an Object
placed right before you in the Horizontal line, You must first consider, That
as the Object that lies right before the middle of the Ball of the Ey in the
Horizontal line appears most perfect, and by consequence shows its truest
demension; So the Object that is placed higher or lower, or on the right or
left hand appears less perfect, and by consequence requires a greater demension
to make it appear perfect; for the Sight moving circularly in the Ey makes on a
Wall the devisions of a Tangent line; and by so much as a Tangent increases
upwards, in such proportion does the strength of the Optic faculty of the Ey
deminish upwards. Therefore the Object that shall be placed any considerable
height above the Horizontal line, and to be seen from a designed Station must
exceed the Object placed just above the Horizontal line in such proportion as
the Tangent of that Arch does the Tangent of the Arch just above the Horizontal
line.

This Rule is very brief, and perhaps may not be understood by all Speculators
in Perspective; Therefore I shall a little enlarge hereon, Because it is of
eminent concernment in the true Seeing, Judging and making of Figures.

Having designed your Distance from the Wall; Set it off from the point your Ey
is placed in; then set one foot of your Compasses in that point, and with the
other describe the arch of a Circle, and devide it into so many equal parts as
you please. So shall the rays that proceed from your Ey continued to the Wall
show on the Wall in what proportion the Object ought to increase to appear so
large as an Object that is to be placed just before you on the Horizontal line.

For Example. Your Distance from the Wall is a b, Therefore at the point a
describe the arch 1 2 3 4 etc. which you may devide into so many equal parts as
you please, and by laying a straight Ruler on the point a and on every one of
those devisions, that straight Ruler will point out on the Wall or on the line
b c which represents a Perpendicular line on the Wall the several sizes that an
Object is to be of placed on those several Heights to make it appear equal to
the Object placed just above the Horizontal line.

But that great Master Albert Durer has very handsomely handled this Operation
in an erected Pillar, wherein he has made an Inscription in Letters, thereby
demonstrating how much those Letters that stand high above the Ey must be made
bigger than those that ly near the Horizontal line: as you may see by this
annexed Inscription.

Having thus performed the Operation, you will see how much bigger the Letters
far above the Ey are than those that ly nearer to the Ey. And this Rule is to
be observed not only in the magnifying of Letters thus placed one above
another, but also in magnifying of Figures to be placed one above another on a
Wall, be they either Painted or Carved.

OPERATION XXXIII.
To Describe in Perspective a pair of Winding Stairs.

HItherto we have imagined the Glass to be placed Perpendicular to the Base,
and therefore as has been said in CHAP. III. Those lines of a Figure that in a
Geometrick Figure are Perpendiculars, are in the Scenographie also
Perpendiculars; as here is seen in these winding Stairs; where because these
Stairs should diminish upwards, the Glass is placed Oblique to the Base. But to
the matter.

This Geometrick Ichnographie is divided into sixteen equal parts, as 1 2 3 4
5, etc. which represents sixteen Steps that wind once about the Newel.
Therefore reduce this Geometrick Ground-plain into Scenographie, as you were
taught in Operat. X. by erecting Perpendiculars into the Base etc. and mark the
Scenographick Ichnographie with the same Figures the Orthographick is; then on
the middle of the Scenographick Ichnographie at the point 13 erect the
Perpendicular 13 a, and divide it into so many equal parts as you please or
intend to have Steps, and erect another line on the same point 13 into the
point of deminution as 13 b: Then from every one of these devisions on the
Perpendicular 13 a draw a Visual raie from the Visual point c to the line of
deminution 13 b, and from the points where those Visual rays cut this line of
deminution 13 b, draw Paralles to the Base into the middle of the Newel, and
those Parallels shall show the Distance or Height of every Step one above the
other on the Newel. And for the Distance or Height of the further end of every
Step you must erect a Perpendicular on the extreme point of the Ichnographie as
d e of the same length your Newel is; and devide it into so many equal parts as
you have Steps, or as your Newel is divided into unequal parts, as f g h i k
etc. to t, and from the Visual point draw Visual rays through every one of
them to intersect every respective line of deminution raised out of the
Ichnographie so shall Parallels drawn from every intersection show the height
of the further end of every respective Step, as the first intersection is made
on the first line of deminution d 17 at 1, therefore a Parallel drawn from the
point 1 where the first Visual raie intersects the Parallel line 1, shall show
the height of the further end of the first Step. The second Visual raie is
drawn into the second line of deminution to the line 2, therefore the Parallel
drawn from that point shall show the height of the further end of the second
Step. The like is to be understood of all the other Steps.

Then for the length of every Step, instead of erecting a Perpendicular on the
several points of the Ichnographie to find them as you have been often taught
before; Draw several lines from the point of deminution which is in the top of
the Newel into every one of those devisions on the Ichnographie, and those
lines of deminution shall bound every respective Step: As that raised out of
the point 1 of the Ichnographie shall show the length of the first Step. That
raised out of the point 2 of the Ichnographie shows the length of the second
Step: and so for all the rest.

OPERATION XXXIIII.
Showing the further process of the last Operation.

BEcause the multiplicity of lines in the last Figure may somewhat confound a
Practitioner, here is inserted another Figure of a pair of winding Stairs,
quite finished, made by the Precepts of the last Operation. So that the lines
that were in the last Figure encumbered with other lines appear naked here: and
the places of the Shadows which there are troublesome to find out are here
visible to the Ey. Herein (as before) you have two turnings about the Newel,
and the whole Design projecting forwards.

If you would have more turnings about the Newel, you must devide the two lines
of deminution on each side into so many the more parts: As you were taught in
the last Operation.

OPERATION. XXXV.
The Description of a pair of Double Stairs, whereon two persons the one
ascending the other descending shall not come at one another.

THese double Stairs are insersed as a piece of Rarity, and described only in
Orthographie, and not by the strickt Rules of Perspective, lest with many lines
the work should be obscured. Yet such as list to be curious therein may in the
last (and several other) Operations find Rules whereby they may effect their
purpose.

Describe a Circle (or which is equivalent a Semicircle) for the Ichnographie,
as 1 2 3 etc. to 13, and in it describe a smaller Circle, as a b c for the
bigness of the Newel: Then devide the great Semicircle into twelve equal
parts, as 1 2 3 to 13, and draw lines from those devisions into the Semicircle
made for the bigness of the Newel, so will that Semicircle also be divided
into twelve equal parts: Then on every one of the points in the great
Semicircle erect Perpendiculars, and those Perpendiculars shall show the ends
of each respective Step. As the Perpendicular at 1 1 bounds the outward end of
the first Step: The Perpendicular at 2 2 bounds the second Step, etc. to 24.
which makes good a whole Circle in the Ichnographie; and Perpendiculars erected
from the inner Semicircle marks on the Newel the ends of the same Steps. Work
the same way with the Steps on your right hand.

You may perceive that the winding of these Steps about the Newel may properly
be compared to the winding of a thread about the Spindle of a Screw. And that as
those Spindles that have but one thread wind not so suddenly about the Spindle
as those that have two threads; So these Stairs having two Ascents, each begun
Diametrically opposite to the other wind more suddenly about than those that
have but one Ascent: and therefore it is requisite the whole Circle be divided
into twenty four parts for these sort of Stairs, when as other Stairs have the
Ichnographie divided but into twelve or sixteen equal parts.

The Newel is pierced through in several places only to let in Light.

Who was the first Inventer of these Stairs is not well known. But at Sciamburg
in France in the Kings Palace is a pair of them, made by Piedro del Bergo, and
Ichan Cousin. They are also set forth by Vignola, in his Book of Perspective,
from whence this is taken.

OPERATION XXXVI.
To Delineate in Perspective a Platform with Columns, Pilasters, Railes and
Bannesters, as it is seen from above, where the Ey is placed directly over it
at some reasonable height.

YOu were shown in Operat. XXVI. that an Object placed farbove the Ey
deminishes. It is the same thing with an Object placed far below the Ey. For as
you were told in Chap. II. Desin. III. The Visual rays do at last meet in a
point: Therefore in this Operat. the Ey being placed above the Edisice, the
upper Railes seem larger and wider than the under Railes, and the Bannesters
under the upper Railes in a b c d appear greater than the Bannesters in e f g
h, because the upper Rails and Bannesters ly nearer the Ey than the under, and
so gradually the Object deminishes till you come to the Platform i k l m, on
which Platform you may note that the Square devisions being fifteen in length,
and ten in breadth, are all equal among themselves; because the Glass is placed
Parallel to the Horizon. And as you were told in Chap. II. Desin. VI. where the
Glass is Parallel to the Horizon, all Objects on the Horizon have a true
Orthographick appearance, but where the Glass is erected to cut the Horizon the
Object seems a wry and shortens proportionable to the Angle the Glass makes
with the Horizon, and so produces a Scenographick appearance. For, for this
cause you have the Platform Orthographie, and the Structure thereon erected
Scenographie; for as was said, the Platform lies parallel to the Glass, But
the Structure is perpendicularly erected thereon.

This being rightly understood, you have already learnt the making this
Edisice: For this Structure of Rails Bannesters Pilasters and Columns are
erected on the four sides of the Base of the Platform by Visual rays drawn
from the Visual point n.

Example of the whole. In the first place, That the upper Rail appears greater
than the under, is (as was said) because it lies nearer the Ey: for if the
Platform were elevated above the Pilasters the Squares thereon would appear as
large as the Squares o p q: and if the Platform were elevated above the
Columns, the Squares would appear yet greater by so much as the Diametrals are
wider assunder: And by consequence, if the Platform were elevated to the upper
Rail (which is nearest the Ey) the Squares would appear yet greater: But the
Platform being so much farther off the Ey than the upper Rail, the Squares
thereon draw nearer to the Visual point. Whence it also follows, that the
Ranges of Bannesters in e f g h appear less than the Ranges of Bannesters in a
b c d, But the Pilasters, Columns. Bannesters, etc. are all erected upon Visual
rays, as you may see in the Figure.

OPERATION XXXVII.
Of designing the Geometrick Ichnographie of a Garden-plot into a Scenographick
Ichnographie, in order to erect thereon the appearence of Arbors, Trees,
Hedges, Fountains, etc.

THe Ichnographie here proposed is that of the Garden of the most Illustrious
Prince of Orange, situate in the Hague, it contains in length 172 Geometrick
Feet, and in breadth 91 Feet, marked a b c d, having on the four angles four
square Arbors marked e f g h as also four round Arbors marked i k l m, with a
Pavillion in the middle marked n, which Pavillion has its entrance on four
sides, viz. out of the two arched Galleries marked o p, and the two long Walks
marked q r. Within this Ground-plot is contained two Garden plotts with four
Walks in each Garden, which devides them into four equal parts apeece, leading
to the middle thereof, where stands two Fountains, as at s t, encompassed with
flower-pots, as also is the whole Garden between the outmost Walks and the
Galleries: As you may see by the small round marks whereon they are to stand.

How to reduce this Geometrick Ichnographie into Scenographie you have often
been taught in several fore going Operations.

OPERATION XXXVIII.
To erect on the Scenographick Ichnographie the Fences, Arbors, Quick-setts,
Fountains, etc. of the aforesaid Garden.

YOu have already the Scenographick Ichnographie laid down in the last Operat.
To erect the foresaid appearances hereon you must raise Perpendiculars from the
points whereon every particular thing is to stand, remembering as you were told
in Chap. I. Desin. IX. that what ever lies right before the Ey is to be
described Orthographically, viz. what ever is Parallel to the Horizon is to be
drawn Parallel to the Horizontal line, what ever is Square is Square, or Round
Round, as you may see in the fore Front of the Fa-Brick adjoining to the Garden
marked a, and the range of the fore and hind Wall. But if you behold any thing
decline, from this Orthographick Front, though it be in the Fabric a line
Parallel to the Horizon, you are to draw it Scenographically, viz. from the
Visual point, as you may see in the Walls that decline from the Front, making
Angles therewith: and all the windows that you see in the foresaid Fabric, how
they do notly Parallel to the Horizontal line, nor the side range of Columns on
the one side, or Wall on the other: but all are drawn from the Visual point, as
was said before.

This being considered the Operation proves easy, yet that this small Figure
and all the curiosities appertaining to it may be the better understood, I
shall explain the whole design, which briefly is this.

In this Figure is somewhat more than the Platform of the last Figure
described, viz. the Banqueting House, and the long Gallery, and also the Wall
of the Dwelling House of his Highness the Prince of Orange Fronting the Garden.
This Wall is marked a a, on the right hand of which as at b you have the said
Banqueting House, and close adjoining to it the said long Gallery, with
Columns after the Derick Order, containing sixteen Arches, and Turrets, with
several Lanthorns on the top of it. On the left hand as at c is placed a Bridge
leading over a Mote which incompasses the whole Building into a curious fair
Walk, which Bridge is enclosed on both sides, and covered over on the top:
Beyond this Walk is an high Wall beginning at the hither side of the
Banquotting House, and going round the Garden to the farther side of the
Banqueting House, within this Wall is another Walk round the Garden, and at
the four corners of this Walk four curious square Arbors: and at the middle of
the Walk is placed a Portal for the entrance into a long Gallery, which goes
quite cross the whole Garden which Gallery is all covered with green boughts,
so close that the light of the Sun cannot pierce between them. On either side
and at the ends of this long Gallery stands a round Arbor, also close covered
with green boughs: within the Garden is erected on two Scenographick Circles
two curious Fences of Quick-sett, with four entrances into each at opposite
points in the Garden, which having four paths a piece leads to a curious
Fountain set round about with Flower pots in the middle of the Garden.

Over three of the Arches of the long Gallery aforesaid is erected part of the
said Banqueting House: of four more of the said Arches is made an Aviary well
furnished with Canary Birds. And of the other nine Arches is made a Grott-work,
with several curious delightful Inventions of Water Works. The rest of the
curiosities of this Piece may as well be understood by the Figure it self as by
many words thereon.

OPERATION XXXIX.
To Describe in Perspective a Folding-chair a Frame chair, and a Bedsted.

HAving designed the space in the Ground-plain that the Folding-chair shall
stand upon, as here upon the Angles of four of the Squares, viz. a b c d. That
is, The distance of each foot is two Squares from the next foot; set off such
an height from the Base as is proportionable to the length and breadth of the
Chair: As here its height not being two Squares on the Base, viz. not so much
as its length and breadth, the height wants somewhat of the Diagonal length of
two Squares on the Base, which you must set off from the points a to c, b to f,
c to g, and d to h, but you must note that for every foot you change your
measure; for to the foot a that stands on the Base you take almost two of the
Squares on the Base, to the feet b d that stands one Square above the Base,
take almost two of those Squares, and for the last foot that stands nearest the
Visual point, take almost two of the Squares in that place, so that the measure
of each foots height be taken from that Square in the Ground-plain that each
foot stands on, as is taught in Operat. XVI.

And because the Square of the seat of the Chair is broader than the Square
space that the feet stands upon in the Ground-plain the sides of the Seat hangs
over the sides of that Square. Therefore in this case you may erect a
Perpendicular from the points a b c d up to the Seat toward the point e f g h,
but you must draw the Seat somewhat beyond it according as in your discretion
you find the Seat of the Chair hangs over the said Square, so have you the
corners of the Seat e f g h: and by a Diagonal line the height of the Back i k.
The Rails in the Back, and the Rails between the feet are all drawn by Diagonal
lines, as you may see in the Figure.

If you would have the Corners of this Folding-chair turned more or less
toward you, you must draw an Ichnographie of it, as you are taught in Operat.
L. and then you may turn the Corners of that Ichnography into what position you
will against the Base, and by perpendiculars erected on the Angles of the
Ichnographie, as you were taught in the foresaid Operat. the Corners of the
Chair shall stand in their elected place.

The other Chair stands with its Foreside directly before the Ey, and is
between the two Forefeet, two and an half Diagonal Squares, and between the
side feet two Diagonal Squares, so that from these points in the Ground-plain
the feet or posts of the Chair are made, by erecting Perpendiculars to your
designed height, and then all the fore Rails of the Chair are Parallel to the
Base and Horizon, and the Return or side Rails are Visual lines, as you may see
in the Figure.

The Bedsted stands with its feet a b ranging directly forward, and is in
length six Squares, and in breadth five Squares; so that the Posts are
perpendicularly erected at this Distance to what Height you please: All the
fore-Rails are parallels to the Base and Horizon, and the side-Rails are Visual
lines, as in the fore-right Chair. Therefore this Operation is very easy,
unless it be the Tester or Covering of the Bedsted, which because it is ridged
at the top, and the fore and hind ends incline toward each other, may seem
somewhat difficult. For designing of which, Find the middle between the two
Posts a b in the Base, as at c, and draw the Visual line d c, and therein
design how much the Tester of the Bedsted shall fall away inwards from the
upper Rail at the Feet, as from c to e; Therefore from the point e erect a
Perpendicular to what convenient height you will above the upper Rail, as into
the point f, and from the upper ends of the Post a b at the points g h draw
straight lines into the point f for that part of the Frame of the Tester that
belongs to the Foot end of the Bed-sted. And to draw the hindmost slope of the
Tester you may do thus: Make a parallel Scale, (as you were taught in Operat.
XXXI.) and on that Scale you may measure how much the angle e is erected above
its Base, as here you will find a little more than one Square; therefore in the
Ground-plain at the distance of a little more than one Square of that Parallel,
under the line i k which is the bottom of the hind Feet, Draw an occult
Parallel inwards within the Bedsted, because the Tester slopes inwards, as m l,
and where that parallel cuts the Visual line d e c shall be the angular point,
as at l, and a Perpendicular erected on that point shall cut the Visual line
drawn to tho point f in the point g, which is the point that the hind part of
the Frame of the Tester must be drawn unto from the two hind Posts. See the
Figure.

These Posts are made square because the hind sides and corners of them may be
represented by pricked lines, For in Frame-work it requires that one half of the
Rails etc. be drawn from the hind sides and corners as well as from the fore
sides and corners, which by the help of these pricked lines you are directed to.

OPERATION. XL.
To describe two square Loggs unevenly laid one upon another.

THe nethermost angles of the under Log is imagined to ly toward the Base, and
is marked with a b c d, from which angles if you erect Perpendiculars into your
designed Height as to e f g h, and from these points and angles draw Parallels
from a to b, from c to d, from e to f, and from g to h; and from the angles a b
e f Visual lines, you have the under Log enclosed; and its hidden Sides and
Angles marked out: as you may see by the pricktlines g c and h d, and the angle
c.

The other Log whose bottom is marked with i k l m lies athwart the first Log,
with one of its angles against the Base, viz. the angle i: Therefore to set
this Log upon the first Log you must erect Perpendiculars from these four
angles, viz. from i to n o, from k to p q, from l to r s, and from m to t v:
Then draw Diagonals from the point x on the left hand to p n, q o, rt, and s v,
and also Diagonals from the point y on the right hand to the points q s, o v, p
r, and n t; and by erecting Perpendiculars from p to q, n to o, r to s, and t
to v, the Log is enclosed.

OPERATION XLI.
To describe in Perspective a Form, a Table, and an Andiron etc.

THe Form stands with its ends before the Ey upon the width of two Diagonal
Squares on the Ground-plain, as a b, and in length ten Diagonal Squares, as 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10. You may make the Form of what height you please, as you may
see by the Perpendiculars marked a c, b d, on the Seat of the Form. The Seat
projects or hangs over the Form half a Diagonal Square on each side and end,
therefore you must draw an occult Parallel at the distance of half a Diagonal
Square within the Base on the Ground-plain as e e and f f, and two occult
Diametrals at the distance of half a Diagonal Square on the Base from the
Perpendiculars a c and b d inwards, as g b, which must be prolonged to the hind
end of the Form; and where these Visual lines cut the Parallels shall be the
outward bounds of the four Feet in the Ground-plain, which must be erected
perpendicularly into the Seat. The fore and hind Rails of this Frame are
Parallels, and the side Rails are Visual lines.

The Table on the left hand is placed with its corners against the Ey, and
stands in length upon ten Diagonal Squares, and in breadth upon six; of which
the Leaf of the Table projects over its Frame one Square on each side and end:
The side lines for the Rails and the Leaf are drawn from the point of Distance
a on the right hand, and the end lines for the Rails and Leaf from the point of
Distance a on the left hand; and the Posts of the Frame stand each upon one
Square, and are all perpendiculars erected into the Leaf: So that here remains
nothing of difficulty in this Figure, unless it be the projecting of the Leaf
over the Frame, which thought it be performed after the same manner of that on
the Form, yet because the Table stands not in the same Sight the Form does, I
shall explain this also.

The Leaf of this Table hangs perpendicularly over ten Squares one way, and six
another, in the Ground-plain; and this Square projects over the Frame one
Square on each side, as has been said: Therefore find the lines in the
Ground-plain that include the ten Squares, viz. b 6 and 10 c, and by taking
away one row of Squares on every side the Ground-plain, you will have eight
left one way and four another, which is the bounds and gives the sides and
angles the Frame stands on. So that you see thought this projecture seem
difficult it is easily performed on the Ground-plain.

If you would place any thing on the Table at a Designed Distance from either
side and end on the Table (as below, which is the same with this, only that is
shadowed, that the lineaments may appear the plainer:) For instance upon the
edge of the hithermost side of the Table within six inches of the hither end,
you would place the Candlestick; Then imagine the Table to be four foot long,
and three foot broad, so shall each Square on the Ground-plain of the Table
represent six inches. Therefore count to the end of the first Square as to the
point 1, and there erect a Perpendicular, and where that Perpendicular cuts the
edge of the Table shall be the place of the Candlestick. Again, If you would
place the hither edge of the Bottom of the Beker within two foot three inches
of the hither end of the Table, and within one foot of the hither edge of the
side of the Table, then count in the row of figures that runs up on the right
hand 1 2 3 4 and half one more in the Gound-plain which is two foot three
inches, and from that point erect a Perpendicular into the Leaf of the Table,
then count in the line of figures that runs down on the left hand from the
point 6 to 4 which is one foot and erect a Perpendicular from that point up to
the edge of the Table and draw a Diagonal from that point and the point a on
the right hand, and where that intersects the Perpendicular erected on the
point of 4 shall be the point where the middle of the hither edge of the Beker
shall stand. If you would incompass that point in the ends of the Legs of the
Table which appear through the Leaf, you may work as follows in this next
example.

Count from the point b to the point 1, which is one Square of the
Ground-plain, and the point where one Angle of the Leg is placed, and from that
point 1 erect a Perpendicular into the side of the Leaf of, the Table, as at 1,
and from the line a on the left hand draw a line to, that point for the bounds
of the force side of the two fore Legs: Then because the Legs are one Square,
viz six inches every way, erect another Perpendicular on the point 2 to the
point 2 on the edge of the Leaf, and to that point draw another line from the
point a on the left hand, and that line shall bound the hind side of the fore
Legs; Then erect Perpendiculars from the angles of the Legs; And to the points
where these Perpendiculars cut the former lines draw other lines from the point
a on the right hand; and the lines drawn from the points aa on either hand
shall bound the top of the Legs: As you may see in the Figure. Do the like when
you describe the hind Legs.

OPERATION XLII.
To describe a Press with its corners toward the Ey.

THis Press is placed on a Ground-plain of Diagonal Squares, made as by Operat.
XVI. with its angles toward the Base. Its undermost Planck contains eleven
Squares in length and nine in breadth, and projects over its Frame on every side
one Square: so that the Frame stands upon nine Squares in length and seven in
breadth, and in thickness one Square. These Legs are to be erected
perpendicularly up into the under Planck of the Press, as the Legs of the
foregoing Table were into the Leaf: And this Planck is also made as the Leaf
in the foregoing Table. The lines representing the sides of the Plancks, the
Rails in the Frame etc. are all drawn from the two points of Distance aa on the
right and lefthand, as you have already been taught.

For placing the Screw in the middle of the upper Planck, Draw from the four
angles of the upper Planck bc de two Diagonal lines, and where they cross each
other is the middle point of the Planck, in which the Toe of the Screw is to be
fitted. This Screw is erected perpendicularly into the Rail wherein the Nut is
made. The Checks ff, gg, contain each one Square, and are also perpendicularly
erected.

OPERATION XLIII.
To describe a Frame with four Posts and three Shelves therein, a Chair, a
Door, a Thorow-fare, and two Holes in a Wall.

THis Frame stands with its angles against the Base upon seven Squares one way,
and six the other. It is Railed round the bottom, and has one Shelf below the
Horizon and two above it. The manner of making it has sufficiently been taught
in the foregoing Operat. viz. The Posts are Perpendiculars erected on the
Ground-plain; and the Rails, Shelves, etc. are all drawn from the points of
Distance a a on the right and left hand. The Shelves you must note do not
project over, but run range with the our sides of the upright Posts.

The Chair contains in the bottom four Squares each way, as you may see in the
Ground-plain. The making the Chair has already been taught in Operat. XXXV.
Only the sight of this Chair is changed, for the Legs are placed against the
Base. For finding the middle of the Back of the Chair, in order to making the
peak in the upper Rail behind, draw from the points b c and d e two lines, and
where they cross each other, draw a Perpendicular through the whole Back of the
Chair, and that Perpendicular shall be the middle between the Back posts of the
Chair, to which point you must draw up the Peak.

On the left hand you have the Frame of a Door described standing on four
Squares in the Ground-plain. The thickness of the Frame is one of those
Squares: It is easy to be understood by the Figure alone.

Above the Frame of the Door you have a apiece Hole described, with one of
its Angles downwards, which is two Squares high and two Squares broad:
Therefore from the point 2 in the Ground-plain erect a Perpendicular, and on
that Perpendicular design what height the lower Angle of the Hole shall stand
at above the Door, as here at f, then draw a Visual line through the point f
into the said line of the Figure as to g, and from the point g set off four
devisions of the Base upwards, as 1 2 3 4, and draw another Visual line through
the Perpendicular into the point 4, and where the Visual line cuts the
Perpendicular, as here at b, shall be the upper Angle of the Square Hole; Then
erect two Perpendiculars one from the point o, the other from the point 4 in
the Ground-plain, and where these Perpendiculars cut the Visual line i 2, as
here in the points k l, shall be the other two opposite Angular points of the
square Hole; and straight lines drawn from f to l, from l to h, from h to k,
and from k to f, shall include the fore-side of this square Hole. The back side
may be easily apprehended by the pricked lines behind the Figure. If you would
find the middle of this square Hole, draw lines from each two opposite Angles,
as from f to h, and from k to l, and where they cut each other shall be the
middle of the Hole.

On the right hand over a through fare is described another square Hole, with
one of its sides downwards, containing also two Squares on each side. To make
this, erect a Perpendicular on the point 2 in the Ground-plain on your right
hand, and on that Perpendicular design the height of the under side of your
Hole, as at m, and through that point m draw a Visual line into the side-line
as at o, from which point o set off two devisions (as before said) of the Base
upwards, as at o 2, then erect another Perpendicular as at o in the
Ground-plain through the Visual line, at the point n, and so much of the Visual
line as is contained between the points m n shall be the under side of the
square Hole; then draw another Visual line from the point 2 on the side-line,
and so much of that Visual line as is contained between the two Perpendiculars
o n p and 2 m q, viz. p q shall be the upper side of the Hole. The other two
sides are the Perpendiculars p m and q m: By the Parallels q r, m s p t, and n
v, you have the thickness of the said Hole, viz. one Square, as in the Ground.

OPERATION XLIIII. XLV.
To Delineate the Scenographick Platform of Buildings, in order to the true
Describing of Houses, or other Buildings in Landskips.

THis Geometrick Ground-plot is reduced to Scenographie by the Rules you where
taught in several foregoing Operations; whether I refer you. But if it be
required that you make the Ceeling of the same form the Ground-plot is, you
must erect Perpendiculars to your designed Height from the several Angles of
the Scenographick Ground-plot, and Visual rays drawn from the point a by the
intersection of Diagonals drawn from the points b b shall inscribe the Roof or
Ceeling also, (as you were taught in Operat. XXV. XXVI. XXVII. etc.

It will in some Cases be convenient to take the lines c c or d d for the Base;
and then you will have the Ground-plot and Ceeling for the sides: By which
means you may easily make Holes through Walls, or describe Loggs lying cross
one another, etc.

OPERATION XLVI.
To erect a Building on the first Ichnographie of the former Leaf.

THe former Ichnographies are described in this Plate: And what is hid by the
Structure raised thereon is marked with pricked lines, as you may see the
Scenographick Squares marked 1 2 3 4 5, in Fig. XLII. whereon the four
Pavilions and the Steeple are perpendicularly erected to a convenient height.
Here you may see that Ranges on the fore-right sides are parallels to the Base
and Horizon, and the Ranges on the right angled Return sides are drawn from the
Visual point: and the cut off angles (which we must also call sides) are drawn
from the points of Distance. As in the Octangular Structure, Operat. XXVII.

OPERATION XLVII.
To erect a Building on the second Ichnographie of the former Leaf.

THis Pyramidal Spire stands upon four Pedestals, and has the middle of its
top found in the Ichnographie, as at b, by erecting a Perpendicular from that
point: and the rest of its sides are made by erecting Perpendiculars into the
surface of the Pedestal, and from thence carried up toward the top of the
Spire. The shortning both of the Sides of the Pedestal and Spire are drawn from
the Visual point. As you may see in the Figure.

OPERATION. XLVIII.
To delineate the appearance of Buildings, in order to the truer drawing of
Landskips.

BEfore we treat of Landskips it will be necessary to begin with Houses in
several positions, viz. with their Sides in Orthographie, and Front in
Scenographie: As the Figures A C D: And with the Front in Orthographie, and
Sides in Scenographie: As the Figure B, and several others already described in
this Book represent: with the several appendices belonging to Houses, as Steps,
at a; Penthouses, at b; opened Windows, as at c; Jetties, as at d; Buttresses,
as at e; Bridges, as at f; etc, all which may merely by considering the pricked
lines, and whence they proceed, be understood. As for Example. To find the
middle Perpendicular line of the Front in Fig. A. in order to the ridge of the
Front in the middle, as at g: Continue the Perpendiculars h h and i i to a
convenient height, and draw two Visual rays at what distance you please
through them, as here the Visual rays i and k, and from the points where the
Visual rays cut the Perpendiculars, draw two straight lines corner-wise, as h
k, l i; and the intersection of these two lines shall be the middle of the
Front between the two Sides, and a Perpendicular erected on that intersection
through the top of the Front shall be the line the Ridge must be placed in: as
is shown by the Figure. The arch of the Bridge at f is drawn from the two
centers m n.

The finding the middle line in the House C is otherwise performed, for this
House is covered with a Spire whose four sides falls into the middle of its
Ichnographie; Therefore to place it right you must have the middle of the
Ichnographie it stands upon: as here, the sides o q, q r, r p, p o, for then
lines drawn from the two cross corners shall intersect each other in the middle
of the Ichnographie, and a Perpendicular erected shall show the middle of the
Spire, as at s; And straight lines drawn from the top-corners of the Building
shall enclose the Spire.

But if you will have a Ridge-cover to this Building, the Ridge mustly in the
middle of the Orthographie, as here at t v, and straight lines drawn from the
two Orthogtaphick sides o p to the point t shall make the fore-point of the
Ridge.

Here is also a Drawbridge described, where the pricked arch x y shows the arch
it describes in drawing up. But all the Scenographie of this Projection being
made from the Visual point, become so easy that I need make no more words on
it.

These Structures are placed just on the surface of a Water, Because a flat
Ground should appear about them. The Situation of the Figure may be easily
understood by the Visual point, and point of Distance z.

OPERATION XLIX.
Of Landskips in general: How they must be ordered.

IN the first place you are to observe for a Rule, That if in your Landscape you
have any standing Water (as a River, a Pond, etc. to describe, you place your
Horizontal line level with the farthest sight or appearance of it; as in this
Figure: where the Visual point placed in the Horizon is at a in the Water.

2. If any Houses or Cottages happen in your Picture, you well consider their
position, that you may the better find from what point in the Horizontal line
to draw the Front and Sides of those Houses, etc. As you shall be taught in the
next Operation.

3. That when you describe any thing at a great distance, you make it rather
too big than too little, that you may the better accommodate your Picture to
the sight and understanding of the Vulgar.

4. For Trees, Hedges, Shrubs, etc. you are left to your discretion, for making
them either slender or stubbed, thick or thin of Leaves, etc. because it would
be endless in drawing them by proportion; partly for the multiplicity of parts
in every Tree, etc. and partly because the season of the year alters their
appearance.

5. In Coloring and shadowing, Those Objects that ly near the Ey, you are to
make of the same Couloure in your Picture they are in the Object: only as they
run from the Ey they must be made fainter and fainter, till at last they all
loose themselves in a dark Sky Couloure.

OPERATION L.
To draw Buildings that are posited obliquely to the Horizontal line.

PLace your Geometrick Ichnographie in what position you think good, as here A
B C D, which reduce to Scenographie, as by many of the foregoing Operations,
and as here you find them at a b c d, then on the corners of these
Scenographick Ichnographies erect Perpendiculars for the several corners of
your Buildings, as in Figure A erect the Perpendiculars A a, b c, and draw a
line through the points A b into the Horizon, as at d, for the Ground-line of
that side of that House, so shall all lines that are on that side of that House
Parallel to the Ground-line be drawn from that point d; as the lines a c and a
f: thus the Return sides of A b must be drawn from the point g in the
Horizontal line, whether (as you may see) the lines of the Ichnographie tend.
The like you find in the Figures B C D, where in the Figure B two sides appear.
viz. the sides B h and B i: from B h the line B h k draws the Ground-line on
the left hand, and B i l the Ground-line on the right hand. In the House C the
Return sides are drawn from the point n in the Horizontal line. And for the
House D, the lines D o and D p prolonged into the Horizontal line, as at q r,
delineates those sides, and all lines that in the Structure are Parallel to
those sides: as you may see in the lines r r i etc.

OPERATION LI.
Showing how to represent Shadows of Bodies.

SHadows are made by the position of Opacous Bodies before Luminous Bodies,
which Opacous Bodies stop and hinder those Lines of Light which else would pass
from the Body of Light to the Plain whereon the Oparous Body stands.

By Lines of Light, I mean those straight lines that pass from the Body of
Light to the Plain. Thus the line a b is a Line of Light.

These Lines of Light, the Plam or Line of Saddows, and a Perpendicular let
fall from the Body of Light makes always a Triangle, as is the Triangle a b c,
where a b represents the Line of Light c b the Plain or Ground-line of Shadows,
and a c the Perpendicular.

If in this Triangle any Opacous Body be placed so as to break the lines of
Light, that opacous causes a Shadow: Thus the Staf d e erected perpendicularly
at d breaks all the lines of Light enclosed between d e b, and makes the Shadow
d b: by which instance alone you may see the manner and properties of Lines of
Light; and how a straight line drawn from the line of Shadows through the point
the Opacous body stands on, and a line of Light drawn from the body of Light
through the top-point of that opacous body shall cut each other in the point of
termination of Shadow. By this proposed Staf I would have you understand a
Line, though in this place it would be unproper to call it so, because that
having no Geometrick breadth makes no shadow. But as was said in the third
Operation, where a Line was laid down in Perspective, knowing how to draw a
Line in Perspective you know how to draw all Figures, because they are bounded
by Lines; so I may say in Shadows, for though the Object be a Body, yet the
Shadow is but a Figure, and by knowing how to draw the Shadow of every Line
properly you know how to draw the whole figure of Shadow. As you may see in
this next Operation.

OPERATION LII.
To find the Shadow of a Cube, the elevation of Light above the Ground-point
being assigned.

THe given Light is a, the Ground-point b, the Cube c d e f, g h i k, Therefore
from the upper angles of the Cube c d e f, I draw lines of Light through the
Plain, and from the point b I draw lines of Shadow through the under angles of
the Cube, as through g h i k, and where these lines of Shadow cut the lines of
Light (as here a e cuts b i in l, a d cuts b h in m, a f cuts b k in n) shall
be the points that the shadowing angles of this Cube casts its shadow on the
Plain, as here to l m n, and straight lines drawn from m to l, from l to n,
from n to k,, and from m to the side of the Cube g c shall include the shadow.

OPERATION LIII.
To find the shadow of a Cilinder, the elevation of the Light above the Plain
of shadow being given.

THe Body of Light is a, the Ground-point b, the Cilinder c d e f, g h i k: The
Cilindrick section above the plain of Shadows you must bring into the Plain of
Shadows, by letting fall Perpendiculars from the four devisions above, viz. c d
e f, into the the plain of Shadow, as at l m n o: Then by drawing lines from
the body of Light through the devisions in the upper end of the Cilinder, as
through c d e f; and from the points g through l, k through o, i through n, and
h through m; where the lines of Light cut the lines of Shadow, as here in the
points p q r, shall be the bounds of a Scenographick arch, which joined to the
straight lines h p and k r shall include the shadow.

You must note, I hat the Scenographick Figures c d e f, made at the top of
this Cilinder, and l m n o, made by the Perpendiculars let fall into the Ground
are true Scenographick Circles; and that the circle c d e f appears smaller
than the Circle l m n o, because it is posited nearer the Horizontal line,
which alters the Scenographick appearance: as you may see in the several
Circles that are made about the Newel of the Winding Stairs, in Operat. XXXIII.
This I mind you of, because from the devisions in that Circle, and not from the
Ground point, the lines of Shadow are drawn to cut the lines of Light.

OPERATION LIIII.
To find the shadow of a Cone set on its point, the elevation of Light being
given.

THe Body of Light is a, The Ground point b, the Cone c d e f g, Project the
top of this Cone (which is a Circle) Scenographically, as in Operat. IX. X. and
by Perpendiculars let fall on the Ground, draw also the other Circle h i k l
from the same Visual point, and point of Distance: Then from the Body of Light
draw lines into the Ground, through the points d e f g of the upper Circle, and
from the Ground point draw lines through the points h i k l, in the Circle on
the Ground; and where these lines intersect each other, as here in the points m
n o, shall be the points through which the Scenographick arch m n o drawn to
meet the straight lines i m, l n, and k o, shall be the track that shall
include the shadow.

OPERATION LV.
To find the shadow of a Tetrahedron with one of its points set on the Ground,
the elevation of Light being assigned.

THe given Light is a, the Ground point b, the angles of the Tetrahedron c d e
f; Project the Triangle c d e Scenographically on the Ground, by Perpendiculars
let fall from the angles, as into g h i, and let the length of the
Perpendicular e f be the length of the Side c d; so shall the sides g h, and h
i, be drawn from the same point in the Horizontal line that the lines c e and e
d were drawn from. Then from the body of Light draw lines into the Ground,
through the points c d e; and from the Ground-point draw lines through the
points g h i; and where these lines intersect each other, as here in the points
k l m, draw straight lines from f to k, from k to l, and from l to the side d f
of the Tetrahedron, where it is cut by the pricked line m n.

OPERATION LVI.
To find the Shadow of a Staff broken by the interposition of a
Parallellepippedon, and by the interposition of a Cilinder. The Elevation of
Light being assigned.

THe Body of Light is a, the Ground-point b, the Staff c, by working as by
Operat. LI, you find a straight shadow continued from d e, where the shadow
breaks against the Parallellepippedon, and and rises Perpendicularly on the
side e f, and thence on the upper side of the Parallellepippedon continues it
self Parallel to the Plain of Shadows as at g, and solooses it self behind the
further side of the Parallellepippedon.

But the Saff h i makes another fashioned Shadow on the surface of a Cilinder;
for by working as before, you find the shadow of the Staf continue straight
from i to m, where the interposition of the Cilinder breaks the shadow, by
receiving it on its own surface in the form of a Scenographick Semi circle,
which is the Figure the Circumference of this Cilinder would make, if it were
cut a sunder in m n.

OPERATION LVII.
To draw a Figure which on the Plain shall be deformed: yet when seen from a
designed point through a Hole shall show a Comely and proportionable shape.

MAke a Plain of so many equal parts as you please, as is the first Plain A B C
D, which is divided into 8 in length, and 8 in depth, as you may see marked down
the side and bottom with 1 2 3 to 8, and therein draw what you think good: as
in the second Plain A B C D. Then make an other Plain of as many unequal parts
as is the third Plain c a d b, (and mark two sides of that also with 1 2 3 to
8.) Thus, Set off one side of your first Plain A B C D at d b of the third
Plain, and in the middle of it as at e, erect a Perpendicular as at e 4 f,
which point f shall be the point of Distance: from this point of Distance draw
two straight lines as f c d, and f a b: then set off your intended height from
the point of Distance, as f g, and draw the Diagonal line g c b to the point b,
and where this Diagonal cuts the out line f c d, as here at c, draw the line c
a Parallel to d b, so is the four sides of your third Plain made. To divide
this into small squares as your first Plain is, do thus, Devide the line d b
into 8 equal parts, as 1 2 3 to 8: then lay a straight Ruler to the point of
Distance f, and to every one of these devisions successively, and by the side
of it draw lines from the line c a to these devisions, and these lines shall
represent the Perpendiculars in the first Plain: Then from the points where
these Perpendiculars cut the Diagonal g c b draw lines Parallel to the lines c
a and d b, and these lines shall represent the thwart lines that cut the
Perpendiculars in the first Plain.

Having thus projected your Plain, drawn therein the figure that was drawn in
your second Plain; and be careful to draw every stroke thereof in its
responding Square and part of the Square, with the same proportion to each of
these Squares that you find in the squares of the second Plain. And though the
figure seem when drawn very distorted and unproportionable, as in the fourth
Plain a b c d, yet if you place one of your Eyes directly over the point fat the
height of the line f g, and winck with the other Ey, you shall see. (if your
figure be exactly drawn) the perfect shape of the figure in the second Plain.
But that you may the better understand me I have pasted a thin Pastboard on the
line h f g, which if you erect perpendicularly, and look through the hole with
one of your Eyes close to that hole, you may see the same figure in this fourth
Plain that is drawn in the second.

OPERATION. LVIII.
To draw on a Quadrant a Figure seemingly confused and without Design, yet when
of this Quadrant a Cone shall be made, a comely and proportionable Figure shall
appear.

DEscribe a Circle of the bigness you intend the Base of your Cone shall be, as
the little Circle 1 2 3 4 etc. to 8, Devide this Circle into so many equal
parts as you will (the more the better) this is divided into eight: and from
the Center draw straight lines to every one of these devisions, as to 1 2 3.
etc. to 8. Then devide one of these Semi-diameters also into eight equal parts,
and through every one of those equal parts describe on the Center a circle
concentrick to the outmost, as the Circles 1 2 3 to 8. Then to make the
appearence of these Lines and Circles on the outside of a Cone, Describe a
Quadrant whose Radius shall be twice the Diameter of this Circle, as the
Quadrant on the right hand, and continue the under Radius to an extreme length.
Devide this Quadrant into two equal parts, and devide the lower part into eight
equal parts; then erect a Perpendicular on the Base as at 8, and from the
Center draw straight lines through the eight devisions aforesaid into the
erected Perpendicular. Then placing one foot of your Compasles in the point 8,
open the other sucessively to all the intersected points in the Perpendicular,
and describe the several arches 17, 26, 35, 44, 53, 62, 71, 80 Then devide the
outmost arch into eight equal parts, as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, and draw straight
lines from the Center into each of these equal parts; So shall this Quadrant
when cut close by the outmost lines thereof, and rolled up in the form of a
Cone, and placed directly before the Ey, so as the light may fall round about
it, show like the little Plain of Circles and straight lines, and be of the
same bigness, and all the arches in this Quadrant shall become concentrick
circles equi-distant from one another: and the straight lines shall proceed
from the center both ways into the circumferance.

Whence (by consequence) it will follow, that what lines soever are drawn in
any of the squares of the Plain of Circles, and the same trnasferred to the
Quadrant, in the square responding to that square in the Circle, it must also
appear in the Quadrant, when made in a Cone, in the same shape it does in the
Circle, As you may see in the enlarged Circle and Quadrant, wherein a Figure is
delineared.

Of Catoptricks or Reflected Beams.
REflected Beams are seen in a Glass, or other matter curiously pollisht. If
this Glass or pollisht matter be exactly flat the Object appearing in it, is
exactly like its Original. This you see in common Looking Glasses: But if the
Glass be not flat the Object alters from the Original, and that more or less
according as the Glass is more or less flat, Therefore in drawing Catoptrick
Figures you must consider the Shape of the surface of the Glass which you
intend to have the Reflection made upon, and for every surface you must make a
particular Ichnographical Projection, which must on the Glass appear to be a
Plain full of equal Squares: on which Projection if you transfer what shall be
drawn on a Plain divided into the same number of true Squares, though in the
Projection it shall show very distorted and confused; yet shall the Reflection
thereof on the Glass show very regular, proportionable, and well composed. I
shall give you one Example thereof in this next Operation.

OPERATION LIX.
To Draw an Appearance seemingly confused and without design which shall
Reflect on a Cilinder Perpendicularly erected in a designed place, an intended
Figure.

SUppose (For Example sake) it be the likeness of the Figure A that is intended
to be seen Reflected on a Cilinder. First devide every side of the Figure into
so many equal parts as you please (here we will take 12) and draw lines through
these devisions to cut each other at right Angles. Then if you make a
Projection whose Reflection on a Cilinder shall show the same shape and number
of Squares: It follows by consequence that if you transfer all the Lineaments
in the Figure, A to this Projection, and place every Lineament in its proper
situation so as to correspond with the same space from the top and sides of
this Plain, every one of these Lineaments in the Projection shall also appear
in the Cilinder in the same shape and situation they do in the Square Plain.

Therefore to make this Projection, descibe on the Center a the Circle b 4 cd,
of the same Diameter you intend the Cilinder shall be, suppose about an Inch
and an half; devide the Semidiameter of this Circle into 4 equal parts, as 1 2
3 4, then on the devision at 3 place one foot of your Compasses and extend the
other to what width you intend your outmost Circle should be, as hereto e, and
describe the Circle f e g: Then devide one of those parts of the square Plain
into 20 equal parts or sub-devisions, and make the first devision from e, 6 of
those equal parts or sub-devisions bigger than one Square, which you must set
off on the Diametral line from e toward a: the second from e, 5 of those
sub-devisions bigger than a Square which also set off from e toward a, the
third 4, the fourth 3, the fifth 2, the sixth 1, and the seventh equal: the
eighth 1 sub-devision less than a Square, the ninth 2 less, the tenth 3, the
eleventh 4, the twelfth 5 sub-devisions less than a Square, which successively
set off from e toward a: then on the Center at 3 (aforesaid) place one foot of
your Compasses and extend the other successively to each of the devisions set
off on the Diametral line, and through every one of those divisions describe so
much of a Circle as the Plain will bear, so shall all these arches of Circles
represent those straight lines in the Plain square A that run athwart the Plain
from the left hand to the right, and reflected on the Cilinder they shall
become straight lines parallel to each other.

To represent in this Projection the Perpendiculars on the Plain square, you
may on the Center a describe an occult Circles as large as you can within the
Projection, as the Circle h i k l, devide half of this Circle as k g h into 8
equal parts, and through every one of these equal parts draw lines from the
Center a into the Circumference of the Projection, and these lines shall
represent 8 Perpendiculars on the Plain square. To draw the other 4 transfer
the distance of one of the devisions in the Circle h i k l twice from l toward
k, and twice from i toward k, and draw straight lines (as before) through
these distances into the Circumference of the Projection: so shall the whole
Projection be finished.

Note that in this Projection the whole Circle is not divided into 12 equal
parts, but only three quarters thereof, because the Cilinder will not well
gather in more rays, for the other quarter lies hid behind the Cilinder.

Of Dioptricks or Broken Beams.
THe Broken beam is to be seen in a Tube, through a Crystal or Glass that has
its surface cut into many Faces: as is the Fig. A: for every one of these Faces
making Angles with the Base or Flat side of the Crystal show an Object each as
through its own Face and not through the Flat of the Crystal: And so is said
to break the Rays of an Object: because to the Flat of the Crystal the Rays
run straight, but afterward they break into the same Angle the Face on the
other side of the Flat makes with the Flat.

Thus it comes to pass that when these Faces on the Crystal are turned toward
a Plain placed directly before it, these Faces of the Crystal dis-sever
themselves at a considerable distance on the Plain, because they are all
directed to several remote parts of that Plain.

Now though there has not as yet been any Geometrick Rule found for the
assigning a place on the Plain of each of these Faces, yet is there found how
they may be placed on a Plain; as you shall learn by the next Operation.

OPERATION LX.
How among a great many Pictures on the Plain, to see one elected and peculiar
Picture quite different from any on the Plain.

HAving fixed your Plain fast, and also fixed your Tube fast directly before
the Plain, look through the little Hole at the hither end of the Tube, and with
a point or black-lead pencil mark where the several Angles of each and every
Face of the Crystal falls upon the Plain; so may you with your black-lead
pencil draw a line by the side of a Ruler from point to point of each Face thus
found on your Plain. But you must remember to mark each Face on your Plain with
numerical figures or some other mark, so as you may know to what Face of your
Crystal each belongs: for you will find them all reverted; that is those seen
through the top-faces of your Crystal will be in the bottom of your Plain: and
those seen through the right hand Faces of your Crystal will be on the left
hand on your Plain.

Having thus prepared your Plain, you must draw the figure of your Crystal (on
a plain paper) exactly of the size of your Crystal, and devide it into so many
parts your Crystal is divided and cut into Faces; and mark each devision
thereon in a reverted order from that on your Plain: As if the bottom Face on
your Plain be marked 1, then mark the top. Face in your paper 1; And if 2, 3,
4, etc. be marked toward the right hand on your Plain mark them toward your
left hand on your paper; as you see in the Figure. On this paper therefore you
must draw the Picture you intend shall be seen on the Plain: Suppose the
Picture of King Charles the first: and having drawn it, transfer all the
lineaments and strokes you find in each respective Face on the paper to the
responding Face on the Plain. As for example: What lineaments you find in the
Face marked 1 on the paper, transfer to the Face marked 1 on the Plain: what
lineaments you find in the Face marked 2 on the paper, transfer to the Face
marked 2 on the Plain. And so for all the rest.

Then looking again through your Tube, you will see all the severed Faces on
the Plain unite, each Face contributing the lineaments drawn in it to form your
intended Picture of.

If you have a mind further to amuse Spectators, you may to every one of the
Faces on the Plain draw another Picture: as in the Face marked 10 on the Plain
you find an Ey, to this Ey make up an whole Figure; To the Face marked 12 you
find the Mouth, to this make up another whole Figure etc. But you may alter the
likeness as much as you list, both in countenance and dress: So will the
conceit appear yet so much the stranger. I have inserted one Example, where
about the Face 1 on the Plain, I have set the Picture of a Woman.

I



II

III

IIII



V

VI



VII

VIII



IX

X



XI

XII



XIII

XIIII



XV

XVI



XVII

XVIII



XIX

XX



XXI



XXII



XXIII



XXIIII



XXV



XXVI



XXVII



XXVIII



XXIX



XXX



XXXI



XXXII



XXXIII



XXXIIII



XXXV



XXXVI



XXXVII



XXXVIII



XXXIX



XL

XLI



XLII



XLIII



XLIIII

XLV



XLVI

XLVII



XLVIII



XLIX



L

LI



LI

LII

LIII

LIIII

LV

LVI



LVII



LVII



LVIII



LXI



LX




