THE MOUNT OF SPIRITS, THAT Glorious and Honorable State To which BELIEVERS ARE
Called by the GOSPEL, EXPLAINED In some MEDITATIONS upon the 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24 Verses of the 12th Chapter to the Hebrews: With some Previous
Reflections upon that whole EPISTLE, and the People of the JEWS.

Psalm 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night. London: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side near Mercers-Chappel, 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT IS an uneasy Reflection, but a very reasonable Supposition, That no Person
will view over this small Collection of some few uneven Thoughts, with any
Delight comparable to what I had in the composing of it; those Satisfactions
are, I well know, personal, and in their nature not transferrable, or else I
would heartily remit them to every Reader; the Meditations herein contained
did, I confess, much affect and delight me while they were upon the Anvil,
though perhaps herein I shall prove to resemble a mean active Preacher, that
warms only his own Affections and starves those of his Auditors; I have this to
solace my self withal, [let the Effect otherways be never so small] That I
sought out these things for no other reason, but because I my self had pleasure
therein, and originally designed an entire confinement of them to my own
private satisfaction; possibly, by their publication, I shall be told, I have
mistaken my Talent, and meddled with things that are too great and too high for
an ordinary Genius, and have brought my self under the correction of that old
Axiom, Prestat de Carthagine Tacere quam pauca dicere; It Is better to say
nothing of Carthage, than to say but a little. I will not contend with this
Reproof, nor yet labor after any farther Excuse than what I find made for me
in that goodnatur'd modern Expression, In magnis voluisse sat est. The Matters
here treated of, are I well know of a sublime Nature, and require the deepest
Consideration and Caution; and therefore I have all along proposed to my self
what I am sure is the safest Method; which is, to walk by the Light of
Revelation, and take the Scriptures in all that I have said for my only Guide;
if Men will understand any thing aright of God's Eternal Councels and Designs,
touching the Making, Ruling, and Saving, of the World, here they must have it;
it is to no purpose to hearken to any other Instructor, but the Holy Ghost,
about these Matters, for none knows the Mind of God herein, but the Spirit of
God alone; the Wisdom and Philosophy of the World has, after its utmost
Enquiries and Pursuits after these things, attained no farther, but to record
their own insufficiency and folly; the Holy Scriptures, as they are the great
Luminary placed by God in this lower Firmament, to inform and enlighten the
rational part of the World in all Sacred Things, so they are the Rule and the
Standard by which all Divine and Religious Concerns are to be tried and
determined: It Is a sorry change, and a very mean shift, to forsake the
infallible Determinations of God that he has transmitted unto us upon Record;
and by an Appeal from them, to put Religion upon trial by the failing uncertain
Opinions and Practices of Men: It ought to be made a perpetual Memorandum in
the Church, in order to their constant Direction, that when our blessed Savior
came, and the greatest Points that ever were debated on Earth were then on
foot, Whether he were the True Messiah, or No? And whether the Religion
established by him was to dissolve and discharge the Mosaical economy, and of
right to succeed it? Our Savior and the Apostles insist not upon any one
Proof, but what they fetched from the Old Testament; not a word of the Church
then, nor any of those Humane Authorities, the pressing of which upon the Minds
of Men has so pestered and disordered the World ever since, and whenever they
contested either with the Jews, the Gentiles, or with Satan himself, they never
used other Weapon than the Scriptures, nor was any other Medium so much as once
mentioned by them to determinate Divine Things by, although that Age was as
much filled with the Noise of Tradition and the Church as any that has been
since. St. Paul, when he is treating of the deepest Points, flies to that
Interrogatory Appeal, But what says the Scripture? And I doubt not but the
glorious State of the Church in the last times, so much fore-spoke of, will
consist in a strict and close Agreement with the Canon of the Scriptures, and
appearing in the Splendour of an Entire Conformity to the Laws of Christ,
utterly rejecting all Humane Authorities, and all such Constitutions of which
Christ himself is not the Author, and such as by which the Antichristian
Fabric has been chiefly erected. It Is of great remark, That the last Item God
gave to the Church of the Jews, when the Spirit of Prophecy ceased, and with
which the Old Testament is closed, was to prevent an invasion of Humane
Traditions, and to oblige them to an exact Conformity and Obedience to what he
himself had prescribed them, Remember the Law of Moses, my Servant, which I
commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes and the
Judgments. And our Savior's last Direction to his Disciples, when he left the
World, was, That they should teach all Nations to observe whatsoever he had
commanded them; to prevent all other Legislators from usurping Authority in the
Church.

In the following Discourse, I have also applied my self (as much as the Matter
would give me leave) to the use of Scripture-Phrases, as thinking to all
Inquirers into these Matters, those would prove the most acceptable Words, and
also, because the Scripture is best expressed by it self; Scripture-Notions
sound best and are most properly uttered in Scripture-Expressions, and what in
one place looks obscure, is often so expressed in another, as renders it
obviously intelligible and easy; we can never be too much inured to
Scripture-Expressions, because the Scriptures contain in them, after an
admirable manner, a Sacred Language, and Holy Dialect, dictated by God himself,
for him and his People to converse together in; here it is that holy Men have
of old, and all good Men, to the end of the World, will constantly learn, in
what Language to express their Prayers and their Praises, and how to utter
themselves in all their Approaches to the Most High, and in whatsoever converse
they shall happen to have with him; it is the Treasury of all Divine Utterance
and Expression, both from God to Man, and from Man to God, and which the Holy
Ghost will principally make use of in all the intercourse that will be between
Christ and the Church to the end of the World, and will very particularly make
such skilful in, who are to bring down the Lively Oracles, and to administer in
Sacred Things; every Man comes naturally to speak and understand this heavenly
Language, when he is born of the Spirit, and brought up in the Nurture and
Instruction of the Holy Ghost. The profane part of the World are ever deriding
this, and making it a constant part of their diversion: Now what a profound
solid part of Discretion do such Men act, who have in contempt the Result and
Effects of Infinite Wisdom? The Papists have a Saying, That never any Dog
barked at a Crucifix, but he run mad. The Moral of that Fable is very good, and
may serve to instruct a profane Protestant; God himself gives a very solemn,
and withal, dreadful Caution and Premonition to all profane Scoffers, by the
Prophet Esaias, Be not Mockers, (says he) lest your Bands be made strong; that
is, lest I choose your Delusion, and give you irrecoverably up to your own
profane sense, which will be found at last to be the worst sort of Madness.

I will not believe any will be so unnecessary critical and nice, as to blame
the Title of this small Tract, in regard the Catholic Church under the Gospel
is so very often in Scripture denominated by Mount Sion, called the Mountain of
the Lord's House, which is to be set up upon the top of the Mountains: And to
this Mount Sion, that is, to the Gospel-Catholick Church, are some way or other
related all the blessed and glorious Spirits that are extant, the fallen Angels
are only excluded; for by coming to this Mount, the Apostle tells us, we are
come to God the Judge of all, to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, to an
innumerable company of Angels, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. A
great part of a true Christian's Life, and I am sure the best part of it, is a
Converse with Spirits; the best and noblest part of Man is a Spirit, and he
must shortly for some time exist only in that part, and when the Body is
reunited to it, that second Coalition and Constitution will be altogether
Spiritual, for a Soul and a Spiritual Body conjoined, will render a Man not
less Spiritual than he was while he existed singly in his Soul, but will make
him perfectly like to an Angel; so we are told by our Savior, That in the
Resurrection the Saints shall be like to the Angels of God. Upon this account
God is training us up, and gradually fitting and preparing of us for this
state; he is acquainting us (as much as our present condition will allow) with
himself and other Spirits here, that so we may joyfully resign up our earthly
state, to become of their number, and at last abide in that condition that will
be purely Spiritual, without any sort of Terrene Allay; and such who live
without any Communion with Spirits here, and have no sort of foretaste, nor any
preparative relish of that state, must needs (if they any way make use of the
thinking faculty) leave their Bodies with very great Amusements.

The Mount of Spirits.
Hebrews 12.18. For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and
that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness and tempest.

Verse 19. And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they
that heard, entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more.

Ver. 20. For they could not endure that which was commanded: and if so much as
a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

Ver. 21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake.

Ver. 22. But we are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels:

Ver. 23. To the general assembly, and church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect.

Ver. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel.


THis Epistle is a Funeral Sermon preached at the Interment of the Law, the
material Body of Moses God himself buried long before, and no man ever knew the
place of his Sepulture, and now his mystical Body, his Doctrine, growing old
and ready to vanish away, ripe for abolition, or rather dissolution, not so
much by being repealed or rescinded, but its use ceasing, the end and substance
of it appearing, and its glory being naturally and of course swallowed up and
dissolved into a greater glory that excels. The Holy Ghost himself by this
Epistle lays it honorably in the grave, and so we have the Sepulcher of this
mystical Body of Moses abiding with us at this day: And happy had it been for
the whole Nation of the Jews, if this Sermon had had its due effect upon them,
God in his wise and gracious Providence, gave them this Warning, this Holy
Instruction and Admonition, to prevent their obstinate adhaesion to the
Mosaical Rites, and violent opposition of the Gospel thereby, which ended in a
very few years after the writing of this Epistle, in the sad and utter Ruin of
their Temple, their City and themselves.

The Penman of this Epistle, by such Probabilities as come very near to a
Certainty, appears to be St. Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and that
Person whom it pleased God so eminently to make use of in the glorious
Fulfilling of that early prophetic Prediction; God shall persuade Japheth to
dwell in the tents of Sem.

The exact Time when this Epistle was written is very uncertain, Antiquity
affords us little or no Information about it, what Knowledge we can have of it
must be by consulting the Scripture and comparing it with it self: It seems
reasonable to suppose, that St. Paul wrote it after his Release at Rome, from
two Years Imprisonment there, with which the Story of the Acts of the Apostles
ends, wherein is contained an Ecclesiastical History of the Church for about 28
Years after our Savior's Resurrection unto the 7th Year of Nere; that he wrote
it after his Release, appears from hence, that Chap. 13. v. 23. he intends and
promises a Journey with Timothy, which had he been a Prisoner, and not in his
own power, is not reasonable to think he would have done: It Is likewise very
probable to be written before the sharpest and most violent Persecutions fell
upon the believing Jews; before the slaughter Herod made at the instance of the
Jews of St. James and those at Jerusalem, because he tells them in this
Epistle, they had not yet resisted unto Blood: and it is very evident to be
writ, and to be well known to the Jews, before St. Peter wrote his second
Epistle, for therein he seems very plainly to refer to this Epistle; and if so,
then it is plain also beyond denial the Author of it was St. Paul: And Account
[says he] that the long suffering of our Lord is salvation, even as our beloved
brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him has written unto you.
Now it is well known St. Paul writ no other Epistle to the Jews, but only this,
and that St. Peter refers particularly to this, his next words seem to infer,
As also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these things: as if he should
have said, Do you Jews, whose fatal day is coming, and near at hand, account
Christ's long suffering to be salvation, according as Paul, by a Divine Wisdom
given to him, has written to you, in an Epistle of his, particularly directed
to you, and has also in all his other Epistles unto the Gentiles, generally
discoursed of this matter, in which there are some things hard to be understood.

This Epistle is directed to the Believing Hebrews, who of all the Converts of
the Apostles Ministry, and the first Age of the Church, were in the greatest
danger of relapses, and needed the strongest and most renewed supports, and
that upon several accounts.

First, Because the Religion they left, was in its original of God's own
institution, and most strongly founded upon the highest Divine Evidences, and
practiced by their Forefathers for a succession of many Ages and Generations,
with singular Attestations of God's Presence and Blessing, above all the
Nations of the Earth; the remembrance of which being strenuously pressed upon
them, [as no doubt it was] by their Brethren of the Circumcision, might often
occasion them to look back, and meditate a retreat from the Christian Doctrine.

Secondly, To be embodied with the Gentiles, and the Uncircumcision, as by the
Gospel they were to be, and coaless with them into one Church state, was a
thing to which they were born and bred, and every way inured, to the greatest
antipathy and opposition.

And, Thirdly, Because the Persecutions they met with, were generally more
grievous and pressing, and less tolerable, than what any Christians of that Age
encountered withal, none embraced the Christian Profession upon greater peril
than they, the whole Body of the Jews being enraged much more against such,
than against the Gentil Believers, and in what place soever they met with any
of the Jewish Converts, their business was to heat the Furnace of Persecution
seven times hotter, as appears evidently where ever they went, in the case of
all the Apostles, and particularly of Saint Paul.

As no man besides that Blessed Apostle, none of those Divine Ambassadors God
at any time employed to treat with the World, were ever so honored, as to be
called up into the third Heavens, and receive their Instructions immediately
from thence, so no man could have a greater Province upon his hand, nor a
weightier Task to perform, as God himself told Ananias in the 9th of the Acts:
He is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my Name before the Gentiles and kings and
the children of Israel.

First, The Apostleship of the Uncircumcision, and by the Ministry thereof,
obliged to depose all the Gods of the Nations, and engage in their utter
subversion, and to clear the World from that Mist of Darkness they had been so
long hoodwinked withal, and that Religious Rubbish they had so long lain under.

Secondly, And which he found the more difficult Task, to bring the
Circumcision, his Brethren according to the flesh, the Jews, to a twofold
assent; first, to behold Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had crucified as the true
Messiah, to look unto this Jesus as the Author and Finisher of all Salvation,
that great and only Sacrifice intended from the beginning, to make the
Atonement between God and Man, and once to be offered up in the end of the
World to that purpose, that according to all the Predictions of Moses and the
Prophets, this Jesus the Son of Mary born at Bethlem, was exactly the Person
that was by himself to complete the Work of Man's Redemption, and that in
persuance of those Predictions, by offering up himself to God upon the Cross he
actually had done it; which two things by the way, made the difference between
the Baptism of John the Baptist, and that of Christ and the Apostles after the
Resurrection; the Baptism of John the Baptist was, to initiate men into this
belief, that that same Jesus of Nazareth whom he pointed them unto, [for he
pointed to the very person, whom all the Prophets before had but at large
foretold; and therefore our Savior says he exceeded all the Prophets that went
before him, and was more than a Prophet] and they beheld Preaching and working
of Miracles, and going about doing Good, was the true Messiah foretold from the
beginning, the very individual Person that was to redeem and save the World,
and therefore in the 7th of Luke, v. 29. they that were baptized with his
Baptism are said to justify God, by believing his Testimony concerning the
Messiah. The Baptism of Christ and the Apostles after the Resurrection, [for
the Apostles baptized with John's Baptism before] was to initiate men into this
belief, that that same Jesus that was to do it, actually had done it, by his
Death, Sufferings and Resurrection, and so was entered into his mediatory
Dominion.

Secondly, To bring the Jews to assent to this as a certain and undoubted
verity, that Shiloh being actually come, there would of necessity follow a
change of the whole state of Religion, a new economy would ensue, the times of
reformation being come, all things were to become new, and a Temporal Reign of
the Messiah upon the Mosaical Policy [which they thought unalterable] in the
Land of Palestine, was an absolute Dream and Delusion: And although this
Apostle had in many other of his Epistles confuted several of their chief
Doctrines, and battered down many of their chiefest and strongest Forts, as
they were made use of to stand in opposition to Christ, and fence out the
Gospel, as that touching Justification by Works, and those concerning the true
use of Circumcision and all the Mosaical Ceremonies; yet in this he very
particularly lays the Ax to the Root of the Tree, and the design of the whole
Epistle is to supersede the Law by the Gospel, to place Christ in the room of
Moses, and to make the Law speak out plain its own natural and genuine use and
designment, and that in the very nature of it; it was no longer to continue,
then until the times of Reformation, being but a shadow of good things to come,
but not the very image of the things themselves: And in the doing of this, he
accommodates himself chiefly to them of the Circumcision, for those he well
knew would with the greatest difficulty become Proselites to this Doctrine, and
the Methods by which he begins, and by which he proceeds throughout this Whole
Epistle in order to this matter, are of admirable consideration to the Church
in all succeeding Ages.

Upon two things the stress of his whole Discourse seems to be chiefly and
principally laid, First, In respect of the Person that publishes and delivers
the Gospel: And, Secondly, In respect of the Nature and super-exceeding
Excellency of the Doctrine published and delivered, the Gospel in the very kind
and constitution of it, utterly exceeding all the Dispensations of God that
ever preceded it, being the very natural, genuine and proper Issue and Product
of them, all Divine Revelations since the World began tended to Christ and the
Gospel as their ultimate End and Center.

Although God had by sundry Ways, and by diverse Persons, both Angels and Men,
at several times, distinctly declared his Mind to the World, yet he never
before spoke by his Son, this is the Memorial of the Gospel throughout all
Generations, that it was first published by the Lord, and after confirmed by
those that heard him: it came first from the Oracle of his Sacred Mouth, and
was sanctified by his most Blessed Lips, and upon that account well may it be
called, as it is, in the 1st of Timothy, The glorious Gospel of the blessed God.

It Is true, that all former Divine Revelations brought to us either by the
Ministry of Angels, or Men, were the Voice of God, and had him for their
Author; but herein lies the peculiarity of the Gospel Glory above them all,
that now he speaks to us without any intermediate Instrument, personally
Himself in his Son, he comes Himself from Heaven, Tabernacles in Humane Flesh,
becomes Emanuel, converseth with us, and speaks Face to Face with us in our own
Nature: Let us with an Holy Astonishment [as Moses said in another case] turn
aside and view this great Sight, and cry out with the Psalmist in Holy
Admiration, Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of
man, that thou should so visit him: and consider deeply what infinite
condescension was this, that when nothing else would serve to recover the lost
World, God comes from Heaven himself, to treat with us about our recovery; so
that no man can now reasonably say, who shall ascend into Heaven to instruct us
from thence, or who shall fetch Divine Knowledge beneath from the Deeps, for
all that we need to know, and all that we can know, is brought home to our
Doors, is put into our Hearts, and into our Mouths, by God himself in the
fashion of a Man, and like to us in all things, sin only excepted.

Two things the Apostle seems to insinuate, in his very first entrance and the
beginning of this Epistle: God who at sundry times and diverse manners spoke in
time past unto the fathers, by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son: First, That it was the same God that spoke now, that spoke
before by Moses and the Prophets, and so prevents their taking prejudice
against the Gospel, as if it came from any other hand than the God of Israel,
or were built upon any other Foundation than Moses and the Prophets.

And, Secondly, That God speaking now by his Son, we may reasonably expect to
hear more than ever was yet known, and all that we are like ever to know by way
of Revelation from above; such a Person as He, may well be supposed to bring
down all God's Errand to the World at once, he has none greater to send by; and
upon that account it is, that the Gospel times are called in Scripture, the
last times, because no more Revelation is to be expected.

If we consider Christ as he is God, he is exalted far above all Heavens, and
beyond all reach of Comparisons; if we consider him in that conjunction as he
was Man, even in that state he is Heir of all things; he is the Firstborn of
every creature, and in all things has the pre-eminence; he exceeds the noblest
of creatures, the Angels, those glorious Spirits, who in their very make and
constitution were nearest of kin of all others to their Creator, and are called
Elohim, a sort of Gods; for God never said unto any of them, thou art my Son,
this day [speaking both of Christ's Incarnation and Resurrection] have I
begotten thee: but at the Son's first arrival in the World, to give an eternal
Instance of his Divinity, he commands all the Angels of God to worship him, and
to worship him with the greatest Prostration and Adoration imaginable; for so
the word (...), used upon this occasion, intimates. That the Apostle should
treat so much, when he is dealing with the Jews, of the Preference of Christ
above the Angels, we may well conceive, when we consider, that he himself in
this Epistle declares, that the Law was the Word spoken by the Angels, and Gal.
3. says, that it was ordained by angels, in the hand of a mediator; not as if
this were to be taken, as Grotius and some learned men have conceived, that the
Law upon Mount Sinai was originally given forth by a created Angel there, for
it was most certainly published authoritatively by God himself there present;
nor is it any where said to be originally given forth by Angels, but to be
spoken by them, and given forth by their Manage and Ministry: In the 68th
Psalm, we are told, The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of
thousands, the Lord is among them, as in Sinai: by which it is evident enough,
the glorious and eternal Jehovah was there personally present, after a very
peculiar and eminent manner: And in Stephen's last Sermon, he tells the Jews,
in that Historical Recapitulation of their whole Affairs, that they had
received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and had not kept it. So that the
meaning is, the delivery of the Law was by the Ministration of Angels, and
their ordering of things upon Mount Sinai, though it was uttered by God
himself; but the delivery of the Gospel is singly by the Ministry of the Son of
God in person: And when we are told the Law was the Word spoken by Angels, and
that it was ordained by Angels, it is in this sense, and no other to be
understood; and well may it be so styled, if we reflect upon these several
things:

1st, The whole heavenly Host of Angels, those glorious Guards of Spirits,
that attend the Eternal Jehovah, were all there present in a solemn and
particular manner, (such as we no where else read of) in their courses, and
order, to execute what their Supreme Lord came about, and beholding with wonder
and admiration, the Wisdom of the Supreme Legislator, in giving forth those
wise Laws to the World, upon which the legal Dispensation was chiefly founded;
which was the reason, perhaps, made them so earnest afterward, to look down
into the Gospel Dispensation, [having seen so much of the legal, and been such
Actors in it] and behold the glory of that, for by it the Apostle tells us
expressly, the manifold wisdom of God is made known unto them; and by beholding
the second Person incarnate, they saw somewhat more of Heaven upon Earth, then
they could see in Heaven it self.

2dly, It was by the Ministry of Angels that those prodigious Terrors were
effected, by which the People were so awed, and taught to reverence the Law,
God raised by them the Smoke, and the Fire, at Mount Sinai.

3dly, It was they that shook and rent the Rock.

4thly, It was they that sounded the Trumpet:

And, 5thly, [from the consideration of which the great Emphasis of the
Apostle's Speech chiefly ariseth] 'twas they framed and effected the articulate
Voices and Words from God, by which he spoke to the People, and by which the
Law was conveyed to their Ears, that is, the Angels received the Law from God's
Mouth, and uttered it by Sounds and Expressions to the People, and thereby
became so the publishers of the Law, as that it is truly and very properly
called the word spoken by Angels: and may be very significantly said, to be
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

'T will be a thing in its nature most instructing, and full of the greatest
spiritual delight and satisfaction, to consider over the Apostles first Point,
those glorious Excellencies of Christ that are appertainant unto him, by which
he has the preference of all that went before him, and by which he is
infinitely exalted beyond what ever can possibly succeed him; and therefore a
Revelation made, and a Religion settled by him, must needs, with the supreamest
Authority, command our utmost obedience.

First he informs us, of two transcendent, supereminent and unparalled
Qualifications of this glorious Person by whom God now speaks; first, that he
has appointed him Heir of all things; and, secondly, that by him, he made the
Worlds. The first of these relates chiefly to his Assumption of the Humanity,
and as he is Man, this is an eternal statute of the Trinity, that the second
Person humbling himself to become Man, and assuming the Humane Nature to the
Divine, as he was Man, should be Heir of the whole Creation, and inherit as a
Prince and a Savior all created Supremacy and Glory, and therefore he himself
often affirms in St. John, that all authority and judgment is given unto him,
upon this very account, because he is the Son of Man, [a Title only given to
him in Scripture by himself and by no other, and another expression of the Seed
of the Woman] that very Humane Nature that looked so meanly, and was such a
stumblingblock to the Faith of the Jews, and the Philosophy of the Gentiles, had
annexed unto it, the Lordship and Dominion of all, this could not simply belong
to the Humane Nature in it self, but was by Divine Ordination of the Father, by
him of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named; and therefore the
Apostle says, that God has appointed him heir of all things, and by this
insinuates to the Jews, that if he were Heir of all things, then has he power
in the Church to alter and settle what Religion he pleases, dispose of their
Ecclesiastic Fabric as he thought good, and that if they did intend to keep
those eminent and peculiar Privileges they had above the rest of the World,
they must own him, and enjoy all from him, and under him, because God has
ordained him Heir of all things.

But the second is that I shall chiefly insist on, by which the Apostle
inculcates his Divinity, that by him God made the worlds; this is a discovery
that at first view seems rather to stupifie and amuse [the Object so far
exceeding the Faculty] than any way to encourage us to contemplate, or enquire,
or farther to think over this matter, nor can any one Meditation about it be
drawn from any other Topic, than pure Revelation; this is a great Oracle let
fall from Heaven for the instruction of the Church, and we must with all humble
and thankful adoration, enquire how far the Holy Ghost has informed us in this
matter, and not farther gaze, lest we lose our selves in vain, fruitless and
unbecoming Speculations.

By whom also he made the worlds. By the Worlds, is not meant as some have
conceived, several Successions of the same World, but it is meant in the sense
the Jews took the word, to whom the Apostle accommodates himself, and they
reckoned upon three Worlds, that above, of Angels and Spirits; that beneath
them, of Sun, Moon and Stars; and this inferior World in which we converse: the
Apostles drift is to show, that what was any where created, was created and
made by him, and that according to St. John, without him was nothing made that
was made; and this appears to be his meaning from Col. 1.16. For by him were
all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible.

[By whom] not as a created instrument any way inferior to himself, so it
cannot be taken, for we are told by Sr. John, that the word by which all things
were made, was in the beginning with God, and was God, but by him as his own
eternal Word, Wisdom, and Power; that is to say, the making of the World was an
act peculiar to the second Person in the Trinity, and the whole Deity in making
the World, acted by the second Person, for it is not said absolutely, that
Christ made the World, but God by him; which notifies to us the order of
working in the Trinity, and the distinct subsistence and operations of the
persons, and not bare instrumentality: True it is, that the act of each Person
in the Trinity is in some sense the act of all the three, yet by the Trinity a
threefold Record is said to be born in Heaven, and distinct acts are applied to
each of the three, and God does appear to us under distinct actings in the same
eternal and blessed Essence by that threefold Record.

To make this deep and important Point as plain and overt as we can, the best
way is to view over those Scriptures where the Holy Ghost treats most expressly
touching this matter; St. John begins his Gospel with a great discovery of it,
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God,
the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. The Apostle's design in this
Gospel, is evidently to begin it with the Divinity and Godhead of Christ, as
the rest had begun theirs with the Original and History of his Humanity and
Incarnation; and this Declaration of his Divinity must needs be very short, for
no man can write a History of God, or make any Narrative of his Eternal
Existence, the Apostle therefore in a few words tells us all that was needful
and proper to be told about his Divinity, and all that could be known about the
Man Christ Jesus, as he was God, In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and the word was God. [In the beginning] it is an allusion to what
Moses says about the Creation, In the beginning God made the heavens and the
earth; that is, before any thing created was extant; and so here St. John says,
In the beginning was the word, that is, Christ was extant when all things else
began; and so he was, and was in being before them, and did not then begin to
be; he was before time, or any thing that was created had a beginning, it is in
a short way to express him eternal, the expression [that he was] is evidently
taken out of the 8th Chapter of Proverbs, from the 23d to the 31st Verse, where
the Word St. John speaks of, is represented as present with God in all the
Business that relates to this World, and principally and especially in the work
of Redemption, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
works of old, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the
earth was, when there was no depths I was brought forth, when there was no
fountains abounding with water; and in the 30th Verse, Then I was with him, as
one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before
him, rejoicing in the habitable parts of this Earth, and my delights were with
the sons of men; of which we can conceive no more, but that God's Works being
known unto him and present with him from all eternity, the Word the second
Person in the Trinity, by whom they were to be made, managed, and finally
disposed, was with him in that particular concern and relation from all
eternity, and God took the same complacency in them, as if they had been
actually in being; the Apostle's words are a plain Syllogism, Christ was in the
beginning, not created, but existing before all created beings, And was; and if
you ask where he was, he was with God, and therefore must needs be God, upon
these premises, that Christ was before all, and was with God. It may be
undeniably concluded, he was God, for nothing but God, could precede all
beginning, and creation, and exist with himself.

[Was the Word.] The Reasons why the Apostle chooses to express Christ when he
writes of his Divinity by the name of the Word, seem to be two, and they both
result from that other undeniable evidence he gives of his Divinity, that he
was not only before the World with God, but that the World was actually made by
him, and that without him nothing was made that was made: The first reason of
his being called the Word, is because words are the express Image of Ourselves,
of our Wisdom, Councels, and Will, and so was Christ the very express Image of
God, the Deity in that work of creation uttered and expressed it self in its
eternal Wisdom, Councels and Will, by the second Person, as the voice of all
the three, and so he is called the Word. Secondly, He is called the Word with
particular reference to the History Moses gives us of the manner of Creation;
the Creatures were all originally framed by God's speaking, for says he, God
said of every thing, let it be, and it was; he said, let there be light, and it
was so. The Psalmist speaking of the Creation expresses it thus, He spoke, and
it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast, Psalm. 33.9. God spoke, and the
Creation was effected; the method of it is so represented, and it being
performed by the second Person, and God speaking solely by him, he is thence
called the Word. And this seems to be all the knowledge we can attain to about
this deep and profound Expression, and we must know withal, that the Expression
is metaphorical, and suited to our frame and capacity.

In the first of the Colossians, from the 15th Verse to the 19th, we find the
Apostle's expression very full in this matter, who is [says he] the image of
the invisible God, and the firstborn of every creature; for by him were all
things created, which are in heaven, and that are in earth, whether they be
thrones or dominions, or principalities or powers, all things were created by
him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist,
and he is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning and firstborn
from the dead, that in [or among] all things he might have the pre eminence. In
the 15th Verse the Apostle lays down these two deep and grand fundamenral
Truths: First, That he is the image of the invisible God, the same that he
affirms in the first of this Epistle to the Hebrews, That he is the brightness
of his glory, and the express image of his person: And, Secondly, That he is
the firstborn of every creature. The Apostle's meaning in the first of these,
in both Texts, is principally to assert and prove the Divinity of Christ
appearing in the fashion of a Man, and to give us to understand, that the
second Person in the Deity united unto the Humanity, though he be so distinct
from the Father, as that the Father and he bear a distinct and twofold Record,
yet he is essentially God, and has all the Qualifications of the Deity
appurtenant unto him, he is the brightness of his Father's glory. Now his glory
is the radiation of his excellency, and Christ being the brightness of his
glory, is the perfection of his glory, and so an essential part of his being,
and in that conjunction of God and Man wherein he is visible, he is the very
Image of the invisible God, and represents the inaccessible and invisible Deity
unto us, [the great thing the Wisdom and Philosophy both of Jews and Gentiles
stumbled at] and renders it the object of our knowledge, our delight, our
communion, and unutterable satisfaction: the Humane and Divine Nature being
united in one person, and making and constituting but one Person, he that sees
what is visible and can be seen in that Person, is said and truly so to see
that Person, as he that sees a Man, is truly said to see the whole Man, though
he do not actually see the Soul of that Man, nor distinctly and particularly
the Understanding, Will and Affections of which that Man is constituted, but by
their effects in corporeal Operations, the Deity was as visible in the Humane
Person of Christ, as the Soul is in the Fabric of any Man we converse with;
and in this sense our Savior himself says, he that seen him has seen the
Father, by the Effects, and his Mighty Operations; he that sees that Person
where the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, has seen God himself, that is,
has seen that express visible Image of his Person, set forth for us to converse
with him by, and through which the Godhead acts and shows it self by its
omnipotent effects, according to that of St. John, No man has seen God at any
time, the only begotten son in the bosom of the father he declares him; that
is, the Humane Nature of Christ united to the Deity, is that Image whereby God
is pleased to reveal and manifest himself to us, and all that is acted in, by,
and through that Image, is the Actings of God.

Secondly, The Apostle says he is the firstborn of every creature, by which the
Apostle no way refers to the order of time in which things were made, but his
meaning is, that his Humane Nature in that conjunction with the Divine, has the
preference to all Humane Beings, God has given him the right of Primogeniture,
and the Dominion appurtenant to the Firstborn, and made him Heir of all
things, as he is said in the 89th Psalm to make David his firstborn, higher
than all the kings of the earth, not by any priority of Time, nor by virtue of
that Dominion he had in Palestine, but as he was a Type and Representation of
Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, God has made the Man Christ
Jesus Lord of the whole Creation, and given him the precedence of all things in
Heaven and Earth; St. Peter tells us, he is gone into heaven, angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject unto him: and this as being his
Firstborn from all Eternity in purpose, and as our Savior styles himself, the
Beginning of the creation of God, he decreeing from everlasting, that all that
should be created, should be created by him, and not only so, but for him, and
be entirely his property, as he was the blessed Mediator God and Man in one
person: In a word, he is the Firstborn amongst the Elect, they are all chosen
in him, the eldest Brother in the Family of God, whereunto is annexed the
Dominion and Power over the whole Creation, whence he is called the Firstborn
of every Creature.

What is more briefly expressed by St. John, that all was created by him that
was created, and what is in few words said in this Epistle, that by him God
made the Worlds, is here enlarged by the Apostle into particulars, showing that
all Creatures both in Heaven and Earth, whether they be thrones, or dominions,
or principalities, or powers, they were all made by him, the Apostle instanceth
in the noblest and highest sort of Creatures as comprehensive of all the rest,
even all the Supreme Rulers and Governors amongst Angels and Men, all were
created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things
consist, as their Maker he must needs precede them, and by whom they were
originally created, by him they must needs live, move, and have their being.

And as he is the Sourse of all Natural Creation, so he is the Spring of the
New Creature, and of all Spiritual Life, being called in the 18th Verse, the
head of his body, the church, the firstborn from the dead: he that first rose
himself as victorious over the Grave, and by whose influence, as an effect of
that Victory, all others shall rise, that in both the Creations, both Natural
and Spiritual, in the whole concerns of this World and the next, he might have
the pre-eminence, for it pleased the father, that in him should all fullness
dwell, that that blessed Person, our Savior and Mediator, should be as full of
perfection and as glorious as all the glory of Heaven and Earth created and
uncreated could possibly make him.

The most material difficulty that seems to result from these Illuminations,
the Holy Ghost has been pleased to give us in Scripture touching these matters,
is this, If the Divinity and the Humanity in that conjunction, constitute but
one entire person, how can so much be properly and distinctly ascribed to
Christ as Man, all things must needs belong to him as God; but the Holy Ghost
makes them appurtenant to him as Man: the Reasons of which seem most probably
to be these,

First, To Honor and Recommend to the World, that Humane Nature Christ debased
himself to assume, that because he in that Nature performed the Work of the
Mediator, and all the suffering part lay upon that; therefore God has highly
exalted it above all created things.

Secondly, Because all the additional Glory that accrued unto Christ by virtue
of his performance of the Law of his Mediatorship, must needs fall upon his
Humanity, for there could be no addition made, nor nothing accrue cumulative to
his Divinity, nothing could be added to him as God, and therefore it is
attributed to him as Man.

Thirdly, The Constitution of Christ as he appeared visibly to the World, and
wherein he acted all, was Man, the Prophesies and Promises that preceded him
pointed to him as Man, the Humanity was the Temple of the Deity, in the
Humanity he suffered, died, and rose again, and performed all his Mediatory
Work, 'twas all promised and designed to be performed by a Man, visibly, and
Humane more, though acted by the second Person in the Deity; and therefore all
the Glory is attributed in Scripture to his Humane part, without which the Work
of Redemption could not have been effected; so we have it in the 5th of John,
all Authority is there said by Christ himself to be given to him, Because he is
the son of man; which Expression I take to relate to his Office, as Mediator,
which he could not have performed had he not been Man; and so the sense of it
is this, that because Christ is the true Seed of the Woman, that real Son of
Man prophesied of by the Prophet Daniel, by whom the World is to be redeemed
and saved; therefore all the Supremacy and Authority appurtenant to that
Office, by God's ordination, belongs to him.

From what has been discoursed upon this Argument, that the Lord Jesus Christ
is he by whom all things were originally created, we may arrive at a twofold
conclusion, and safely establish these two most important Truths.

First, That the Foundation of all God's Designs and his Eternal Councels and
Purposes, touching Angels and Men, and the whole that was made by him, was laid
in his creation of all by the second Person in the Trinity.

And, Secondly, That all the Works of the first Creation, were so framed and
made, that they might lie in a direct subserviency to the new Creation, and the
manifestation of God's infinite Grace in redeeming and saving the World by the
second Person becoming Man and incarnate.

I shall apply my self chiefly to the former of these: Our discovery of this
Matter is a part post, no Man was conversant with God's Councels from
everlasting, all Men are eternally silenced with God's Question and Demand to
Job, he may say to all, as he said to him, Where were ye when I laid the
foundations of the earth? where were the Councels of your Hearts? where were
your Thoughts and Contrivances then? ye were so far from instructing or
assisting the Almighty, that ye were not in being, nor knew any thing what he
was about to do; what we know therefore, is what God is pleased since to reveal
to us, and from the providential future effects which our eyes behold, from
both which we are plentifully instructed herein; Moses indeed in his Writings
is silent about this matter, the full Relation of it was reserved for the Days
of the Gospel, when it came to be known how, and by whom, the World was to be
redeemed, then we are more particularly told how, and by whom it was made, the
blessed Person of our Lord Jesus Christ is represented to us, as the Alpha and
Omega of all, the Beginning and the Ending of the Creation of God, in whom
there is a recapitulation of the whole, God designing after things were
scattered, disordered and lost by sin, (...), to bring all, Jews and Gentiles,
Angels and Men, the whole Creation into one Head, and under one Rule in him, as
the Apostle expresses it in the first of the Ephesians, that he might gather
together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
one arth, even in him: and so as God was pleased to make all by him, he
recovers all back again through him, and under him.

In discoursing this deep and mysterious Point, what ever advance is made
toward the right understanding of it, be it never so small, the design ought
to be in every step that is taken, to do it with perspicuity and evidence, that
so it may not be rendered a Notion obscure and useless, but a Truth wherein the
comfort, satisfaction, and interest of every Christian may appear much
concerned.

And in order to this, I will take a distinct and threefold Consideration of
all the Works of God's Hands: 1st, Of the Angels; 2ly, Of Mankind; 3ly, Of all
the rest of the Creatures.

Two things are eminently and principally to be considered about the Creation
of the Angels; 1st, That they were so made, that some of them might apostatize
and fall, and that others of them should keep their first and original station:
2ly, That all of them should be under the Lordship and Dominion of Christ, as
the great Recoverer of Mankind, and the Mediator and Head of the Church, Moses
in his History of the Creation gives us no account of the Angels, nor does the
New Testament inform us any thing of the manner of their Creation; so that when
they were made, in what part of the six days, or how, whether of preexisting
Matter, or as the Soul of Man and other parts of the Creation, without any such
preexisting Matter, and whether when made, they had all an equal vision and
fruition of God [because it seems difficult to conceive how any created Being
could turn aside from that Vision] or whether they sinned in God's presence and
in foro Coeli, because their Judgment is so heavy and irreversible, are things
unrevealed, by the Scriptures passed over in silence, nor can they by
searching, or any humane endeavor be found out.

The Angels that fell being of the noblest nature and complexion, nearest unto
God of any that he made, and of greatest power and influence, their fall was it
that first introduced Sin and Apostasy amongst Men, and occasioned all the
Rebellion of this lower World against God; and upon that account we are told by
St. John, for this cause was the Son of God manifested, that he might destory
the works of the devil: as comprehensive of all the Apostasy both of Angels
and Men; and therefore it is, that they first fell of all other Creatures under
the Lordship and Dominion of Christ as Mediator, by virtue of that declaratory
Promise, [from which the mediatory Dominion of Christ bears actual date] the
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. Hence it came to pass that
the apostate Angels, who by the Temptations they laid before our first Parents
and so early assaulted them withal, appeared to be of an aspiring Temper, and
not contented with that present station, which by their first and original make
they were placed in, but attempted something farther, beyond those bounds God
by the Law of their Creation had confined them to, [which could be nothing else
but to deifie themselves, for God had already made them above every thing but
himself] they fell from that glory they had received from the second Person in
the Trinity [by whom they were made] as God, into an absolute subjection to
him, [as his Enemies and Vassals] as he was Man, and by God's most just, wise,
and holy Judgment, saw themselves subjected to that very Nature, they so
maliciously [with respect both to God and Man] sought the ruin of; and the
same Nature wonderfully assumed to the Divine, by the second Person, and in
that glorious and splendid Conjunction, the World recovered, and a Dominion
established over all the Rebellions, Apostasies, and Declensions, both of
Angels and Men.

The Devil having been thus a Liar and a Rebel from the beginning, and using
all the fraudulent endeavors possible, to have all the Creation [to their
final and utmost Ruine] his Associates therein, and God having been pleased in
his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, to encounter all his Designs and Endeavors
by the second Person incarnate, whom he constitutes a Prince and a Savior, and
sets him as his King upon his Holy Hill, and declares his Decree from
everlasting, to establish his Kingdom with all Authority and Power; the World
has been ever since under a twofold Dominion, that of Satan, and that of
Christ; and these two Kingdoms, that of the Fallen Angels, and that of the
Mediator, have stood in direct opposition, and in all Ages contested each
other, the Contest grew high very early in the World, and continued so till the
Flood; the four great Monarchies since have all ofthem been Satan's Allies and
Instruments, and Factors for his Interest, not only by their multiplied
Idolatries, thereby throwing [as much as in them lay] the true God out of the
World, but by their proud and insolent defiance of him, and placing themselves
in his room upon all occasions: To what inconceivable Insolence and Pride were
those first Babylonian Monarchs arrived at? we need no other account of it, but
to read what the Prophet Esaw tells them, Thou have said in thine heart, I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit
also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north, I will
ascend above the heighths of the clouds, I will be like the Most High. The
Persian Monarchy, that next succeeded, much affected to retain and improve the
Grandeur and Height of their Predecessors, and if it were possible to out do
them; one Instance they gave of that, in which they greatly prided and valued
themselves, which was to make their Laws unalterable; the Laws of the Medes and
Persians were not to be changed, as if they had arrived at once to all the
Wisdom and Foresight of God himself. The folly of this insolent Project, of
this vain Exaltation of Humane Wisdom and Power beyond its due bounds, and
setting themselves in the supreme Legiflator's place, the Scripture has
sufficiently recorded to its eternal shame and confusion, in one Instance we
have of it in the Book of Esthers: Ahasuerus, upon the Petition of Haman, made
an Edict, that all the Jews in his Territories should be upon a prefixed day
slain and destroyed; after, upon the Petition of Mordecai and Esther, he
altered his purpose, and had a mind to have all the Jews saved; the first Law
could not be altered nor reversed by their fundamental Constitution, and
therefore Abasuerus had no other way, but he makes another Law after the same
form and manner that he made the former, wherein it is thus decreed, The king
granted the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and to
stand for their lives, to destroy, to slay and cause to perish all the power of
the people and province that should assault them, both little ones and women,
and take the spoil of them for a prey. By which he downright settles a Civil
War by two unalterable Laws in the Bowels of his Dominions, and in all his
Territories commands his Subjects to massacre and destroy each other, nay, even
in his own Palace, for upon this second Edict the Jews slew 500 Men in Shusan
the King's Palace. The last Monarchy of Rome had so far advanced Idolatry and
carried on Satan's concerns, that they ransacked the whole Creation for
Deities, and arrived to Thirty thousand Gods, and the Emperors came to such a
degree of impudent Pride and Impiety, as downright to deifie themselves; the
Kingdoms and Powers of the World have lain from the beginning in his hands, and
therefore it is said upon the full recovery of the World, The kingdoms of the
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ: the Kingdom of the
Mediator has consisted but of a few, it pleasing God in his infinite Wisdom to
declare the glory of that rather in quality than quantity.

This Kingdom of the fallen Angels is sometimes called in Scripture, the
Kingdom of Darkness, and sometimes the Kingdom of Satan, and he is himself
sometimes called the Prince of this World, and the Prince of the Power of the
Air, that old Serpent the Devil and Satan which deceives the World; the
original of it was Apostasy and Rebellion against the Supreme Sovereign, and
an endeavor to set up a Counter-Soveraignty in the creature against him, and
it is carried on and will be till the end of his Reign, with all possible
counterworking to the Kingdom of the Mediator, and all the gracious and
glorious Designs and Purposes of God therein.

The chief of the fallen Angels is reckoned the Prince of this Kingdom, and all
the fallen Angels and fallen Men (unrecovered) are embodied in it as his
Subjects; it is carried on and supported by these two things, First, A malignant
Opposition to God, for his manage of the whole Affairs of the Creation by the
second Person incarnate: And, Secondly, By an insatiable appetite to throw off
all Bonds and Ties of Obedience to their Supreme Sovereign and Maker, and enjoy
the uninterrupted possession of a lawless Life, suitable to their degenerate and
apostate Inclinations. The woeful state they arrive at by this [to let us know
no Man can oppose God and prosper] is, First, Ever to labor and endeavor with
a certainty of disappointment, for the fallen Angels know very well their
purposes and designs shall never be accomplished. And, Secondly, To lie under a
constant sense of ill doing, and under guilt and terror in what ever they act:
And, Thirdly, To stand bound over to the dreadful Justice of God, and be
sentenced at the Judgment Seat by that Man whom he has appointed, to the
endless and utmost Misery and Horror, of all which the fallen Angels and many
of their adherents are sufficiently informed.

From the beginning God has not been pleased to set himself at any time against
this Kingdom of his confederate Enemies and Rebbels, by the Thunder of his
Power, and as it were most easy for him to do, in a moment to grind them to
Powder, but in the profound depths of his Wisdom, [who is wonderful in council
and excellent in working] suffers the continuance of it for great and holy ends
and purposes, and opposes it [and will at last utterly ruin it] by a still
small voice, in those Methods by which the Mediator's Kingdom is to be erected,
that is, the Laws of his Grace, and the mighty Influences of his Spirit; and
hence it is, that in every Generation we find a continued contest and
opposition between the renewed and recovered part of the World, and all
apostate Angels and Men, God contesting by his Grace and Spirit in the Hearts
of his Servants, all the violent Assaults that the Powers of Darkness, the
whole Race of degenerate Angels or Men could bring upon them; and upon that
account, has had some faithful Servants in all Ages, upon whose Fidelity and
Ability in this way of Combat, he has staked down his Interest, and with whom
he has trusted his Glory, nor can he by this Method ever fail of the Glory due
to him, or by such an Adventure ever come short of it, for it is trusting his
Glory with his Grace, and the one stands upon as sure a foundation as the
other, and both in their nature immovable. Instances of this kind the
Scriptures abound withal, but that which in a particular case seems the most
eminent of them all, and most remarkable, is the Case of Job and the Trial he
went through.

Whoever will nicely consider his Case, shall find it a Story of wonderful
distinction and circumstance, the whole Business of Religion being by consent
put upon trial in him: Job was declared by God himself, [and Satan denied it
not] to be the best Man then living, one that had not his like in all the
Earth; but Satan objects unto God against him, and affirms, that though he was
so eminent, and had the priority of all the Religious Party then extant, yet
all his Religion was but Hypocrisy, built upon a secular bottom, and that if
God brought him once to trial, it would appear so to be, and himself manifested
thereby to be a most notorious Hypocrite and Dissembler: Had this in reality
proved true, Satan had carried his point, for it had been an undeniable
evidence, that God had had no faithful Servants, nor had there been any such
thing as true and sincere Piety and Religion in the World; for if the very best
of all Men proved upon trial but a rotten falsehearted Hypocrite, the
consequence had been very plain, that all the rest of the same profession must
needs have been much more so: The trial proceeds with all the possible
advantage Satan could wish to obtain his end, and he is permitted to go to the
utmost extent of all the Artifices he had, in order to stir up and provoke in
Job, all the exorbitant Passions, unruly Ferments, and irreligious profane
Workings that belong to Humane Nature, and usually appear upon such occasions,
in order to bring him to calumniate Providence, and even reproach God himself:

1st, By Afflicting his Body; 2ly, By Ruining his Estate; And, 3ly, By laying
him, as to his present state and condition, under the sharpest Judgments and
severest Censures of his best and most devout Friends; yet for all this, and
all that Satan could do by himself or his Agents, yet the Grace of Sincerity
[the main thing Satan struck at] carried him triumphantly through all, to the
utter confusion of Satan and all his malicious Charges against him; such a
Sincerity he appeared to have as is the Badge of God's Israel, and that Mark
whereby the Lord knows those that are his: Job indeed discovered much Weakness,
and manifold Infirmities, [which belong to the best Servants God has, so
gracious is he in his acceptance of them] but that was in no sort the Point
under question, whether Job were a Man of Infirmities or no, but the Matter put
upon trial was, whether Job was an Hypocrite or no, and in the main of his
state and condition one under allegiance to Satan, or a true and faithful
Subject and Servant to God, and that was by the carriage of the whole business
clearly determined against Satan, by Job's perfect and entire Submission unto
God, [so far was he from Cursing him to his Face] and total Resignation of
himself to him in a way of trust and affiance, though he should proceed to kill
him, and justifying of himself to the utmost in his Sincerity, and keeping his
Integrity throughout his whole Exercise and Trial clear and untainted to the
very last, and rancountering Satan's Accusation with that holy submission in
the very height of his Agony, when the News of all his Misfortunes at once
came upon him, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and blessed be the Name of
the Lord; than which Expression nothing could more positively and expressly
confute all the Charges and Accusations Satan brought against him, for he
declared quite contrary to Satan's suggestions, so far was he from Cursing God
to his Face, and therefore the Holy Ghost immediately records the Victory on
Job's side in the next Verse, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly.

But the greatest, most general, and most powerful Contest, that ever happened
between the Strength and Force of these Kingdoms, appears to be the last of
all, wherein Satan with all the Powers that belong to his Kingdom, will
discover himself in his strongest and utmost Efforts, and wherein he will at
last perish, this is by a spiritual Babylon reared up by him in the days of the
Gospel, and a System of Religion composed by him, to encounter the Mediator
withal in his own way; this was the grand Infernal Project, when the Gospel
began to prevail against all opposition, and Temporal Power would serve the
Devil's turn no longer; and herein he proves so successful, as to delude and
intoxicate the Nations of the Earth, and make them drunk with his Compositions,
and to erect a spiritual and mighty Monarchy, now of great and long
continuance, founded upon wonderful Artifice and Strength; this was the great
Secret revealed of old, to that greatly beloved of God, the Prophet Daniel,
that out of the fourth and last Temporal Monarchy of Rome, should arise another
Monarchy, upon the dissolution of that, diverse from all the rest, that should
mightily prevail, speak great words against the Most High, wear out the saints,
change times and laws, and continue his power until a time and times and the
dividing of time: [which is after punctually explained in Scripture to be 1260
Years, the exact time of this Monarchy's continuance] and should by a mighty
Power in Spirituals, resemble the great Power the Roman Monarchs had in
Temporals, have the same situation, and much the same subjects in Spirituals,
that the other had in Temporals: This is the Popish Fabric, the erecting of
which is the Masterpiece of Satan, and the greatest Effect of the Wisdom and
Process of the fallen Angels since they left their first state, who have with
their utmost vigor employed themselves herein; and the affirmation of this
cannot seem strange, since we are directly told by the Holy Ghost, that the
coming of the man of sin is after the working of Satan.

The case was plainly this: The Messiah so often promised from the beginning,
in the fullness of time (that is, in the exact time wherein all the Predictions
of his coming did concenter) comes, and assumes Humane Nature, compleats the
work of Man's Redemption, and by one Offering for ever perfects them that are
sanctified, proclaims the Gospel, publishes a new Law of Grace, and issues out
a general Proclamation for all the World both Jews and Gentiles without
exception to come in, and upon the terms of this new recovering Law to be saved.

Satan very sensibly feeling this fatal Blow, and finding his Kingdom
fundamentally struck at, and that unless foam new Infernal Councels were taken
up, his interest could not longer be supported, turns every stone to invert and
invalidate this gracious Design of God, and this glorious Kingdom of the
Mediator now shining forth in its native luster and splendour. To deny the Fact,
would have made him ridiculous, and to endeavor to stop the Success of the
Gospel if it went on, he well knew was impossible; and therefore resolves upon
this Method as his last and only Remedy, to Plow with Christ's Heifer, to Erect
a Religion seemingly founded upon the Gospel, and extremely like it, that yet
should be destructive to all the ends of it, and by this to supersede the
Gospel it self, and have this false and spurious counterpart taken in the room
of it, this is the Papacy, a false dead Image of the Christian Religion,
animated by the spirit of Satan, and a thing in its nature utterly ruinous and
destructive to it.

This Structure in Scripture is called Babylon, with reference to the first
Babel, being like that set up in direct opposition to God, and to confront his
Authority: As God is pleased that Jerusalem, where his Worship and Ordinances
were so solemnly settled, by his own appointment, shall keep up its Name and
denominate the true Church throughout all Generations to the very end of the
World, so he is pleased to stigmatize the Name of Babylon, and by it eminently
and emphatically to denominate the very worst of his Enemies until Christ's
second coming and the period of all; the Names that are given to this
Ecclesiastical Monarchy, [for there be several others though Babylon be the
chief] the Holy Ghost instructs us that they are spiritually to be understood,
and relate to its spiritual and ecclesiastical Abominations; when it is called
Egypt and Sodom, it is to signify the Filth of it, and the cruel Bondage the
Saints undergo there; when it is called and particularly denominated Babylon,
it is to signify its Grandeur, Tyranny, and Idolatry, all which were eminent in
that Monarchy.

Although this Spiritual Monarchy arise out of the ashes of the fourth and last
Temporal Monarchy of Rome, yet St. John writing during the continuance of that
Monarchy, the Holy Ghost chooses to represent it by that first Monarchy of
Babylon, and there: seems to be a peculiar resemblance between this
Ecclesiastical Monarchy and that, and that in several things:

1st, In the continuance and time of its duration 1260 Years, being near about
the time that the Babylonian Monarchy lasted.

2dly, In respect that all the holy and sanctified Utensils of the Temple were
captived in Babylon, and there profaned as all the Sacred Institutions of the
Gospel are captived and profaned in this Mystical Babylon, how shamefully have
the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and the other Holy
Institutions and Ordinances of the New Testament been profaned and abused
under the Papal Reign?

3dly, This Ecclesiastical Mornarchy is set forth and described by that of the
Babylonian, after a very peculiar manner, in respect of the sore Persecutions
the Church meets with under both, the Holy Ghost makes the one typical and
representative of the other.

4thly, The Babylonian Monarchy was not ruined by a common Providence, but by
peculiar and extraordinary Judgments; they are three times in one Chapter
called the Vengeance of his Temple. And so shall this Papal Babylonian State be
ruined after a peculiar manner, by the brightness of Christ's coming, and by
the glory of his Power.

5thly, And that which I think the principal Reason why the Holy Ghost brands
this Ecclesiastical Monarchy with the Name of Babylon, though it arose out of
the Ruins of the Roman Monarchy, and have its situation at Rome, is this, to
keep up and maintain the Harmony and due decorum of the Visions set forth in
the Revelation, and the Representations and Expressions thereof: Now it is
plain, that in the Revelation, the true Church is represented under the Gospel
by Jewish Similitudes and Expressions, and the Enemies of it are represented in
the Names of those great Enemies the Jews had to their Church and State. The
three most remarkable Calamities that befell the Jews, was first in Egypt,
secondly in Babylon, and thirdly from the Outrages of Antiochus; and upon that
account we find Egypt often mentioned in the Revelations, and the sore Bondage
and Persecutions of the Church reckoned from thence, and in regard the Jewish
Church and State, with their City and Temple, were totally ruined, and
themselves captivated by the Monarchy of Babylon, their constant and avowed
Enemy, therefore the grand Enemy of Christ and the Gospel, the Antichristian
State, is called: Babylon, and perhaps the Persecutions and Desolations of
Antiochus are represented by God and Magog, when Satan shall be let loose.

This Ecclesiastical Structure is also in Scripture styled Antichristian, and
the Monarchy of it Antichrist, and that not only for the general opposition it
makes, and the tendency it has against Christ and his Interest, but for this
peculiar reason, because there is a Vice Head, and a Vice Christ, and so a
False Christ set up in the Church; Christ's Place is by this Monarchy
notoriously usurped, it being enthroned by its Head, the Man of Sin, in the
Temple of God, as God, and most impiously and impudently personating Christ in
all his mediatory Authority.

Satan and the rest of his Associates, having thus from the beginning declared
their enmity to God, and peculiarly to the Seed of the Woman, and the Interest
and Kingdom of Christ as Mediator, and pursued it in all Ages with the greatest
Rage and Malice imaginable, and having in the Antichristian Reign for 1260
Years, which began at the fall of the Roman Empire; [for the Beast and the ten
Kings, which are the shivers of that Empire, are expressly said to take their
Power in one hour] and St. Paul tells us, he that does let will let, till he be
taken out of the way; which is to tell us in other words, that till the
Temporal Monarchy of Rome fell, the Spiritual Monarchy could not be erected, I
say, having brought their Apostate Practices and Principles to the utmost
culmen and height they could arrive at, they will then grow ripe for
destruction, the Judge will appear to stand at the door, Christ will bring
these lapsed Angels and their Associates to their final doom, and destroy them
and all their contrivances by the spirit of his mouth and the brightness of his
coming, he will at last come to judgment with all his Holy Angels, and
according to that ancient Prophecy of Enoch, with all his Saints, he will come
first in his Father's glory, to manifest before all, that he and the Father are
one, and that the essential glory of God is his. 2dly, In his own glory, the
glory of his mediatory Kingdom, having by his Humiliation, Suffering, Death and
Resurrection, conquered the Grave, Death, Hell, Sin and all the Effects of it,
and acquitted a peculiar glory to himself thereby: And, 3dly, In the glory of
the Angels, who are all his Attendants, not only in the glory they received
from him in their first creation, but the glory they have acquired through him
in keeping their first state, and the glory of all their faithful service and
conformity to him and his Kingdom to the end: and this honor will all the
Saints then have, not only to appear with him in glory, but to sit in judgment
with him, as his mystical body, and as part of the reward of their works that
follow them, and join in the Sentence pronounced by him.

The first Sentence he pronounces will probably be upon these apostate
Spirits, who were the first created Rebels, and them he will doom to eternal
darkness and misery; and so these Angels that could not content themselves with
the glory they had in their first creation from the second Person as God, come
to be fatally sentenced by him for their aspiring Impieties as he is Man; as
they were made by him, so were they made for him, to come under his mediatory
Authority, and be finally disposed by him, and with this tormenting
aggravation, that he is accompanied and glorified therein by the blessed
Angels, whose company they forsook, and in opposition to whom they have all
along carried on a distinct interest, and by all the Saints, the whole body of
the Church, which they have so malign'd and persecuted since the World began.

So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord; then will it be said, the Mystery of
God is finished, the Spirits Influences completed, the Mediator's Kingdom
perfected and delivered up, the Wicked are gone to their own place, the Saints
are all come safe home to their Father's House, and rest for ever: God is all
in all: Amen, Hallelujah.

Touching the other part of the Angels, those that kept their first state, of
whom the Scripture makes such honorable mention, as sometimes to call them
Morning stars, sometimes Sons of God, Angels of Light, Chariots of God, his
Hoasts, his Ministers, the Elect Angels; who with respect to their Nature are
called Spirits; with respect to their Dignity, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, and Powers; and with respect to their Office and Employment,
Angels and ministering Spirits; [for Angel is a word relates to their Employment
and not to their Nature,] and we find Men sometimes in Scripture by virtue of
their Offices and Employments called Angels. In the order of the Jewish
Synagogues, there was one that chiefly prayed for the People and blessed them,
and him they called the Angel of the Synagogue; and that I believe St. John
relates to when he writes to the Angels of the seven Churches; how these, I
say, were designed in a particular manner to all their future use, service and
happiness in their creation at the first by the second Person in the Trinity,
will very manifestly appear, if we consider, first, the dependence they have
upon him, and, secondly, their subjection and serviceableness unto him. First,
Their dependence upon him: The Scripture informs us, that after the disorder
and scattered, confused, miserable state of things, that Sin had introduced and
occasioned, God was pleased to recapitulate and gather all together into one
head, according to St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.10. That he might gather together in one
all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are one arth even in
him: and erect an unalterable Kingdom wherein his Soul should rest, under the
rule of the second person incarnate, with a distribution of several effects of
his Government suitable to Divine Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, as the state
of the World then stood; [for it was of old eminently foretold of him, that the
Scepter of his Kingdom should be a right Scepter] wicked Angels, and Men
obstinately and finally impenitent and wicked, were to remain enchain'd by his
power, until he pronounced their last Sentence; the elect Angels were to come
under his Headship and Rule, [he being their Head though he be not their
Redeemer, and their Security though not their Satisfaction] and be secured
thereby against all created danger of relapsing, and embodied with all the
saved amongst Men, as Subjects of one entire Kingdom under the same Monarch and
Sovereign.

And thus it pleased God, that neither the happiness of Angels nor Men should
be fixed or perfected by his creating Power, exerted by the second Person at
the first, but by his restoring, recovering, establishing Power, exerted in the
same person becoming Man, and fulfilling all the Laws of that mediatory Kingdom
God designed [for the praise of his Grace and Glory] to erect in and by him.

So that we see the eternal design of creating these Angels, by the second
person was, that first they might come under his Headship, and be secured in
all their created glory by him in that future state of Mediatorship he was
designed unto: and secondly, that they might be ministerial and serviceable to
all the ends of his Kingdom and Government, wherein as the Apostle tells us, 1
Coloss. v. 20. By the blood of his cross all things in Heaven and Earth are
reconciled to God, and also things in Heaven, and things on Earth one to
another, or else 'twere not to be thought that the Angels, who remain spotless
and untainted of sin, should ever enter into any converse with such a defiled
apostate creature as Man, much less to undertake a Ministry and Service on his
behalf, whereas now, by virtue of that Reconciliation, by the Blood of his
Cross, their great delight is in the Ministry of Reconciliation, and to be
ministering Spirits on their behalf who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

Two wonderful things by Christ's assumption of the Humane Nature, and by the
Blood of his Cross are brought to pass: 1st, That the Angels, the more noble
Creatures, and who never fell under the least stain of any guilt, should become
Servants to poor miserable apostate Man. 2dly, That the Establishment and
Security of all the created angelical Glory, should depend upon that Assumption
and Christ so circumstanced, for he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but
in the Nature of a much more inferior Creature, became their Security, their
Sovereign and Head, and by this glorious contrivance of the blessed God, Man
upon Earth is set upon his legs and recovered, the Tabernacle of Adam that was
fallen is raised up again, and the Angels that kept their first state are
secured in ever so doing, it having pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell, and that every part of the Creation, should some way or other
owe their happiness to him, and that upon the truest reason, to him every Knee
should bow, both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, even to him.

Secondly, If we take a distinct consideration of Man, the noblest part of this
lower World, and the Lord of it, we shall soon discover, that all the future
designs of God, relating to him, were laid in his creation of him at the first,
by the second Person in the Trinity, and this will appear several ways:

First, Man we know was originally made in such a state as lasted but a while,
Man created in Honor abode not, that innate freedom of choice he was made
withal with reference to good or evil, [which was the bottom Adam first stood
upon] God well knew and foresaw, would not secure him long, but would soon
decline, and the tendency of Man's free choice would be ever in partem
deteriorem; yet so it pleased God to make him, and not in the first state to
secure him, because his designs lay quite otherways; [and who shall council
infinite Wisdom?] the Scenes of this World, as now it is, were all before him,
he intended Man for a second Creation, from whence should arise the Glory he
designed to himself by him and from him, and Man's Happiness and Rest for ever,
and both these Creations were to be performed by the second Person in the
Trinity; and therefore so soon as Man fell, and discovered the impotency of
that first state, God declares his recovery in the second Person, and puts
forth his hand and lifts him up to a better, upon which never any blot nor
stain should come, in which both the Soul of God and Man should rest for ever,
and this by that gracious, yet withal then mysterious Promise, That the seed of
the woman should bruise the serpents head; by which Promise, the foundation of
all Men's recovery and future happiness is laid in the second Person, designed
for the Assumption of the Humane Nature; so that it evidently appears, that
when God made Man by the second Person in a state that was not to endure, his
design was to recover and remake him by the same blessed Person in that nature
he had so made; God at the first made Man by the second Person in the Image of
God, and that being lost, brings forth the second Person in the Image of Man,
and therein Man is recovered and saved, for he was made in the likeness of Men,
and found in fashion of a Man, so that the union of the two Natures in the
second Person, is the great Cornerstone upon which the welfare and happiness of
all created Beings, and most eminently and particularly of Man's, is built up
and established.

Secondly, This will appear from the mighty and stupendous Undertakings of the
second Person incarnate on the behalf of Mankind, He it is that by his own Arm
brings Salvation, and singly undergoes the Burden and Weight of all Humane
Miseries and Misfortunes, the care of all the concerns that belong to Mankind
are laid upon him, and the recovery of the fallen Posterity of apostate Adam is
solely left to his Undertaking, Conduct and Manage, ever since that first
Promise concerning him, set forth by the Seed of the Woman, Mankind has been
his Care, and the Church his peculiar Province; the Faith of all the Holy Men
in the first times was built upon his promised and intended coming: It was
prophesied of him in the 72 Psalm, Prayer also shall be made for him
continually: that is, for his coming and incarnation before he did come, and
for the success of his Kingdom, and his second coming after he was come: It is
he that has been with the Church in all Ages, and appeared so often to the
Fathers in the Patriarchal times in humane shape, to confirm their Faith, and
assure his future Incarnation, and when the fullness of time for his being born
of a Woman and born under the Law [that is, standing in Man's steed and obliged
to the mediatory righteousness God required from him] came, the whole course of
his Life, his Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, and his Intercession above,
are all on the Churches account, to make a full and ample provision for all the
Declensions and Apostasies of Humane Nature, and secure Man's Eternal Happiness
with himself for ever; so that it is evident, that God's making the World at
first by the second Person, was in order to the discovery of his manifold
Wisdom and infinite Grace, in redeeming and recovering it by the same blessed
Person.

Thirdly, This will appear from hence, because that the whole Dominion and
Sovereignty over Mankind, the entire disposal of Man, is committed unto him,
how correspondent is it to all God's revealed purposes, touching his own Glory,
and Man's Happiness, that a mediatory Dominion should be vested in the second
Person, that the creating and redeeming Right over Man should all concenter in
him; sometimes we are in Scripture told of his creating Right: so in the first
of St. John's Gospel, He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and
the world knew him not: sometimes we are told of his Right by Redemption, The
Father [so he himself tells us] judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son: and the reason given for it is, because he is the Son of Man, the
true Seed of the Woman, and the only Mediator between God and Man, and upon
that account it is said he will judge the World by that man whom he has
appointed; the ordering, governing, and final disposal of Man, belongs alone to
this blessed Person, he that made us and knew our original frame, he alone
could best tell how to recover and remake us, and from everlasting 'twas God's
pleasure it should be so: In his Redemption all is taken care for, all is
recovered and fetched back, not a Hoof of what was made and lost is left
behind, there is a Plaster provided for every Sore, and a Remedy for every
Malady, an infinite Treasury of Grace provided and suited to all depraved humane
Faculties, to unite Man again to his Maker and Redeemer, with cords of love and
bands of a man, to influence the whole Soul of Man, to convince his
Understanding, and govern him in a way of true Wisdom and Knowledge, to seize
his Affections with the most heart-affecting Motives and most glorious Objects,
and to fix the unruly Will in a right Path, out of which it should never again
wander: All the Workings since Adam's fall of the Souls of Men toward God, and
the Influences of God and his Spirit upon them, they are all transacted,
managed, and will be finally judged of by the second Person; this is the
Kingdom of God, and the great Realm of Christ within Men, not a Divine Whisper
into any Man's Breast by the Holy Ghost, but it is from the Mediator, and a
consequent of his Ordination and Government: the great Effect of Christ's
ascending Conqueror into Heaven, was the sending down the Holy Ghost, and till
he did so the Holy Ghost could not in that glorious eminent manner appear as
afterward he did, for he came from Heaven with the Ratification of that Peace
and Reconciliation that Christ had purchased, this we are positively told in
the 7th of St. John's Gospel, The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Christ
was not yet glorified. It appears to be an eternal determination by the blessed
Trinity, that till the mediatory Work was all completed, and Christ was
ascended and had made his triumphant appearance in Heaven as a Conqueror, the
Holy Ghost should not be sent down; and therefore our Savior tells his
Disciples plainly, Unless I go away the comforter cannot come, and it is
expedient for you, upon that account, that I do go away, for if I go I will
send him unto you: this is the grand effect of Christ's ascension, to procure
the descent of the Holy Ghost, that great Engine of Salvation, the Sword of the
Lord in Christ's hand, the mighty Operator by which the Mediator erects his
Kingdom, and without whose Influences upon the Souls of Men, to change and
remark them, no Laws of Grace, no Terms of Salvation, though never so easy,
would ever have proved effectual for Man's Recovery and Happiness; this is the
great effect of what Christ has purchased for the World, for Men to receive an
ability from Heaven to believe and obey what God requires of us; had not this
been, the Conditions of the Gospel would have been as little performed as those
of the Law: this sending down the Holy Ghost from Heaven, St. Peter tells us,
the Angels desire to look into, it is an Allusion unto the Cher^bims, that were
made with their Faces looking upon the Mercyseat, to let us know, that the
Angels above diligently behold the glorious effects of God's Grace to this
lower World; and two sights they have had by their attentiveness thereon, which
were both stupendous and wonderful; First, The second Person leaving Heaven,
descending upon Earth, becoming Man, and making his abode for a time here; And,
secondly, Upon his return, so soon as the second Person ascended, the Holy
Ghost coming down to manage all the concerns Christ left behind him here below.

And as all the Operations of the Holy Ghost upon the Spirits of Men, are under
the Mediator's Conduct, so the Behavior of all Men is noted in his Book, and
laid up in his Records, in order to a future Judgment: which Judgment is of
everlasting duration, for after he has given up the Kingdom to the Father, both
the Righteous and the Wicked will for ever remain in the same posture and
condition his Judgment left them, the Wicked will be for ever miserable, by
virtue of his Sentence, and the Righteous enjoy their everlasting portion of
happiness, from his adjudging them thereunto; so that he is to all Men, their
Alpha and Omega, in Creation, in Redemption, in Superiority and Government, and
in that final, irreversible and eternal Judgment he will at last pass upon them.

Fourthly, This important Truth is evident from hence, The supreme End of all
God's Works is his Glory: now it is plain, that the glory God designed to
himself, by the making and forming of Man, it is all given up and handed unto
him, in, by, and through the Son; upon that account, he that honors the Son
honors the Father, the creating Work of our Lord Jesus, his redeeming Work,
his mediatory Government, all his Workings and Operations by the Holy Ghost
upon the Hearts and Spirits of Men, and his final Judgment at last, they are
but to collect and bring in a Revenue of Glory for the Father, and when the
Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, all the Glory of it will for ever center
in him.

This will farther appear the larger View we take of the Particulars:

First, In the Creation of Man by the second Person, how greatly does the glory
of God's Power manifest it self, in bringing into being such a creature as Man
first was, so stupendiously constituted, and ever after so fearfully and
wonderfully propagated, compounded part of Heaven and part of Earth, between an
Angel above, and a Beast that perishes below, a spark of Divinity and
Eternity, put into a lump of mouldering Clay, intended to be separated after a
dreadful manner, and as wonderfully to meet again and be reunited; such is the
Soul breathed into the Body, a Creature made able still to mount upwards, be
guided by his nobler part, and cleave to his Maker as his chief good, and also
under possibility of being influenced by his meaner and lower part, and still
sinking down into vanity, sensuality and folly; a Creature so made, as to be of
everlasting duration, and a future Subject of mighty Rewards and Punishments;
and his Person, by reason of the wonderful and unbounded workings of his Soul,
a Stage of stupendous Transactions, wherein the whole Trinity are most
eminently manifested, all the Angels both above and below most highly
concerned, and in which the welfare of all the rest of the Creatures and of
this lower part of the World is much bound up; this Creature although he may
derive himself from the eternal pleasure of all the Persons in the Godhead, yet
his Creation was the peculiar Act and Operation of the second Persons, and the
Glory of that Creation results to the Deity through him.

Secondly, The Glory of God's innate Mercy and Goodness, is exceeding
transparent from hence; no sooner had Man lost himself but the floodgates of
Divine Bounty are let open by the undertakings of the Son; nothing imaginable,
nothing possible, could so display Divine Grace, as Christ's undertaking to
leave Heaven and become Man, and do what he did for Man's sake; no Glass but
this, could have showed at once, the complete and entire Glory of that
Attribute, the Faculties of Angels and Men, though they are large and
inquisitive, comprehensive and sagacious, yet they are quite silenced and
extasiz'd by this Transaction, the Object quite over-matching the Faculty; when
God gives his Son and himself in him, what Creature can think himself into the
Heighths and Depths of that Gift, or pretend to span its Dimensions in his
Imagination? all we can utter upon this Subject is what St. Paul [in a Sacred
Extasie] says in the 8th of the Romans, What shall we say to these things? and
improve it as he does there, by that holy Interrogation, He that has given us
his Son, will he not with him also freely give us all things?

Thirdly, How transparent is the Glory of God's Justice, in punishing Sin upon
his own Son, and redeeming the World by no less a Sacrifice than the Blood of
God; this is to exalt the Glory of that Attribute to its utmost height, and
for ever to abase Man, and lay him as low as he can be: this is a stupendous
Instruction to the profane ignorant World, to let them see what Sin is, and
what the sense is God has of it, and how hard a thing it is for a rebellious
creature to be reconciled again unto God, when we consider the absolute
boundless Dominion and Sovereignty God has over us, as our Maker, and the
uncontrollable Authority that is inherent and resides in that infinite Being,
that gives being to all besides himself, and whose Laws are in their nature
perfect, and the very quintessence of all rectitude, we must needs then reflect
upon that rebellious Evil and Poison that is in Sin, no contradiction can
consist with such a Being as God is, and therefore no Man can oppose him and
prosper: whilst Man abides in a state of subjection and conformity to him, he
is happy, and nothing can make him miserable, but when he turns aside to
Rebellion and the Madness and Folly of Sin, he becomes naked, a dread and
terror, a frightful Ghost to himself, and renders himself exposed to all the
Misfortunes and Miseries his Being is capable of.

Fourthly, By the second Person is given up unto God the glory of his rectoral
and magistratical Authority over all his Creatures, and therefore in the second
Psalm God calls him, his King, being both from him, and for him; this is done
by Christ's Rule and Government, as Head of the Church, the whole Creation is
put into subjection to him, and he that is in our own nature our Redeemer and
Savior, him has God made to be Ruler and Lord of all: By his Government all
the Divine Attributes are clearly and evidently displayed, all the righteous
Methods of Government pursued, and all the true and noble Ends of it brought
about and accomplished. All the various Turnings and Windings of Humane Affairs
here below, as they are under the Mediator's regulation, are but subservient to
a discovery and manifestation of God's Wisdom, his Power, his Grace, and other
Divine Attributes, and through them all, perfect Methods are pursued, and at
last the right Ends will be attained, giving every Man according to his Works,
and settling Rewards and Punishments in their due places.

In two respects the Excellency of Christ's Government does chiefly appear:
1st, In respect of the World, as he is King of Nations; And, 2dly, In respect
of the Church, as he is King of Saints.

With respect to the World, the Glory of Christ's Government appears eminent in
these four things:

1. In his providential Endeavors in the course and motion of Humane Affairs,
for their Information, Reformation, and Salvation, bringing Men out of Satan's
Kingdom, and embodying them with his Church, overruling things in the course
of the World to tend that way, his Heart is still upon Salvation, and his
ultimate design to make Men eternally happy.

2. In respect of those spiritual invisible Influences and Convictions by which
he more nearly treats with the World about their Eternal Welfare, and all the
Long-suffering he exercises to that purpose.

3. By his mighty overruling all the violent and raging Oppositions made by
the World and the Powers thereof, against Him, his Church, and his Interest,
and doing it in such a manner, as that whatever is most maliciously intended
against them, shall be rendered useful and subservient to them.

4. By his complete Conquest over and final Judgment upon all his incorrigible
Enemies at last.

Secondly, With respect to the Church, there he is most eminently triumphant in
his Glory and Government, for he dwells in Heaven, and rules on Earth, but
reigns in Sion; the Church is his peculiar Province, where he displays the
manifold Wisdom of God in curious variety:

1. They are all redeemed with his own Blood; St. Peter tells us, We are not
redeemed with corruptible things.

2. They bear his Image; look upon the Frame and Constitution of every true
Christian, and if you ask whose Image and Superscription is this, the answer
is, it is Christ's; and therefore the same treatment he met with here below,
the very same will always attend the Church; every Christian is a Member of the
New Creation, Christ has remade him all over; herein lies the great Power and
Glory of Christ's Kingdom, in remaking and new making of the Sons of Men, and
this New Creation, it is an Abomination to the fallen Angels and all apostate
and unrecovered Men, and so will be to the end of the World.

3. The tender Heart and gracious Disposition of Christ is most transparently
beheld in the Government of his Church, of his own House and Family; it is here
you may have the report of all his unwearied Kindness, and unutterable
Forgiveness, of all his Attendance upon, and Endurance of, the froward and
perverse Spirits of Men; here you may see all the fulfilling of the good
pleasure of his Goodness, and the work of Faith with power, and all those
gentle, easy and obliging Methods he uses to gain Souls to himself and render
them happy, how many Faults he bears with and forgives in his People, how many
Temptations he shields them from, and how many sore Lapses he pities them in,
and recovers them from under, and puts forth his Hand, as he did to Peter, to
every sinking Soul: what that eminent Apostle and Servant of Christ said of
himself, is much more verified in his great Master and ours; upon him lies
continually the care of all the Churches, and of every particular Member, and
that not only in one Age, but throughout every Generation.

Laftly, The Greatness and Excellency of this Government appears herein, that
he makes all subservient unto it, and brings all his Subjects safely to their
Eternal Inheritance; all Humane Motions are so overruled, as to promote the
great Work of Salvation; as all things were designed in their first make, to be
serviceable to the manifestation of Divine Grace therein, so they are made to
be in the future Revolutions of all Ages: how glorious and wonderful an
Enclosure is the Church out of this profane apostate World? God the Father is
the Supreme Benefactor, sets the great Wheel going, For the Son does nothing
but what he sees the Father do: And in the great Volume of God's Book, this
peculiar Memorandum is made, and it is recorded of him, that he came to do the
Father's Will; I come to do thy will, O God. All that Christ does is but the
Execution of the Father's designs; the Holy Ghost is their peculiar Comforter
and Companion, the grand Operator in Christ's Kingdom, and that mighty
Instrument by which all is effected, that heartchanging, life-reforming,
wonder-working Spirit, by which all the stubborn, unruly, unconquerable Lusts
of Men, all the Wills of the Flesh and of the Mind are all subdued, Leopards
Spots quite washed away, Ethiopian Skins made white, and Men old in sinning,
and such as are accustomed to do evil, are so instructed, convinced and
changed, that they readily learn to do well, resign up themselves as Temples
for that blessed Spirit to dwell in, and are no more led by depraved, unruly
Appetites, but wholly conducted and managed by that safe and blessed Adviser.

Here Is the great delight of God, in the Creation restored, in Man new made,
and remade, by the mighty workings of the Holy Ghost in the Mediator's hand's;
God says of these Men, the world is not worthy of them; but the World are quite
of another opinion, for they cry out, Away with such fellows from the earth, it
is not fit they should live.

Thirdly and lastly, As it appears that the whole design of God, touching both
Angels and Men, was laid in his first creation of them by the Son, so is it in
reference to all the rest of the Creation: the inferior Creatures were so made
as that God would receive all the Homage of them from Man, they were made for
his use and put in subjection to him; Man's Habitation is this lower World, and
the Creatures are the Furniture of it given to him of God; and as the Dominion
and Sovereignty of this inferior part of the World was vested in Man, by an
unalterable Law of Creation, so it has ever since been involved in his
condition, while Man abode in his primitive state, all the rest of the
Creatures kept their original luster and beauty: In Man's fall, they also fell;
when Man fell into Rebellion, this lower World fell under a Curse for his sake,
and that Curse is gradually taken off from the Creatures as Man is renewed and
restored by that gracious Covenant of God sealed in the Blood of the Mediator;
so at last when the Church is completed, the whole Creation shall be restored
to its original and first created Glory.

The Scripture gives plain evidence to both these things:

First, That the Curse is gradually taken off from the Creatures as Man is
restored and the Church built up: but it is in this sense to be taken, and no
farther, that the Curse is taken off from the Creatures. As to Man's use and
enjoyment of them, the Curse upon them lay in two things:

1st, A natural defacing of them, and degrading them from their original Image;
for at first every thing was very good and there was no deformity nor any such
production as Briers and Thorns:

And, 2dly, By inverting the use they were created for, [which was to be a
Blessing] and laying the enjoyment of them by Man under a Curse and a Judgment
for Sin's sake.

In respect of the first, The Creatures contiliue alike to all, and will do so
till the restitution of all things; the Creatures are naturally the same to
good and bad, and enjoyed by both alike, without any such distinction or change.

But as to their enjoyment and use the difference is plain; As Man is by the
Mediator reconciled unto God, so he comes to a sanctified enjoyment of and
right to all the Creatures; for God in the gift of his Son, has with him also
freely (by a second Donation) given us all such things: and so the Creatures
are now enjoyed not by virtue of Man's first right to them in Creation, but by
virtue of Christ's Purchase and Redemption: St. Paul ranks things in this
order, All things are yours, [speaking to the Saints] and you are Christ's, and
Christ is God's. To a Believer every Creature is good, not as it was originally
so made, but as it is by Christ restored into that condition, the Curse
removed, and as it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer; to a Man
unrenewed and unreconciled to God in the Mediator, God's original Curse upon
the Creatures still remains, and he enjoys them with that doleful circumstance,
That his Table is a Snare; and upon that account the Holy Ghost tells us, That
a little that a righteous man has, is better than the great riches of the
wicked, and that to them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure.
Solomon lays it down as an undoubted Maxim, That the curse of the Lord is in
the house of the wicked: wherever Adam's original Rebellion is upheld and
promoted, there the primitive Curse then pronounced upon the Creatures remains;
it is only removed by Christ, to those that have interest in him, and are
reconciled to God by him.

Secondly, As the Curse upon the Creatures is in all Ages gradually taken off,
as to their use and enjoyment, to such as believe and obey the Gospel, so by
virtue of the Price Christ has paid, and the restoring recovering Power put
into his Hand thereupon, the whole Creation at last, shall be rescued from the
Slavery and Deformity it has lain under, and be restored to its primitive
Beauty and Excellency; we may say in this case as St. Paul says of Death, For
since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead, for as
in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: As the Creatures fell
and died as it were with Man, so shall they be restored, and have a
resurrection in his recovery; their Restoration is one part of Christ's
Purchase; as they were cursed for Adam's sake, so they shall be again revived
and blessed for Christ's sake; who can imagine that the Creation shall always
groan under Bondage to the Lusts, Passions and Debaucheries of Men, and not at
last put on again its beautiful Garments, and in a right and due manner be
serviceable to that end [which was the use and delight of Man while he lived in
communion with his God] for which it was originally made? This Restoration will
be accomplished at Christ's second coming, for then will be the great Jubilee
the Creation has so long groaned after.

Many Passages there are in Scripture that give in Evidence to this Truth, but
I will endeavor the Proof of it only from three Texts; the first of which, as
to the proof of this Matter, is very probable, the other two very positive; the
first is in the 65th of Esau, The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and
the lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meat,
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord. This
seems to me a plain Prophecy of the Deliverance and Restoration of the
Creatures: When the primitive Order of Creation was lost, as Man fell into
Rebellion against God, so the Creatures fell into Rebellion against him, and
into implacable enmity one against another. This seems to be a Prophecy of the
Creatures recovery, and of their reconciliation toward Man, and toward each
other: Some take it for a metaphorical Description of the future Effects of the
Gospel upon the Spirits of wicked, bestial and unreasonable Men, and that
Reconciliation and Harmony the Gospel should produce amongst Mankind: But I
conceive this Text is literally to be understood, and cannot be fairly so
taken, for diverse considerable Reasons:

1st, Because the time to which this Prophecy relates, and in which it is to
be accomplished, is when there shall be a new Heavens and a new Earth; and what
more proper to conceive, than that when the Heavens and Earth are to be new,
the Creatures should have new Qualities and Conditions? It is plain so to be,
if you look back to the 17th Verse, and read on to this, For behold I create
new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered nor come
into mind: And from thence, to the 25th and last Verse, is a perfect
Description of the State of this new Heaven and new Earth, and the happy
condition the Creation shall be restored unto: This new Heaven and new Earth is
to be at Christ's second coming, when the restitution of all things is to be;
for the new Heavens and new Earth, and the restitution of all things in
Scripture Phrase, are the same; and what time so likely, so fit, and proper for
this to be effected as then? and it is certain it must be then or never. The
other Prophecy of this Matter in the 11th Chapter of this Prophecy in these
words: The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down
with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them, and the cow and the bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox, and the
sucking child shall play upon the hole of the asp, is to be when knowledge
shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea; which is but an expression
of the same time before mentioned in other words, it shall be when Christ shall
come and shall set all to rights.

2dly, It seems more reasonable, to take this Text literally than
metaphorically, [allowing for the Rhetoric of the prophetic Stile] because
these opposite Creatures are said to lie down and quietly cohabit one with
another, retaining their own distinct and proper Natures still; though a Lion
lie down with a Lamb, yet he is a Lion still; the very life of the Prophecy
lies in that, that a Lion whilst a Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, the
creature is the same, only the hurtful enmity removed. Now, should we take it
metaphorically, the Gospel-change is rather to make a Lion a Lamb, to alter the
very Nature and Disposition, and to infuse new Habits and Qualities, and so a
Lamb would lie down with a Lamb, and not a Lion or a Wolf with a Lamb, if we
take it in strict sense; and then what is intended to signify, would not well
agree to what is signified.

3dly, Some Parts and Passages of these Prophesies cannot fairly be construed
in any such metaphorical sense, as that the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox,
and Dust shall be the Serpents Food, by which the removal of the Creatures
enmity one to another, and their devouring one another as an effect thereof,
seems to be singly and literally signified, and an account given how they shall
live in that state, when all these hurtful qualities introduced by Man's sin at
the first shall be removed; 't will be hard, with any tolerable and sober
sense, to put a mystical and metaphorical meaning upon these Passages, and
those that have attempted it have much justified the literal interpretation by
their misfortune in the attempt, and if it seem necessary to take any part of
the Prophecy literally, it will be a probable ground to suppose the whole
ought so to be taken: and the truth is, the Prophets do seem often plainly to
foretell, that the Creatures shall be all reconciled to each other, and brought
into their due and primitive obedience unto Man, according to that Passage in
the Prophet Hosea, In that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts
of the field, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with the creeping things of
the ground; that is, as I take it, they shall be restored and reduced to that
order they were first made in, and a metaphorical sense put upon this
Prophecy, would seem very heterodox and foreign, to what by the Context the
Prophet seems to intend and aim at. The second Scripture I shall insist on, is
that of St. Paul, in the 8th of the Romans v. 21. Because the creature it self
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the children of God, for we know that the whole creation groaneth
and travaileth in pain together until now: this is highly probable to be one of
those Discourses of St. Paul, which St. Peter mentions, in which there are some
things hard to be understood; for St. Peter, where he quotes St. Paul for his
writing in his Epistles of those things, is there speaking of the new Heavens
and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, the Season when the Creatures
restoration is to be. There are many things hard to be understood in
Scriptures, and without all doubt, many, very many things within its bowels
that lie undiscovered and untaken notice of as yet; for it is a Book intended
for the instruction of the Church, and to exercise her care and industry in all
Ages; it will be with the Church in the last period of the World, as it was
with the Disciples when they went to Emaus, Christ will open their
understandings, and give them a clear view of the Scriptures, and of all things
therein contained, touching himself, and the glory of his Kingdom, and the
restitution of all things. For the clear understanding of this Text in hand, it
will be necessary to take in the Context from the 18th Verse, For I reckon that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us, for the earnest expectation of the creature
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God: the last part of the 18th
Verse is that (as I think) from which the Apostle takes the rise of his whole
Discourse in these Verses, [are not worthy to be compared to the glory that
shall be revealed in us,] and proceeds in the 19th Verse to show, there will be
such a glory; for the whole Creation expects it, their deliverance being to be
contemporary with it, For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the manifestations of the Sons of God: the meaning seems to be, that he
speaks not of the glory of Heaven in the 18th Verse, but of that glory that
shall be revealed in the Saints here in this World before the conclusion of it,
when the whole World shall become the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints; and so
the force of the comparison lies the stronger, the sufferings that we have in
this World, are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed
in us even in this World; and then in Verse 19, proceeds to show there shall be
such a glory, For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God; that is, there is an expectancy in the whole
Creation of such a day: when the Sons of God are manifested and revealed in the
glory that is promised them, then the whole Creation shall enjoy a Restoration
and Jubilee. It Is of great moment here to take notice, that the Apostles
Antithesis is not between the Sons of God, and the Sons of Men, of any sort,
but between the Sons of God and the Creature; by which is certainly meant the
inanimate part of the World, which is said in its way to expect; for nothing is
more common in Scripture, than to apply rational Acts to irrational Creatures,
as calling upon the Heavens and the Earth to hear, and many such like: For the
creature, Verse 20. was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him who has subjected the same in hope: that is, the whole Creation was cursed
and subjected to vanity, by the just judgment of God for Man's sin, but yet so
that it remains in hope; and why? because in Verse 21. the Creature it self
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the Children of God, because there is a restoration belongs to it, and the
opposition is still between the Sons of God and the Creature, and cannot with
any tolerable sense be made between Man and Man.

The scope of St. Paul in this place seems clearly to be this, That the
Creature being under a curse, and under a preternatural subjection and usage,
not suitable to its first make and designment, by reason of Man's sin, and
being unwillingly subjected thereunto, did in its way dislike it, groan to be
delivered from it, and naturally tended to its primitive state and use, which
it was to be restored unto, when the Sons of God should be manifested, and
Christ should set up his glorious Kingdom here upon Earth. This Interpretation,
though without doubt it contains the natural and genuine sense of the Apostle,
is by some contradicted, by understanding the word [Creature] in another sense;
that is to say, by taking it to mean the Gentiles, and that part of the World
who (say they) were unwillingly subjected by the Devil to all the bondage of
the Heathenish Worship and Religion, and groaned to be delivered from under it:
Now both the Text it self, and the Context, utterly refuse this interpretation;
For, first, we must represent the Apostle thus speaking, For I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us, for the earnest expectation of the Gentiles
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. The Apostle does not make the
opposition to lie between the Sons of God and the Sons of Men of any sort, but
between the Sons of God, and the irrational part of the World, and makes the
groaning of that, after the manifestation of the Sons of God, a reason why
there shall be such a manifestation; and in Verse 20. when he says the Creature
was made subject to Vanity, he points chiefly at the irrational part of the
World, which was made so by God's curse upon Man, and upon it for Man's sake;
but it is very improper to say the Gentile World was made subject to Vanity,
[and understand, as they do, Vanity to be their Idolatry] unwillingly, because
what they did in that, was voluntary, what they chose, and what they highly
applauded themselves in, and to say the Devil had subjected them to their
Idolatry in hope, [which those that thus interpret do and must say] is plainly
to say, the Devil subjected them to Idolatry, in order to a deliverance unto
Salvation, which is absurd to suppose. And in Verse 21. the Apostle lays the
Emphasis so, as points clearly at the irrational and Iowest part of the World,
Because, says he, the creature it self, he does not in the least seem to intend
Mankind or any sort of them, but the lowest and meanest part of the World, and
that he must needs mean, by saying, the creature it self, in the most
diminutive sense of the Creature; for it is evidently to distinguish, between
the Creature, and the Sons of God, and not to make the Antithesis between one
sort of Men and another: And in Verse 22. he tells you, the whole Creation, or
every Creature groaneth and travaileth in pain for deliverance; he tells you
before, the Creature was in expectancy, and now he tells you, it groans and
travaileth in pain; and this Creature is the whole Creation, or every Creature:
it is the very same word that is used all along this Context, and therefore it is
the same thing he discourses of. Let any Man in these Verses read the Gentile
World, instead of the word Creature, and whole Creation, (or, as it is better
to be rendered, every Creature) and then see, what an awkward ill-cohering sense
is imposed upon the Apostle thereby.

The third Scripture I shall insist on, for the proof of this Point, seems more
plain and positive than any, Acts 3.21. Whom the heavens must receive, until
the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy prophets since the world began. This Text is part of St. Peter's
Sermon, the effect of which was so famous a conversion; his Point was to prove,
that that same Jesus whom they crucified was the true Messiah, that he was
risen again, but not to be seen by them any more upon Earth, which perhaps the
Jews expected, to justify the truth of his Resurrection, and to render him in
a capacity to be such a temporal Messiah as they looked for; this seems
preventively spoken, to forbid any such expectation, he tells them, the
Heavens, whither he was ascended, must contain him until the restitution of all
things: What can be more plain, than that these two things result from this
Text?

1st, That Christ will again appear in the end of the World, for the Heavens
must contain him, but until, that is, to a determinate time.

2dly, That his appearing again, will be in those times wherein all things
shall be restored, whatever is defiled, defaced, disordered, and misplaced by
sin, shall be reduced in those times to its primitive beauty and order, as a
very particular effect of Christ's Redemption; and they are called times of
restitution, because they will precede and last some time before the day of
Judgment, which is usually expressed in Scripture singularly by one positive
determinate day; the day of Judgment to all good Men, will be much more than a
restitution, it will bring them to a far better state than ever they were made
in: but these are called times of restitution of all things, not only Men, but
all the Creation shall partake of the benefits of these times; and these
restoring times are such as God has spoken of by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets, all or most of them, have some way or other, more or less, mentioned
this glorious Kingdom of Christ toward the end of the World, but it is not so
evident that they have all or most of them spoken of the day of Judgment: the
Apostle gives them to know, that that very Jesus, whom they crucified, was the
only true Savior of the World, was ascended into Heaven as a mighty
Conqueror, and would from thence return, and before time ended, bring with him
times of restitution, and let the whole Creation feel the effects of his
Redemption by an universal Jubilee, and restoring it under his government to its
original order, beauty and glory; after which it has a natural tendency, and in
its way perpetually groans, having ever since the fall of Man and the curse
thereupon, imposed upon it, unwillingly lain under a sad and grievous
oppression from the unruly Lusts and Passions of Men.

And thus we see by the very first Design and Platform in Creation, God by
making the World by his Son has placed in the whole Creation after its fall and
misery, ever since, a natural tendency to come under his mediatory Rule and
Dominion, as its only Deliverer and Savior, and by whom God from everlasting
designed its freedom and happiness should be retrieved and restored.

These times of restitution of all things, are the same with the new Heavens
and new Earth St. Peter speaks of in his Epistles, and St. Paul points at the
same when he speaks of the manifestation of the Sons of God, and the glorious
liberty of the Children of God.

The Scripture gives us a positive Account of many great and glorious things
that will there be effected by the Mediator before his Kingdom ends: the Lord
shall descend according to St. Paul in the Clouds, with the Voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God; the Dead in Christ-shall rise first, and be
caught up with all the Saints then alive, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall be ever with him; this is called the first Resurrection: all his Enemies
upon Earth, and the Antichristian State shall be utterly confounded and ruined,
the Heavens and the Earth shall be burnt, that is plain in St. Peter, and
probably out of their Ashes and Ruins will result the new Heavens and new
Earth, for it is not probable that new ones will be entirely created as it was
at first; it is usual in Scripture to call that a new Creation which is only
changed in quality and condition. Some of the Subjects and Inhabitants of this
new Heaven and new Earth, will without doubt be the converted Jews, at which
that passage in the 66th of Esau seems positively to point; For as the heavens
and the earth, which I shall make, shall remain before me, so shall your seed
and your name remain; that is, they shall abide all along the continuance of
this new Heaven and this new Earth which I shall make, and shall be
contemporary therewith. The Prophet in that Chapter, and in the preceding, is
largely discoursing of these glorious times, and of the restoration of the
Jews. This new World will most probably last for a 1000 Years; but how, and in
what order, and manner, and in what succession, all these things will be
effected, and whether the new Heavens and the new Earth will precede the first
Resurrection or not, are Questions not pertinent to be asked, because they are
as yet impossible to be resolved.

Thus we have seen, by what has been discoursed upon this Argument, how all
the great and eternal Designs of God, touching this World, were laid in his
creation of it by the second Person, and that by him all the glorious and
blessed ends God proposed to himself there by, are brought to pass and
accomplished; as all was made by him, so all was made for him, and the glory of
all results to God through him. The Apostle in this Epistle sets forth many
Qualifications of the blessed Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the Jews
might think themselves no losers by changing their Legislator, by taking him
instead of Moses; in respect of his Divine Nature, he was infinitely exalted
above all comparisons; in respect of his Humane Nature, he was exalted above
the Angels; as a Prophet, he exceeded Moses, as far as the Master of a Family
exceeds his Servant, for he is the Son in his own house; and as a Priest, he
much exceeded Aaron, by once for all offering up himself a complete and perfect
Sacrifice, and shedding thereby the Blood of God for the Sins of the World; and
as a King and Priest together, by reason of his absolute perfection in Sanctity
and Sovereignty, and that he is the great Reconciler of Earth and Heaven, the
great Peacemaker between God and Man, he that brings down and proclaims Peace
upon Earth and Good Will toward Men, the true King of Salem; he infinitely
preceded Melchisedech, having also the power of an endless Life, and being
indeed without beginning or ending of Days, which Melchisedech was only in
Historical Figure and in the Type: And throughout the whole Epistle, shows the
wonderful excellency of the Gospel above that of the Law, not only from its
Original and Founder, but also from the Nature and Constitution of it, being a
heavenly Frame pitched by God himself; the other but an earthly one, and all
the Appurtenances to it, the Sacrifice, the Ordinances of Worship, the
Covenant, and the efficacy of the whole suitable thereunto; and all this to
bring the Jews to own the truth of their own Religion, to acknowledge their
true and natural Messiah, of whom as purtaining to the flesh Christ came; after
his departure and ascension, Christ, who compassionately wept over Jerusalem
and that People, while he was upon Earth, was pleased to afford them this
glorious Luminary, to follow them with this Instruction, and to kindle this
Heavenly Lamp before them, that ought to have been a Light to their Feet, and a
Lanthorn unto their Paths, to have led them from Mount Sinai to Mount Sion,
from Mount Sion literal to Mount Sion spiritual, and from the earthly to the
heavenly Jerusalem; but the success proved otherways, for the State of the
Jews, the governing part of that Nation, together with the Body of the People,
continued in the utmost rage and opposition they could possibly express,
against Christ and his Doctrine, till that remove of their economy and
Worship, which is here but spiritually and doctrinally laid before them, and
tendered to them for their information and instruction, came to be materially,
sensibly and dreadfully put in execution, to their utmost horror and confusion.

That People being chiefly concerned in this Epistle, and having been so
stupendous a Stage of singular Blessings and extraordinary Judgments, a short
Digression touching that People and Nation in particular, cannot in this place
seem either heterogeneal or impertinent.

A short Digression touching the Jews.
The Jews who were so long proprietors of the true God, and in possession of
the only instituted Religion of which he was the Author, of whom it might for
many Ages be said, considering and comparing them with the rest of the World,
That Salvation was of the Jews; that People that had so much advantage above
all others every way, and that made so great a divine and religious Figure in
the World, and so true a one, for so long together, having in Promises, Types,
and Significations, the Christian Religion it self amongst them, (for out of
that Root it sprang,) there it was in Oar, though it was afterward coined and
stamped, and that as yet do remain as wonderful Monuments both of Divine Justice
and Mercy, and the Subjects of many Prophesies to be yet fulfilled to this very
day, a right Account of this People, and a due and serious Consideration of
them, cannot but be of excellent use to all the ends of the Christian Religion.

Their Original was from Abraham, they never pretended to derive themselves
higher, and therefore encountered our Savior with what they most valued
themselves upon, We have Abraham for our father; he was the first friend God
was pleased to make to himself upon Earth, and with him it was that God
personally established the Covenant of Grace in all the Essentials and
Substantials of it, and the legal Covenant, as the Type, Figure and Forerunner
of that; in his Natural Capacity he was the Father of the Jews, [but
restrictively by the Seed of the Promise in Isaac] with whom the Covenant of
Circumcision was made, an Institution of great Sanctity and Distinction, and
whereby they obliged themselves against all false Gods and Idolatry, to the
Worship of the only true God, as he himself declared the meaning of it to be;
and in his Spiritual Capacity, as one that believed and obeyed what God
revealed to him, and followed him fully; he was the Father of all the faithful,
who have ever since all gone to Heaven by treading in the steps of their Father
Abraham: but this must not be so strictly taken as if these two Seeds of
Abraham were always subjectively diverse, for they were often the same; and this
the Apostle proves at large in the 9, 10, 11 Chap. to the Romans, in the
Instances of Isaac and Jacob, and the Remnant of Israel, that were at that time
saved, who were both Heirs according to the Flesh; and according to the
Promise, the Gospel was all virtually uttered unto him in that one expression,
In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed: the meaning of which
was, that the Promise of the Messiah having yet lain at large and in very
general terms, and proceeded no farther than the first Promise made of him,
that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head, God would
graciously advance one step farther, and not only enlarge that Promise, by
declaring, that in the Seed of the Woman all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, but also make it known of what People of all the Nations and Kindreds
of the Earth the Messiah should come, and from whose Loins, according to the
Flesh, he should proceed; and this honor is done to Abraham, and he of all the
Persons upon Earth is fingled out for it, and he is told of God, that in him
all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, and this is called after in
Scripture, the blessing of Abraham, [being first pronounced to him] which is
the Blessing of the Messiah: nor is any thing more particularly revealed
touching the Messiah before his actual coming, save that out of the numerous
Posterity of Abraham, one particular Tribe is singled out, and one Family of
that Tribe, and it is declared, that Christ should come of the Tribe of Judah,
and of the House and Lineage of David.

That the Covenant of Grace was established with Abraham, is plain from what
the Apostle says, Gal. 3. v. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen, through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying in thee shall all nations be blessed: which must needs be the Gospel,
because it refers to all Nations; what particularly belonged to the Jews went
no farther than that Nation; and the same Apostle, in his grand Dispute with
the Jews about Justification, proves the Gospel-Method of Justification to be
the true Method, because Abraham was justified that way, and was of more
antiquity than the Law, [taking the Law for the whole Jewish economy from the
original of it] for the first beginning of that was Circumcision, and Abraham
was justified in a Gospelway, [that is, had Righteousness imputed to him]
before he was circumcised, and Circumcision was to him but a Seal of the
Righteousness which he had being yet uncircumcised; from whence the Apostle
infers, that Righteousness came not by the Law, nor the Operations thereof, but
by Faith; this was the first instance, this of Abraham's, in which we find any
Man in Scripture justified, and 'twas intended to be an Instance of God's
future and final Justification of Believers both Jews and Gentiles under the
Gospel to the World's end, and that the Law, in the complex Notion of it, was
only a Schoolmaster to conduct and lead Men to Christ is very evident, because
both the Covenants were made with Abraham, and the Gospel Covenant had the
precedence, and the other, though first in actual execution, was in its nature
but declarative and expressive of it, and conductive to it; and very proper and
signifying it was, that Christ should come from the Loins of Abraham who stood
related to God as a public person, not only the natural Father of the Jew, but
the spiritual Father of all the faithful, both Gentiles and Jews, for although
Christ, as concerning the Flesh, came of the Jews, who were a holy enclosure
unto God, and under his own peculiar Regiment, and it was a singular advantage
to them to have it so, and in some respect it was absolutely necessary that it
should be so, that so he might be born under the Law, and under an obligation
to all the righteousness of the legal Dispensation, which he came to fulfill,
and might be a Minister of the Circumcision [as the Apostle speaks] for the
truth of God to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers, yet he came as a
public Person in no sort confined to the Jewish Nation, but equally related to
all Mankind; and therefore we find, that one of the Evangelists derives his
Pedigree from Adam.

From a triumvirate of Divine Favorites, Men highly beloved of God, and of
great Heavenly Renown, Heirs of all the Promises, [for Isaac and Jacob
inherited all the Blessings of Abraham] this People had their Original; in
those three God did not only epitomize his future gracious Proceedings with the
World in the Covenant of his Grace, and as it were appropriate himself to that
triumvirate as their peculiar property, by stiling himself the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; but so far honors them after death and
when they had left this World, as throughout all Generations to set forth the
blessed state of the saved, by their sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven, as if the very Company and Presence of those blessed
Patriarchs, to whom the Promises of Life and Salvation, through the Messiah,
were first personally made, would add much to our happiness there, and as if
their state above, were the utmost felicity any could hope for, or attain to,
for these Fathers sake of theirs they are to this day beloved of God, and God
owes them, [for what he promises he owes] and intends them a kindness, [as
shall be shown hereafter] for their sakes, for as in those three the natural
and the promised and spiritual Seed did both inhere and concenter; so at last,
their natural Seed according to the Flesh, shall also become Heirs of the
Promise, and the reason of it we have from St. Paul, because the gifts and
callings of God are without repentance.

The Consideration of three things will let us into a right account of that
People:

First, That God did intend by the impalement of them to himself, to put in his
Claim to the World, generally run quite away from him into gross Idolatry, the
Worship of the Sun, and other parts of the Creation, and become Subjects of
that Kingdom set up by the fallen Angels against him, by this to challenge a
part of the work of his hands, and to have some select part of the World ruled
and governed by Laws and Institutions of his own ordaining; the great tendency
of which were, to prevent and overruled that fatal miscarriage of Mankind, in
worshipping the Creature instead of the Creator, and placing an Idol in the
room of the true God; and therefore throughout the whole Mosaical Institution,
there is a sacred Antiparistasis against Idolatry, a total contradiction in
every Ceremony of the Jewish Worship to it, and the whole so contrived as to
make that People utterly separate themselves from the Sins of the Nations in
that particular, and to bring them up with the utmost detestation of it. One
constant Memorial of himself in a most eminent manner God by his Law placed
amongst them, which was the observance of the Sabbath, intended as a constant
weekly Memorandum against Idolatry, and to put them in mind who it was that
made the Heavens and the Earth and rested the seventh day from the works of his
hands; and upon this account it pleased God, that Idolatry and breach of the
Sabbath had the same punishment: And as the Laws and Constitutions of this
People were thus framed to secure them against Idolatry, so the providential
dealings of God with them all along tended this way, God himself undertaking
the particular charge and government of them, [which necessarily made them a
Church and a State conjoined together] and exercising that government in such a
way as might be expected from such a Sovereign, and might in the highest manner
oblige them to their obedience to him, by mighty and open-face discoveries of
himself, by stupendous Miracles, amazing Signs and Wonders, and by an
outstretched Arm of Power, subduing all their Enemies before them; that People,
above all others, might utter that Expression, Say unto God, how terrible art
thou in thy doings? and supplying them also with whatever they stood in need
of, and at last settling them in a Land that was the glory of all Lands, and a
Land for which God cared continually, and had his eye ever upon it to make it
fruitful; their Story in Egypt, their Travels in the Wilderness, and their
Possession at last of the Land of Canaan, with the various Events that befell
them there, are the profoundest and most stupendous part of all History, and
the greatest outward and visible Declaration of the mighty Sovereignty that is
above, that has been yet made since the World began.

Secondly, God by taking the Government of this handful of People into his own
hand, and vouchsafing to be their peculiar Legislator, first did intend a
public Instruction and Information to the rest of the World besides, and
therefore he himself declares to them, that the Nations round about them should
admire their wise Laws; and that proceeded so far, and was so far verified,
that the whole Body of the Jewish Laws, Moses and the Prophets, was by Ptolemy,
King of Egypt, translated into the Greek Tongue, the most universal Language at
that time; and so the greatest part of the World became conversant with it, and
it proved a mavelous providential Preparative for the Conversion of the
Gentiles; 'twas easy [Prejudice removed] to perceive the difference between
the religious Worship and Service of the true God, and the superstitious
Follies of Idolatry, between a devout serving the Maker and Preserver of all
things, and the doting folly of adoring nothing; for such is an Idol in the
Apostle's sense, though it be materially a piece of Stone or Wood or some such
thing, yet it is nothing of that for which it is taken to be, and so is truly and
vertually nothing: And their Constitution was so framed, that any Man might
become a proselite and incorporate himself into that Religion, that became
convinced of the excellency of it. Secondly, This National Constitution was
intended to prepare the World for that universal Law of the Gospel, which was
to be published in due time and that two ways: First, By being a standing
Monument and constant Memorial of the true God and his Worship, and a
Preservative of the Notices thereof; And, secondly, As it contained in its
Bowels a discovery, that the Gospel was that Blessing wherewith God intended to
bless the World from the beginning, and being it self a Witness upon Record to
it.

The third thing to conduct us into a right Notion of this People, is to
consider, that the Scripture informs us, that God's whole transaction with this
People was in a great measure with design to signify things that should be
spoken of after; they are set forth, we are told, for Examples and Types, they
were in their very constitution the shadow of somewhat to come, but not the
thing it self: In finding out therefore the divine signification of this
People, we shall come to the truest and best comprehension of them.

The first and great design of God by them was to make way for the Messiah, to
make them Harbingers for him, not only in reserving them distinct from the
World, that Christ might receive his Humanity from that People, and proceed
from them, and so from Abraham, according to the flesh, but that the offering
up of himself as a Sacrifice for the World, and the necessity and perfection
thereof might be signified thereby; the whole ceremonial Law was but a
preparative Scene for the Gospel, the end of it was Christ's offering up
himself, and to declare this great truth, that no Humane Offerings, not the
Firstborn of Men's Bodies, if God had required it, would make a sufficient
Atonement for the Sins of their Souls, but that a better Offering was
necessary to reconcile God and the World: the Law of the Ten Commandments the
end of it was Christ; the Apostle tells us Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, and Righteousness was the great end of the Law, and so Christ
must needs be the end of it; we are expressly told, the law written in stone is
done away; and it is now only in force as part of the Law natural, and as
reestablished by Christ, and made part of the new Law of Grace, and obliges
upon the terms thereof. Two great ends there were in it, 1st, To discover Sin,
and thereby the absolute necessity of a Savior. 2dly, To restrain it until
Christ's actual coming and the commencement of the Gospel. In both respects it
was added, because of Transgression, and was but a Schoolmaster still to teach
us the Gospel-Lesson, and bring us to Christ.

Secondly, God in the depths of his infinite and unfathomable Councels
determining with himself, that few in respect of the body and bulk of Mankind
should be finally and eventually saved, gave this instance of it at first, in
separating but a small handful of People to himself, in respect of the Nations
of the Earth, and making his part and peculiar to consist but of a few, it is
not to be doubted, but that the inherent Attribute of Grace and Goodness in God
is rendered more transparent to Men than any of the other, yet so it pleased
infinite Wisdom to order it, that the manifestation of it should lie in the
quality of the salvation, rather than in the quantity saved; the Righteousness
of God in dealing with all Men will be like the great Mountains, but his
Judgments herein are like the great Deeps: the People of the Jews were in their
constitution truly Types and Representatives of the Saints and the saved
Church, and many, very many of them were personally of that number, but they
had all of them, not one excepted, that signification appurtenant to them, and
literally and typically those Qualifications:

1st, They were chosen of God and separated from the rest of the World, and
called out to be his peculiar Treasure.

2dly, They were devoted and dedicated unto God, and had received his mark in
their flesh.

3dly. They enjoyed the worship of the true God and all divine privileges.

4thly. Whatever they possessed they owed it to Gods free donation, even their
temporal inheritances in the land of Canaan. Now take these things in their
true and spiritual sense and they are the perfect Constitution of a true and
sincere Believer under the Gospel.

Thirdly, By the whole Transactions of God with this People, this general
Intimation was given to the World, That no outward Administrations, though of
the most advantageous Circumstances, and accompanied with the most prevailing
Motives, no Miracles, no extraordinary Operations, no Prophets, no Divine
Oracles whatever, would reduce Men to their obedience to God, and such a
conformity to him, as is absolutely necessary to make them Happy, unless there
went together with it, some Divine Efficacy to change the faculties of Men's
minds, and make a Man inwardly another thing, than what by his degeneracy and
apostasy he has made himself; nothing did more plainly and evidently discover
itself in the whole transaction of God with this People, then that there could
be no Law given, that would singly, and of itself, without foreign Assistance,
introduce Righteousness, that there was an absolute necessity the Holy Ghost
should be sent down from Heaven, if ever Mankind were made fit to go thither,
and such a Covenant made with the World, as would give to Men a new Heart and a
new Spirit, and such a Covenant God declares [having found fault with this]
that he would make, whereby he would write his Laws in Men's Hearts, and put
them into their inward parts, and so possess them with his Grace, and lock them
up to himself by his fear, that they should not depart from him.

If we begin with this People in Egypt, and consider them there, it is plain
the generality of them had fallen in with the Religion of the Country,
[notwithstanding all the colateral inducements they had, and all the
obligations they lay under to the contrary] and totally forgotten the true God;
this seems plain from what Moses, in Exodus replied unto God, when he commanded
him to go to them, and tell them, The God of their fathers had sent him unto
them; Moses Answers, when I come unto the Children of Israel, and shall say
unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto you, and they shall say,
what is his Name, or as it is better rendered [what God is he] what shall I say
unto them? It Is plain from hence, that Moses was well aware of the success he
was like to have; and that the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, was a
thing that the people at that time had no notion at all of, and upon their
entrance into Canaan, when Joshua had by Gods direction circumcised them, God
himself declares, this day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off
you, which reproach of Egypt was their Idolatry in Egypt, which was rolled away
by their being devoted by Circumcision to the true God and his Worship; some
learned men have supposed that the people were not circumcised in Egypt, and
that their uncircumcision there was that reproach that was rolled away, but
it is I conceive a mistake, for we are told in Josh. 5. v. 5. Now all the People
that came out (speaking of Egypt) were circumcised, but all the People that
were born in the Wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them
they had not circumcised: And in the 4. v. that is said to be the reason of
their being now circumcised; those that came out of Egypt it is expressly said
were circumcised, now if they were circumcised by Moses after their coming out,
then the reproach of Egypt was rolled away before, and this circumcising could
not be it, if they were (as I believe they were) circumcised before they came
out of Egypt; then uncircumcision could not be the reproach of Egypt here
meant, and it is probable they were all circumcised there, because Pharaohs
Daughter so soon as she had taken Moses out of the water and looked upon him
knew him to be an Hebrew Child, which is likely she did by the mark of
circumcision: If you ask how Circumcision and their Idolatry could stand
together; the answer is, They kept up that Right without any regard to the ends
of it, just as the Posterity of Esau and Ishmael do to this day, who are the
greatest Idolaters in the World though circumcised, and constant observers of
that Right: No sooner were they come into the Wilderness, though by such
stupendous deliverances as the World before had never been acquainted withal,
and although they had a Miracle [by the Cloud and the Pillar of Fire] always in
their eye, yet while Moses was gone into the Mount to treat personally with God
about their concerns, they fell greedily into the Egyptain Idolatry, [a great
demonstration they had been used to it before] and set up the Calves, to
declare in the Highest manner their disloyalty to God their King, their
uneasiness under his Government, and that his Rule and their unruly Humors
would never suit together; and withal to signify their wretched ingratitude
for all he had done for them against Pharaoh and the Egyptians: And to testify
their utmost satisfaction and delight in what they had so done, the Text says,
Exodus 32. v. 6. And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered
burnt-offerings, and brought peace offerings: and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play. Suitable to this was their carriage all
along in the Wilderness; so Stephen told their successors, that for Forty Years
in the Wilderness they took up the tabernacle of Moloch and the Star of their
God Remphan, Figures which they made to Worship them, and had not sacrificed
unto God as they ought: the 78 Psalm is a Holy recapitulation of all the
disloyal undutiful and unthankful treatment God had from them: If we follow
them to their last settlement into Canaan, their constant spiritual Whoredom
there was intolerable, provoking the most high to his face, their whole
behavior was utterly to testify their dislike of God and his Government, and
that they desired not him of all others to rule over them, but rather subjected
themselves to the meanest Idol; the two tribes of Judas and Benjamin that kept
longest in their Integrity, yet soon fell to the Worship of Baal, and before
the great Captivity they had set up the most odious Idol-worship in the very
House of God; this was plainly shown in vision to Ezekiel, when he was in
Babylon upon the first Captivity, there he saw Men in the Temple worshipping
the Sun, Women weeping for Tamuz, and many more Abominations; and in the 19th
of Jeremiah, God tells them by his Prophet, Jerusalem and Judah shall be
destroyed, because they have burnt incense to all the host of heaven. The ten
Tribes early deserted the true God, and fell down before the Calves at Dan and
Bethel; and at last, under one of their apostate Kings, those Idols were
removed to Samaria, the Metropolis of the ten Tribes, and placed there to put
the utmost Honor and Credit upon them that possibly could be; this was done by
Omri, of whom the Scripture records, that he did worse than all that went
before him; because he made Laws to bring these Idols from Dan and Bethel to
Samaria, the Royal and Capital City of the ten Tribes, (for so it is called in
the 7th of Esau) to affront the God of Israel in the highest manner, and as
much as in him lay to obliterate the Name and Mention of him amongst those
Tribes in his own chosen and peculiar Country: The Holy Ghost has left a
perpetual Brand throughout all Ages upon these Statutes of Omri, and in the 6th
of the Prophet Micah tells the People, nothing they did should prosper, because
they kept the statutes of Omri; that is, they went to Samaria, and worshipped
the Calves there, according to the Laws and Institutions of Omri, rendering
these Laws thereby the most odious of all their Idolatrous Laws, because Omri
did not only fall in with Jeroboam and the rest of that wicked Crew in their
Idolatrous Veneration and Worship, but put the highest Honor and Countenance
imaginable upon those Idols, that so they might by them supersede the true God,
and root out his Religion for ever.

The long and sore Captivity the two Tribes underwent in Babylon, proved a cure
to them for ought we find of their Idolatry, but they had no inclination to
rebuild the Temple, nor to return to Jerusalem; and after their return, they
continued in all their other Impieties till they came to the very highest they
could arrive at, which was to be the Betrayers and Murderers of the Son of God
himself, and by their own importunity to pull down the dreadful guilt of the
most sacred Blood, that alone could save them, upon their own and their
Posterities heads. After the Gospel was published, their rage and opposition to
it was such, that St. Paul, notwithstanding all his love to them, and zeal for
them, gives this dismal account of them, that they pleased not God, and were
contrary to all men, forbidding the Gospel [what in them lay] to be preached
unto the Gentiles; the learned and ruling part of them were so blinded with
prejudice, that they would admit of no Testimony that Moses and the Prophets
gave to our Savior, though never so plain and convincing, nay, they would not
admit that a Prophet could come out of Galilee, because Christ was of Nazareth,
and yet if they had but consulted the second Book of Kings, chapter 14. v. 25. they
had there found, that Jonah, one of their eminent Prophets, was of Gathhepher,
a chief City in Galilee, and belonging to the Tribe of Zebulon: and even at
their last gasp, when all our Savior's Predictions in the 24th of Matthew and
in the other Evangelists came to be executed upon them, when they saw the
abomination of desolation before their eyes, that was, Jerusalem encompassed
with Armies, and Titus besieging them, the History of their vile and shameful
behavior then, is scarce credible, were it not transferred to Posterity by one
of themselves there personally present.

The Natural Instruction of all this, and of the whole Behavior of that People
under all those outward Means and Privileges they enjoyed, is, That the Gospel
became necessary, God might well say as to all outward Dispensations, after his
Transactions with this People, What could I have done more to my Vineyard that
I have not done? yet have no Fruit. Had not this trial been made, the
Gospel-glory had not shone so bright, nor had the World known the Value of that
inestimable Effect of Christ's Purchase and Ascension, the sending down the
Holy Ghost from Heaven to complete the Work of Man's Salvation, and to
sanctify, remake and save the World.

Fourthly, By this Covenant of peculiarity God entered into with the Jews,
founded as upon outward Dispensations, so also upon temporal Rewards and
Punishments, he would by the punctual and exact performance in both kinds,
insure to the World, the positive certainty of those future Rewards and
Punishments the Gospel proposes to us in the World to come; upon this account
we find with great exactness the effects both of God's Justice and Mercy to
this People. Hence may be learned how great is his Goodness, and how dreadful
also is his Justice: What People were ever so blessed as this People? ever so
born with and forgiven as they were? never were they failed in any one temporal
Promise, tho they were all made with Conditions of Obedience annexed; they seem
to be at the utmost pitch and enjoyment of all their temporal Promises in the
days of Solomon, the Grandeur and Splendour of that Court was exceeding great
and magnificent, and great Homage paid to it by all the Nations round about;
the Holy Ghost records that Divine and Heavenly Benediction that attended those
happy Days, and tells us they were Times wherein there was neither evil
Accident nor Occurrent: but the end of his Reign shows us how fading and
decaying we shall find all created Happiness, and that the end of all temporal
Promises is at last but a Grave and Room to repose our Bodies; this was
signified to and certainly well understood by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who
lived to possess nothing in Canaan but a Burying-place, the Field of Machpelah;
they were instructed to look after better things through those, [though their
Posterity did not] a heavenly Country was in their eye, and a City that has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God; and therefore it is the Scripture
tells us, God was not ashamed to be called their God; because their hopes and
expectations were not earthly, but suitable to such a Being and Benefactor as
he is, and such as he expected those should have whom he intended to honor and
own for his; for Twenty nine Years of Solomon's Reign, the whole Twelve Tribes
of Israel came up to the Temple at Jerusalem, and worshipped in the Beauties of
Holiness there; then was verified what the Psalmist says so elegantly and
emphatically in Psalm. 122. Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact
together, whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord unto the testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord, for there are set thrones
of judgment, the thrones of the house of David. But Twenty nine Years was but a
small continuance of time, their sins shortened those happy days, Jerusalem
literal was not compacted together, the Ten Tribes went off and apostatized in
the first Year of Rehoboam, and never came to worship there more.

The Judgments of God upon this People have been stupendous and dreadful, no
part of the World have drunk so deep of the Cup of God's Severity as they have,
and God himself interprets this to us, when he tells us in the Third of Amos,
You only have I known of all the nations of the earth, therefore I will punish
you for all your iniquities: You have I singled out of all the Earth to make
both my Mercy and my Justice known by, that all the World might understand me,
by my proceedings with you; as I have discovered more Grace and Favor to you
than to all the World besides, to let Mankind know my Nature is not cruel, but
that I am the Lord merciful and gracious, longsuffering and slow to anger, yet
at last will not spare the guilty; so will I punctually punish you, and that
before all the World, for your manifold Iniquities, that my Justice thereby may
be also made manifest. God's sharp Proceedings with them in the Wilderness,
devouring them by Death; their sad and dreadful Captivities out of the Promised
Land, when they were settled there; their being in the just judgment of God left
to Betray and Crucify their long expected Messiah, and the dreadful Judgment
that in a few Years after befell them thereupon, ending in the total ruin both
of their Church and State, and their miserable forlorn Condition to this hour,
are all sufficiently convincing Evidences of this Truth.

The ten Tribes, for their abominable Idolatries, were early removed and
captived by Salmanaser, and to this day never again heard of, seem as lost,
only survive in the Promises made for their restoration, and all we know of
them is, that the Scripture tells us out of what places at last they shall be
recalled. The other two Tribes, about a Hundred and twenty Years after or
somewhat more, went into Babylon, suffering the loss of all in a sore
Captivity; they returned indeed and continued a petty inconsiderable State,
which was at the best under the Maccabees, till Christ came; but then when the
glory of all they hoped for, and the substance of all their Religion signified,
appeared, then was the Judgment of God completed upon them. What account can
be given of this, that these peculiar People of God, in covenant with him above
all the Earth, to whom the Promises of the Messiah were chiefly and primarily
made, of whose flesh he came, that they of all the World should be his
crucifiers; what account, I say, but this, that God would complete his
Judgments for all their Rebellions upon them above all others? and it is a thing
of great remark and observation, that in the 6th Chap. of Isaiah, where that
fatal and dreadful Rejection of the Jews, from the advantage they might have
had from Christ and the Gospel at his coming, is foretold and recorded; we
never find God more gloriously magnified, nor his praise more celebrated in
Heaven, than upon this occasion: In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw also
the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the
temple. Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he
covered his face, with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.
And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory. And the posts of the door moved at the
voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke. And in the 8th
Verse, Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who
will go for us? Then said I, Here am I, send me. And he said, Go and tell this
people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive
not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. Then said I, Lord, how
long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the
houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate. So clear and evidently
just were God's proceedings with this People, in suffering them to reject
Christ and the Gospel, who had so often and so long rejected him, and bring at
last a total ruin upon themselves, their City and whole Country by the Romans,
that the whole heavenly Host admire and adore his Actings herein, and give
their utmost Suffrage thereunto.

But although all these Miseries have befallen this People, and all the
Judgments threatened in the Law of Moses have been most righteously executed
upon them, yet God, according to his ancient Promise, has not totally and
utterly destroyed them, but has subjected them in hope, and will at last revive
them with a glorious and merciful Revival and Resurrection; which is the Point
shall be last considered about this People.

Touching the Calling of the Jews.
The Calling of the Jews is a Matter that has been variously treated of, and
there has been considerable Advocates on both sides; but to me it seems, that
no Man that with due diligence reads what the Scriptures informs us about this
Matter, can fairly deny, but that the Jews will at last be called into the
Christian Church, and embodied with it, and their restoration will be very
glorious; the whole stream of the prophetic part of the Old Testament runs
this way, God has upon all occasions by his Prophets declared himself very
plain in this Point, that he would not by any of his Judgments utterly raze
that People out of the World, but that there should be hope in their end, and
that although he had in punishing many other Nations made a full end with them,
that their Names should be no more remembered, yet he would not do so with the
Jews, for he had married himself unto them, and although he would with the
exactest severity punish them for their Sins and take vengeance upon their
Inventions, yet he would not make a full end with them, but reserve them to be
Objects and Spectacles of his Mercy at the last: so in the 31st of Jeremiah he
declares, That the sun, moon, and stars, should as soon cease from enlightening
the world, as the seed of Israel cease from being a nation before him for ever;
which in a great measure our own eyes behold made good at this day, in the
forementioned 6th of Isaiah, where their rejection from the advantages of the
Gospel at its first publication and to this day is so solemnly and dreadfully
declared by the Prophet; the last Verse of that Chapter is a plain witness to
this, But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return and be eaten: as a
teil-tree, and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their
leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance therefore. Though they look
like a dead Tree without Leaves, yet there shall be a secret Life within: A
holy seed that shall be the substance thereof.

To set down all that the Prophets have left upon record, touching this
restoration of the Jews at the last, were to transcribe a considerable part of
their Writings, and therefore I shall confine my self in the proof of this
Point to a narrow compass, and insist only upon some few Scripture Evidences,
but such as I take to be very concluding and enough to convince in this matter.

First, If there appear any Promises in the Old Testament for the restoring and
recovering of the ten Tribes, as there appear very many that Judah and Israel
should be again united, and those two broken and divided Sticks made into one,
then it is past question, that those Promises are yet to be made good and
accomplished; the ten Tribes have never yet been restored since they were
captived by Shalmaneser, and God himself declared by his Prophet Hosea, in the
first of Hosea, that he would make a great difference between the Captivity of
the ten Tribes, and the other two, in point of duration and continuance of
time, even so far, that the ten Tribes should seem as utterly cast away, yet in
the 10th and 11th Verses he promises they shall be at last restored and
embodied with the other two.

Secondly, When God speaks by his Prophets, as he very often does, of a second
restoration that he would vouchsafe the Jews, it is as I conceive very plain,
that it is yet to come, and cannot be interpreted to be already past: The Text
I shall chiefly insist on for both these Points, is in the 11th Chapter of
Isaiah, Verse the 11th, and so to the end of the Chapter. It shall come to pass
in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand the second time, to recover the
remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath,
and from the islands of the sea. And he shall set an ensign for the nations,
and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of
Judah from the four corners of the earth. And Verse the 16th, There shall be a
highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, like
as it was unto Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. This
seems a direct foretelling of the recovery of the ten Tribes out of their
captivity, for these were the very places whither they were carried and
dispersed; but the two Tribes we know were captived into Babylon, and Babylon
here is not so much as once named; and there were many particular Prophesies
that concerned the recovery of the two Tribes from thence: In the 49th Chapter
of this Prophecy we find great Joy and Admiration expressed by the two Tribes,
under the name of Sion, [by which they are very often expressed; and well might
they be so, the other Tribes being gone, and they only in possession of
Jerusalem, the Temple, and the true Worship] at the restoration of the ten
Tribes: Verse 21. Thou shall say in thy heart, [speaking of Sion] Who has
begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children and am desolate, a captive,
and removing to and fro? and who has brought up these? Behold, I was left
alone, these where had they been? They looked on them as lost, but now behold
them with rejoicing and wonder.

The plain meaning of the Prophecy seems to be, that as God had graciously
recovered the two Tribes out of Babylon, so he would set his hand the second
time, to recover the ten Tribes out of those remote Countries where they were
captived and dispersed, and make a glorious restoration of all the Tribes; and
this Prophecy, as I conceive, is not yet fulfilled, for it relates evidently
to the times of the Messiah, and is generally granted both by Jews and
Christians so to do, and then to be fulfilled; according to the judicious Note
of Calvin upon the place, Itaque haec [says he] de Babilonica redemptione
intelligi non possunt, sed ad regnum Christi referri debent: These things
cannot be interpreted of the deliverance out of Babylon, but ought to be
referred to the days of the Messiah: and the Context puts it out of all doubt,
for the Chapter begins with the Messiah, And there shall come forth a rod out
of the stem of Jessey. And every Verse after in the Chapter appears evidently a
Description of what shall happen under his Kingdom and Government.

Two things are objected against this, to prove that this second Deliverance of
the Jews often promised, is not yet to come, but is already passed.

First it is said, That this second Deliverance is spoken with reference to that
out of Egypt, which is meant as first, and the Deliverance out of Babylon as
this second; but this Objection is wonderful impotent, for besides that it does
not cohere nor fit the case, because the People were not captived in Egypt, but
came at first voluntarily thither, and were after bred and born there, though
they were we know kept in sore bondage, yet they were not Captives there; it is
to make the Prophet intend otherways than he speaks, and that when he says God
would a second time bring the Jews out of Assyria, and Cush, and Elam, he
meant, he would a second time bring them out of Babylon; and should it be
admitted, that the Jews were, when they came out of Babylon, called out of all
those places, yet it was but the first time, and this second Call must needs be
yet to come: But the Prophet Zachary decides this Matter, and puts it out of
all question, for after the Babylonish Restoration was over, he prophesies the
very same thing, and directly foretells the restoration of the ten Tribes,
Zach. 10. v. 9, 10. They shall remember me in far countries, and I will bring
them again out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria, and I will
bring them to the land of Gilead and Lebanon. The Babylonish restoration could
not be this, that God says he would again bring about, for that was effected
when the Prophet wrote, and the two Tribes were at that time come home, and in
their own Country: So that it is very plain, there was a second Restoration of
the Jews to be, after the Deliverance out of Babylon was over.

Secondly it is said, That this second Restoration of the Jews the Prophets so
much point at, and so often foretell, was accomplished at the coming of Christ
by those Converts amongst the Jews that then embraced the Gospel; but this is
utterly out of the way of all right reasoning about this matter, for St. Paul
absolutely denies, that the conversion of that remnant of the Jews in those
times, that those few that then received the Gospel, that that was the glorious
state of the Jews foretold and prophesied of in the Old Testament, which he
calls their fullness, [though it was an evidence God had not even then totally
cast off his People] but on the contrary, looks upon that season as their very
lowest ebb, and calls that season their fall, their diminishing, their casting
away; and in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 3. he tells us, their
minds were blinded, for until this day (says he) remains the vail untaken away
in the reading the Old Testament; [that is, he means upon the bulk and body of
that People] which Vail he tells you in the 16th Verse, when it shall turn to
the Lord shall be taken away; but at that day when he wrote the Vail remained
upon them. In the 11th of the Romans, v. 11. By their fall (says he) salvation
is come to the Gentiles, and clearly refers it to another season, that is, when
the fullness of the Gentiles should be come in, that the Jews should have their
fullness, and then all Israel shall be saved, and Christ not only be a Light to
lighten the Gentiles, but the Glory of his People Israel; for, says he, God has
concluded them [that is, the bulk and body of them] at this time under
unbelief, that he might hereafter have mercy upon them all.

It Is also farther objected upon the whole matter, 1st, That the ten Tribes
were never lost, nor are not in any sense extinct; 2dly, That what calling they
were to have is past already. He that affirms the first is obliged to tell us
what came of the ten Tribes since their Captivity, and give some good
satisfying account where they now are, which there is not a Man upon Earth that
can do: He that affirms the second must either show when they were called and
restored, or else must deny that there are any promises made for it, for if it
be promised in Scripture, that Judah and Israel should be again united, as it is
plain enough to be, and the ten Tribes restored; then if those promises do not
appear yet to have been fulfilled, it is an invincible argument that the
fulfilling of them is yet to come, for the Scripture cannot be broken, but must
have its punctual accomplishment one time or other.

But to come to a due and right consideration of these two things, it will be
necessary to take a view of their original Captivity, the History of which we
have in the second Book of Kings, chap. 17. In the time of Hoshea's Reign,
Shalmaneser came up against Samaria, the Capital City of the ten Tribes, and
after three Years siege took it; and the Text says, carried Israel away into
Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in
the cities of the Medes: And in the 18th verse, after a recapitulation of all
their heinous and God-provoking sins, it is said, Therefore the Lord was very
angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but
the tribe of Judah only, under which name, that part of the Tribe of Benjamin
that adhered to Judah is comprehended; for a Considerable part of the Tribe of
Benjamin joined with the ten Tribes in the Idolatry of the Calves, and
underwent their Fate: And in the 24th verse it is said, The King of Assyria
brought men from Babylon, and from Cutha, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and
from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria, instead of the
children of Israel; and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities
thereof; by which it is plain, they were so effectually removed out of Canaan,
that they were placed in a far and remote Country, and their own Country was
Peopled with other Inhabitants; a thing very unusual and rarely, if ever heard
of in Conquered Nations, and in which a particular Hand of God seems to appear;
and this continued till our Savior's time, for the inheritance of the ten
Tribes was much of it possessed by Assyrians, then with a mixture of some Jews;
which Jews were moftly of the two Tribes that returned out of Babylon, who,
after their return, got into possession of diverse parts belonging to the ten
Tribes formerly, the Samaritans, who inhabited a very considerable part of the
inheritance of the ten Tribes, were all Assyrians, and well known to remain
there ever since Shalmaneser's Conquest, and had the Jews in the utmost
detestation, and would have no converse with them of any sort, this is all
briefly expressed by Grotius in his judicious annotation upon the 4th Verse of
the 4th Chapter of John, Samariam intellige (says he) illam partem Terrae
promise in qua manserunt assyrii post quam caetera december tribubus olim
possessa Judaei a Babilonia reduces receperunt, ab urbe enim olim regni capite
nomen mansit regioni, by all which it appears sufficiently evident that in our
Saviors time, the ten Tribes were not come back, but their Country was
generally possessed by Assyrians and Jews of the two Tribes, it is like some few
of the ten Tribes might be amongst them, though Shalmaneser did not leave such
numbers behind him as Nebuchadnezzar did, but swept the Country more clear in
order to a new Peopling of it; So clear that it appears by the 27th Verse of
the 17th Chapter of the second Book of Kings, That not one individual Priest
was left in the whole Country; by which Providence God seemed to point at the
long and lasting duration of that Captivity, and the hopelesness of any sudden
return, whatever small part of the ten Tribes might possibly stay behind or get
into other adjacent Countries, are not sure to be reckoned for the ten Tribes,
when all the Ruling part and the Bulk and Body of them were gone, no more then
those Nebuchadnezzar left (though they far exceeded in number) were to be
reckoned for the two Tribes, when the chief of them and the Bulk of them were
in Babylon, and the Scripture every where reckons the two Tribes to be there
during their Captivity, and above fifty Thousand returned, those few of the ten
Tribes that were in Canaan in our Saviors time were of three sorts, First,
such as upon the first setting up of the Calves by Jeroboam had fled to
Jerusalem, (which diverse did) to enjoy the true worship and service of God and
settled there; those upon the removal of the ten Tribes by Shalmaneser it is
likely might at least some of them return home to their former Inheritances:
2dly, Those few that were left behind when Shalmaneser transplanted them, for
some few of the meaner poorer sort were probably left: And 3dly, Those that
upon the decree of Cyrus came back which some few people did, that were near
home and had fled into the adjacent Countries, but the Bulk and Body of the ten
Tribes were gone, and had not then returned, nor have they had any restoration
to this day, but remain, as to our knowledge of them, buried and lost in their
first Captivity.

The reason why Shalmaneser placed them in Halah and Habor by the River Gozan
and in the Cities of the Medes, may well be collected from hence, 1st, That
those were the most uninhabited places of any parts of his Dominions; And 2dly,
Because those places were at so very great a distance from the land of Canaan,
that they might have no thoughts nor opportunities of returning, and for the
matter of fact of these two reasons, it is proved from Strabo and the best
Geographers: now the ten Tribes being so circumstanced at first in their
Captivity, it is very probable to believe they settled and continued there, or
were by (to us) unknown accidents removed, till all the Memorials of them were
as now they be quite lost and extinguished: this Captivity of the ten Tribes
was above a 120 Years before the Babylonish Captivity, and there is not the
least color of proof they returned during that time; Nay, it is certain they
remained in Captivity, when the other two Tribes were in Babylon; but it is
urged by some, and great stress laid upon it to little effect, that they being
within the Dominions of Cyrus, and his decree reaching all his Territories,
they might return when the two Tribes came out of Babylon; for his decree set
them all at liberty so to do, but this comes to no more then arguing from a
bare possibility against a plain matter of fact to the contrary: The prophesies
and promises that concern the Restoration and Conversion of the Jews, are not
to be reckoned as fulfilled and accomplished from any possibilities or
probabilities that they might be so in any age, that were to trifle with God's
veracity, but from an actual, specifical execution and performance: The ten
Tribes I acknowledge, were within the Dominions of Cyrus, and by that decree
might have returned, but it is certain in fact the Body of them did not, and
that is easily supposed in the general, because we find those that had been but
a few Years settled in Babylon were loath to return; and much more might the ten
Tribes that were at so great a distance, and when the two Tribes came out of
Babylon had been settled in those remote parts very near two hundred Years, and
all those dead long before that knew the Country, and had been personally
removed from thence, and that they did not return is possitively proved from
Ezra 2. v. 1. And from Neh. 7. and the 6th Verse, where it is expressly said,
those Jews that returned into Palestine, were those that had been carried away
by Nebuchadnezzar; and we are further assured, they consisted only of the two
Tribes, because they took account of them and registered them by their
Genealogies, and Families, and so they were returned every one to their own
City, and it is said they came to Judah every one to their own City; Esdras was
one of them that returned out of Babylon, and by his second Book it plainly
appears, (so far as his Authority goes) that they reckoned the ten Tribes to
remain then in their captivity, and shows how they had settled themselves there,
and those that then lived must needs know that matter: True it is, that from
the Decree in the first Year of Cyrus, to the sixth Year of Darius Nothus, when
the Temple was finished, was 46 Years; so long was it e're the Temple was
completed, reckoning, besides the times of its actual building, those of the
stops and intervals that interposed; and to that the Jews relate, when they
told our Savior, Forty six Years was this Temple in building: during which
time some few scattered Jews belonging to the ten Tribes, that had fled upon
Shalmaneser's conquest into the adjacent parts, returned into Palestine; but it
does not appear that they were of any other Tribes, but those of Ephraim and
Manasseh: but this was so inconsiderable a thing, in respect of the return of
the whole ten Tribes, that in Ezra and Nehemiah no notice at all is taken of
it; and the building of the City and the Temple, and re-peopling the Country,
is wholly ascribed to the two Tribes that went out of Babylon. Now no Man can
think, if he would, that if that vast body of the ten Tribes had been then
restored, but that they would have had a great hand in resetling that Country,
and eminent mention would have been made by the Holy Ghost of it. So that it is
plain the body of the ten Tribes settled by Shalmaneser by the River Gozan and
in the Cities of the Medes, came not back upon Cyrus his Decree, but in the
wise and secret Providence of God were reserved for a more glorious
Restoration, which is yet to come.

From the rebuilding the Temple, till our Savior's time, there is not the
least intimation in any story of the return of the ten Tribes: In Ahasuerus's
time they were dispersed all over the Persian Empire; that is plain from what
Haman said to King Ahasuerus, in the third of Esther, There is a certain people
(speaking of the Jews) scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all
the provinces of thy kingdom. And I think it is utterly impossible to find any
Call or Conversion of them to this day, such as is prophesied of, and St. Paul
tells us of, such a body as those Ten Tribes must needs consist of, could be
never called or restored, without filling the World with a very great Story;
since our Savior's time, we hear of nothing but Judgments upon that People, of
their Slaughter and Ruin by Titus, Trajan, Adrian, and other Emperors, but not
a word of any Restoration or general Conversion of the body of the ten Tribes
that were carried so far eastward; some speak much of the flourishing of the
Christian Religion in Judea and about Jerusalem in and after Constantine's
time, but that did not arise what ever it was from the number of Christian Jews
there, so much as from the great conflux of other Christians that came from all
Parts, and many of them settled their Dwellings there with respect to the holy
Sepulcher, and the City and Country where our Savior had lived and wrought all
his Miracles.

The ten Tribes, as to any knowledge we have of them, are certainly the bulk
and body of them lost; he that will deny it, is obliged to prove what is become
of them, and where they be; but it is no good Argument to infer from thence,
that either they are totally, finally, and really lost, or shall never be
recalled; it is out of the compass of all rational conception to think such a
vast number of People should be wholly extinct and not propagate Posterity, no
instance can be given of any such thing; but their being does not at all depend
upon our knowledge of their being, they may exist in many parts of the World,
and we not know it, and so may be lost as to us, though not in themselves;
'twould be no good way of arguing, to deny the existence of all parts of the
World, and all Inhabitants of it, that are not to us particularly known and
discovered: And as to their Calling, it is a very potent Argument to me they
shall be called, because they are at the present in such a lost unknown state;
for the Prophets, and especially Isaiah, do in many places intimate, that their
condition by the ordination of God should be such, that they should seem as
utterly lost and past all hope of recovery; so Sion is introduced, speaking,
Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children? The Prophet
Zachariah seems to point at their wonderful recovery, in that expression, I
will remove the iniquity of the land in one day; and also the Prophet Isaiah
when he says, Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the
earth be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a nation be born at once? for
as soon as Sion traveled she brought forth her children. And the whole
Scripture seems to design it as a most glorious Work of God's Power, wherein he
would eminently appear to call home those his ancient People, out of a most
forlorn, seemingly lost and desperate condition; and Saine Paul himself, who
best understood this matter, calls their recovery and restoration, in the 11th
of the Romans, which, as he says, there was after that time to happen, life
from the dead. 2dly, It Is said by some, That what Calling they are to have, is
passed already; and this they chiefly ground upon what was discoursed before,
of the Advantages they had by the Gospel in the time of our Savior and the
Apostles, and what Numbers of them were then converted, in so much that the
Epistle to the Hebrews is directed to the believing Hebrews, and St. Peter and
St. James write to the twelve Tribes scattered: That some of the ten Tribes, as
well as of the other two, did embrace the Gospel in those times, is out of
question, and that the Apostles met with many of them in Heathen Countries,
where they went to preach, is very evident; the occasion of their dispersion,
besides those common accidents by which Nations come to inhabit and dwell one
amongst another, was chiefly upon this twofold account: 1st, Wheresoever they
were at any time carried captive, many of them stayed behind and never
returned: And, 2dly, When they were to be removed as Captives by their
Conquerors, many of them, fearing the consequences of their Captivity, fled
into other Countries, to conceal themselves, and there continued; and so the
Apostles found some of them almost every where dispersed, as they went about
preaching, and occasionally converted part of them: and upon that account those
Epistles are directed to the Strangers scattered, and to the twelves Tribes,
reckoning a part for the whole, and to keep up the Honor and Memory of the
Tribes, and to make good St. Paul's assertion, That God even then, had not
quite cast off his People; though it is likely of some of the ten Tribes there
were but a very few that became Christians, a very mean, small, inconsiderable
handful, in respect of the body and bulk of them.

But let the Conversion the Jews had in the Apostles times be put as far as it
will or can be put, it is certain, if St. Paul be infallible, that those that
make that to be the great Conversion and Restoration of that People, foretold
in the Old Testament, are undoubtedly mistaken; for all the Jews that were then
converted, St. Paul, in the 11th of the Romans, makes to be no more than a
small Remnant, like that in the time of Elias, which Elias did not see it was
so inconsiderable, and opposes it to the bulk and body of that People; no Man
would think it a reasonable and fair dealing with the Scriptures, if any should
say, that in Elias his time, the body of the Jews were free from the Idolatry
of Baal, because seven thousand of them were; it is the same thing to say, the
Jews were called and restored to the Church in the Apostles times, because a
small Remnant of them were then converted; St. Paul, as plain as words can
express, distinguishes between the Call of that Remnant then, and the general
Call of that People which he terms their Fullness, and which he refers all along
to a future season, when the fullness of the Gentiles should be come in: 'twere
a strange thing to conceive, that that Season wherein the Holy Ghost tells us,
Wrath was come upon that People to the uttermost, that that should be the
Season wherein all the glorious Predictions concerning their Call and
Restoration should be accomplished.

And it is not to be passed over, without much observation, that the Prophet
Isaiah, having in the forementioned 11th Chapter of his Prophecy, so
positively foretold the restoration of the Jews, and particularly of the ten
Tribes, and in the last Verse of that Chapter declared, There shall be a
highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, like
as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. The
twelfth Chapter following is the very Song in Terminis set down and indicted by
the Holy Ghost, which the Jews shall sing at that glorious time of their
recovery and restoration. Chap. 12. And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I
will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortest me. Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be
afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my glory, he also is become my
salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation. And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his Name,
declare his doings amongst the people, make mention that his Name is exalted.
Sing unto the Lord, for he has done excellent things: this is known in all the
earth. Cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Sion: for great is the holy One of
Israel in the midst of thee.

So that as there was a solemn Song sung unto God, upon the mighty deliverance
out of Egypt, for it is said in Exodus, than sang Moses and the children of
Israel this song; even so upon this mighty and wonderful restoration and
recovery of the Jews shall this solemn Song of Thanksgiving be sung by them
all, to the Praise and Honor of that great God, that has brought again
together these poor dry Bones, and made a People and Nation of them, and has
remembered his Promise of old, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and declared thereby
his faithfulness and truth to this his ancient Inheritance, according to that
of the Psalmist, He has remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations, which covenant he made with Abraham, and
his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel
for an everlasting covenant. Though their Posterity, by their sins, have
brought a long suspension upon these Promises, yet the Entail is not cut off,
for it shall last through a thousand Generations.

In the New Testament this Point is largely discussed, and as I conceive very
plainly determined by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, having professed
there his great zeal for, and love to, the Jews, that were his own flesh, he
proposes this Question, Has God (says he) cast away his people? He answers it
with the most sacred, and withal the most vehement and abhorrent Negation, God
forbid; just as he answers that Question in the 6th Chapter, Shall we sin, that
grace may abound? (which was one of the vilest scandals that could be put upon
St. Paul's Doctrine and the Gospel,) He answers, God forbid. So that the case
is so far very clear, that God has not cast off his People, and 'twere a great
piece of impiety, when we reflect upon the Promises made to them, and the
Prophesies yet unfulfilled concerning them, so to think. The Apostle makes good
this point, that God had not cast off his People, by this twofold answer to
that Question; 1st, That some of them, amongst whom himself was one, had
embraced the Gospel at that time, and that although the bulk of that People
remained in unbelief, yet 'twas then as 'twas in Elias his time, there was a
remnant of Believers amongst them according to the election of Grace; so that
God had not quite cast off his People even then. And, 2dly, He answers, that
hereafter, when the fullness of the Gentiles should be come in, that Blindness,
that then in part happened unto them, should be removed, and so all Israel
should be saved: His words are in the 25th and 26th Verses, For I would not,
brethren, that you should be ignorant of this mystery, lest you should be wise
in your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is
written, There shall come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. He tells the Gentiles before, that they were like a
wild Olive grafted into a good Olive, and did partake of the Root and Fatness
of it; they must not boast against the Branches, for thou do not bear the
Root, [says he] but the Root thee: The Apostle brings in the only objection the
Gentiles could make in the 19th Verse, Thou will say, The branches were broken
off, that I might be graffed in. Well; because of unbelief they were broken
off, and thou stand by Faith. Be not high-minded, but fear. And in the 24th
Verse tells them, For if thou were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by
nature, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree; how much
more shall these that be the natural branches, be grafted into their own
olive tree? The Apostle in these Verses intimates to the Gentiles, that he
would not have them exalt themselves too much over the Jews, and therefore
reveals to them this Mystery, that Blindness was happened in part unto Israel,
until the Fullness of the Gentiles should come in, and then all Israel should be
saved; and for this quotes that passage in the 59th of Isaiah, There shall come
out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: The
plain meaning of which, and of the Context all along, is this, that the
converted Gentiles should not over magnify themselves, as if they were so the
true Church, that the Jews were utterly excluded; for as some of them embraced
the Gospel then, so the exclusion of the rest was but for a time, till the
fullness of the Gentiles should come in, and then the Jews should have their
fullness also, and so all Israel should be saved, and have such a reviving as he
calls before, life from the dead; the conversion of some Jews at that time
[amongst which was St. Paul and the rest of the Apostles] being visible and
notorious to all, was no Mystery at all, nor can he be supposed to refer to
that, when he tells them he would discover a Mystery to them; for in Scripture
phrase a Mystery contains somewhat sacred, and somewhat secret: But 'twas a
great Mystery and a mavelous Secret, that the body and bulk of the Jews were
suffered by Gods just judgment to lie in unbelief till the fullness of the
Gentiles was come in, and that then the Jews should all be called, the Vail
taken off their faces, and so all Israel should be saved; and this he says
expressly is God's Covenant unto them when he shall take away their sins. By all
Israel, it is past all denial he means the Jews; for in the preceding Verse he
says, Blindness was happened to Israel in part, until the fullness of the
Gentiles should come in, and then all Israel should be saved, where the
opposition is plain enough between Jew and Gentile; and he means the same thing
by Israel, where he speaks of Israel in part, and all Israel, and the Quotation
he brings solely respects the Jews, There shall come out of Sion the deliverer,
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. No Man can ever so mistake, as to
think that Prophecy belonged to the Gentiles, or any part of them; For this
(says he) is my covenant unto them; and as concerning the gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes; but as touching the election, they are beloved for the
fathers sakes, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. So that
this calling of the Jews, that, according to St. Paul, is yet to come, for
there has never been since his time, any such juncture, with reference to the
Jews, as could be called their fullness, or such a revival, and such a reception
of them into the Christian Church, as could be called Life from the Dead, or
has it yet so turned unto the Lord, that the Vail has been taken off them; this
calling, I say, of the Jews, ought to be established as an undoubted Doctrine
of the Christian Church, St. Paul having not in very many Points declared
himself more fully, as I conceive, than he has done in this; nor is there any
thing material that can possibly be objected against this genuine and clear
Interpretation of the Apostle's sense before given, who has largely and with
great exactness and accuracy treated upon this Subject, and as I conceive for
ever determined it.

I come in the last place to the consideration of this particular appartment of
this Epistle in the 12th Chapter, from the 18th Verse to the 24th. The Apostle
in these Verses is vigorously pursuing the chief design of this whole Epistle,
which is to encourage and persuade the believing Jews, to stand fast in the
profession of the Gospel; and in order to it, not to forsake the Christian
Affemblies, [which was in those days usually the first step to Apostasie]
notwithstanding all the specious Allurements they had to return to the Mosaical
Institutions, and notwithstanding all the sore and pressing Persecutions they
underwent for their Professions sake; and the chief Motives he insists on all
along for their so doing, are from the Author of the Gospel, and the Excellency
of the Gospel it self, the Preference it has to the Law, the great Privileges
they are arrived at thereby, and how worthy the Gospel was in all respects to
be suffered for. In these Verses he seems to make an epitomizing comparison
between both the Dispensations, that of the Law, and this of the Gospel, and as
he says in the 8th Chapter, speaking of the Priesthood of Christ, Of the things
which we have spoken, this is the sum, or head, (...). So what he says here in
these Verses seems to be such a recapitulation of his whole comparative
Discourse between the Law and the Gospel.

The particular induction of these Verses begins in the 15th Verse: Looking
diligently, lest any man fail [or fall away] from the grace of God; lest any
root of bitterness spring up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: lest
there be any fornicator, or profane person, like Esau, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birthright. For ye know how that afterward when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance,
though he sought it carefully with tears; Which is in other words to say, take
great heed least any of you Apostatize from the Christian Doctrine to Judaism,
and that by such example many others be seduced to do the like: For in so doing
you will resemble profane Esau, who so easily as upon the pressure of a little
temporary hunger, and the relief of one poor meal, sold his birthright and
primogeniture, upon which God had entailed the Priesthood and the Dominion of
the Family, the double portion, and the blessing of the Covenant, for so long
as God was served within private walls, and before the Tabernacle and Temple
were erected, to the first born was appurtenant the Priesthood, and the right
of performing all Holy and sacred Ministrations before the Lord; and upon these
accounts the Apostle calls him Profane Esau: the apostatizing Jews would
resemble him, and that in a twofold respect.

1st, Because the Gospel that contained all the glorious privileges, was their
peculiar birthright, the promises being made originally, as we are told in the
9th of the Romans; to them, Christ came of them, and first offered himself to
them, and the Gospel was preached in the first place to the Jews, and tendered
to them as their particular Right, before it reached the Gentiles.

2dly. If out of the impatience of some Temporary persecution and to obtain
some present worldly ease and repose, they should quit and forsake the Gospel,
they would become like profane Esau, who despised all his Spiritual
Privileges, to satisfy his present appetite, and sold them for so mean a
carnal advantage as one poor meal.

Before we come to a distinct consideration of each particular of the Apostles
comparison, and for the clearer understanding of it, some things may be
previously noted; First, We have here set forth, how much more Honorable the
call of a Christian is then that of a Jew, and how much greater and nobler
seize we arrive at by the Gospel, then ever the Jews could pretend to by
the Law: And this is done, First, Negatively, By showing that we are past and
not come to those lower and more terrene Dispensations and Methods of the Law;
but we are come to all the wonderful privileges and advantages of the Gospel,
it has been God's way from the Beginning to proceed gradually in the Reveration
of his love and good will to the World, and still to advance farther and
farther in discoveries of himself, and in methods of Grace, till at last the
intercourse between God and Man upon the assumption of the Human Nature to the
Divine, is as near as it can be, and Men come to have access to God, in the
manner the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2. ver. 18. For through him we both have an
access by one Spirit unto the Father; which is to Worship in the Grace, Glory,
and Efficacy of the whole Trinity, and to have as much Communion and Fellowship
with each Person distinctly, and as much enjoyment of them, as we are capable
of in this lower World.

Secondly, The Apostle here sets before the believing Jews, the form of giving
the Law, and the effects of it, both which had in them all the discouragement
and disswasive imaginable from deserting the Gospel and returning to that; for
the giving forth of the Law was with all the amazing affrighting Terror that
possibly could be, to represent the eternal Majesty and Sovereignty of God the
Supreme Legislator: The dreadful Consequences of breaking his Laws, and falling
under his Justice and Wrath, and how fearful a thing it is for a sinner without
some reconciliation to fall into the Hands of the living God, and the effect of
this dreadful promulgation was suitable to it, for the People fell under the
Highest consternation, and petitioned that God would please to speak for the
future to them by Moses, being far unable to endure any such personal converse
with the Almighty: Nay, even Moses himself, that had so long, and so intimately
conversed with God, was not able to abide by this dreadful appearance, but fell
into a paroxism of quaking and fear, and this sufficiently represented by the
vast distance there was between God and Man, in this dispensation, and how
impossible it was for Man under that Law, ever to approach unto God with any
comfort and satisfaction.

Thirdly, By the Apostles so punctually setting forth the giving of the Law
upon Mount Sinai, and opposing that fingly, to the Fabric and State of the
Gospel, is contained this insinuation, that it was comprehensive of their whole
constitution; the highest Privilege and Honor the Jewish Church had to boast
of, and that wherein they did most eminently stand distinguished from the rest
of the World, was, their being brought unto Mount Sinai, and God Personally
meeting them there, and himself delivering his Law unto them: By this they were
most eminently in their public national State taken into Covenant with God
above all the kindreds of the Earth, and constituted there by a political State
and a National Church unto himself; and the Apostle reckons it as one of their
highest privileges, the giving of the Law. Now the force of the Apostles
Discourse lies in this, the greatest thing you have to boast is your Law, and
God's giving it himself to you upon Mount Sinai, thence came all your National
Privileges, and that was indeed no other then a splendid Ministration of
Death, Man stood there before God under the greatest Guilt, Condemnation and
Misery, and God ap peared with the severest and most awful aspect that Man
could behold him in; nothing but Thunders, Earthquakes, Voices, Fires, and
dreadful Horror round about him: The Pardon, the Peace, the Reconciliation, the
near Approach unto God that Man stood in need of, these things belong to Mount
Sion, to which we are come by the Gospel, and it is a very sorry change for any
Jew that had embraced the Christian profession and viewed the Glory of this
spiritual Mount, and the Inhabitants of it to return back to Mount Sinai, and
all the dreadful circumstances appurtenant to it.

I come now to the distinct consideration of each particular in these verses,
For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with
fire, or as some better read it [the fire that burned;] the Apostle's scope is
to discover the Excellency and Glory of the Gospelstate by a Negative
comparison of it with that of the Legal, and it is one good step toward the
showing what a thing is, to show comparatively [when the comparisons lie near]
what it is not, you are not come (says he) unto that mount that might be
touched; coming to that Mount which your Fathers came to, is quite out of date;
that is not your present business, that is not the Dispensation God calls you
to now; but you are by his call come to another Mount, a much nobler and better
state of things, we are said to be come to that to which God calls us unto, and
to which he requires our attendance and obedience; the People came to this
Mount after very great preparatives of God's own appointment; we by the Gospel
came to Mount Sion without any such typical preparations; this Mount was Mount
Sinai in Arabia in the Wilderness of Horeb, called sometimes the Mount of God,
which probably St. Paul when he traveled there (as in one of his Epistles he
tells us he did) had seen. Three things are observable of it, 1st, It was a
very great and high Mountain. 2dly, That it was in a vast and Barren Desert,
had a most retired and solitary Situation: And, 3dly, That it was a Mountain
full of fruitless unprofitable Shrubs and Bushes, from whence it had its
denomination.

Now in regard that all God's proceedings are originated in infinite Wisdom,
and so perfect and complete, and every circumstance of them carries in its
bowels wonderful Instruction, it is not only our Duty, but our great Advantage
and Interest by searching to find it out, especially in things of this nature,
where every thing was impregnated with future and typical significations.

For the first, God's choosing to appear and deliver his Law from the top of
such a Mountain, was to set before the People his Highness and Majesty, and to
represent his supreme Sovereignty over them, and the great distance that by
this dispensation he was at from them; we read in Scripture of many sacred
Transactions upon Mountains, as being nearer Heaven and more removed from
Earth; and our Savior himself from such a Pulpit uttered that famous Sermon of
his recorded in the 5th of Matthew. God's Appearances to the World from the
beginning have been suited to his Designs and Intendments thereby; so when he
appeared to Abraham, to give him the Promise of the Messiab, he appeared in the
form of a Man; when he appeared to Moses, to insure him the People should
survive their Afflictions and Sorrows in Egypt, because his presence was
amongst them, he appeared as Fire in a Bush, and the Bush not consumed by the
Fire, because he dwelt in it; and when he appeared to Joshua, who was to be his
Captain, and sight his Battles in Canaan, he appeared as an armed Man, with a
naked Sword in his hand; so here, being to deliver, as the supreme Legislator,
his Laws to the People, his Appearance is all Majestic, to represent the
Sa^ctity and Severity of his Laws, and the dreadful destruction would accompany
the breach of them: For let us but consider distinctly and particularly how
this Mount was circumstanced, and we shall see nothing could to flesh and blood
be more awing and dreadful, the Lord himself, the eternal Jehovah, descended
like devouring Fire upon it, the Mount was thereupon all over Fire and Smoke,
with Blackness and Darkness, and quaked exceedingly, Thunders and terrible
Voices filled the Air, and above all, there sounded in their cars that most
dreadful sound of the Trumpet, that waxed louder and Iouder, and the voice of
words, after all, with which they were so terrified, that they could not endure
the consternation of it, and earnestly petitioned they might never hear it
more. And what could be less expected, since this was the first general
discovery, in a way judicial, God made to the World of their Apostasy and
Rebellion, and the first time he by a comprehensive Law set it before them? We
could not expect to hear of God in any other way, or that he would with any
other aspect show himself upon such an occasion; the Law belonged to Man from
the beginning, and was so imprinted in his constitution, that he was a Law to
himself; it was also correspondent to, and inherent in, the holy nature of God,
that made him in his Image, but God thought it not fit to promulgate it in such
a Systeme till now, nor to set before him in Tables of Stone, what was
originally written, however defaced in the fleshly Table of the Heart; but
herein, as in a Glass, he shows unto Man at once his deformed and apostate
Face, and all the Rebellions of Adam and his Posterity ever since; the
discovery of which must needs be dreadful to Man, and accompanied with the
highest displeasure in God; and therefore nothing was visible in this whole
Transaction, but Tokens of Wrath and Displeasure; in a way judicial, nothing
could more awfully represent. God's coming, to take a strict Account of, and
give a final Judgment upon the World, than this Appearance; the sweet and
gentle Calls of the Gospel (satisfaction being interposed) are quite of another
nature.

Secondly, This Mountain was situated in a vast barren and fruitless Desert,
to signify to us, the Nature of the Dispensation (as to Man's advantage by it)
as barren and fruitless as the Desert it self, the Law being suitable to the
holy Nature of God, and Man's corrupt and depraved Nature and Inclination lying
in direct opposition to it, nothing but ruin and destruction could accrue unto
Mankind thereby, the Law being, according to the Divine Nature, holy, just, and
good, and Man being originally made in that Image, this Law before his fall
would have been his great delight and satisfaction, and it had been natural to
him to have lived in conformity to it, but having degenerated from that Image
and lost it, this Law becomes to him Death and Condemnation, God could not
repeal it, nor Man perform the Duties of it, nor make any suitable satisfaction
for his disobedience, and so Mankind must needs lie down in sorrow, and by the
fear and dread of this Law be all their lifetime subject to bondage; how
impossible was unsinning obedience to a creature, the thoughts of whose heart
was evil, and only evil, and continually evil? God could not repeal it, he
could no more dissolve and destroy or contradict that Law, as to the matter of
it, than he could contradict his own Existence; as for instance, when he
commands no other Gods to be worshipped but himself alone, this could never be
repealed without God's denying himself; and so when he commands, that Men
should not Steal, nor Lie: this is so founded in the rectitude, veracity, and
justice of God, that it can never be reversed, because they are eternal
Principles inherent in the Nature and Being of God, as well as the counterpart
of Man's original Frame: The result of this matter is plainly this, As no Man
could possibly be happy, while in Rebellion against his Maker, and in some
respect against himself, so no Man could ever be happy under this Law, that
fully discovered his Rebellion unto him, and inflicted the Penalties due to it,
without any provision of Relief, or the discovery of any Remedy or Help in this
case; Man could never keep this Law, nor make any adequate compensation for the
breach of it, and therefore it only served to make this discovery to him, that
thereby he was irrecoverably lost, and that his happiness and help must arise
some other way. So that of all places this Mount Sinai yields the least
desirable Fruit to Mankind, and is of all others the most formidable and
destructive, and no Man that is once discharged from the dreadful consequences
that attend it, could ever more mistake his own interest, than to meditate a
retreat to the Soil of Horeb and Sinai.

If it be asked, how we come ever to be freed from the Obligation of the Law,
if the Law be in it self of such an unalterable Nature; the answer is, We never
were, nor can be, free from an obligation to the matter of it, while the World
endures there will be an obedience due to it; but our freedom and discharge
from it lies in this, there being no Remedy provided by the Law it self for our
breach of it, and Man himself being utterly at a loss in that matter, and never
able to provide any, God himself in the deepest profoundest contrivance of
infinite Wisdom, finds out a way to make a satisfaction on our behalf to
himself, for all our transgressions of it; and so although the Law, as to the
nature of it, be not thereupon repealed, yet upon plenary satisfaction made,
the Penalty is relaxed, and our blessed Redeemer in his own Person having
suffered all the Penalties the Law inflicted, the whole power of legislation
and giving Laws to the World, is henceforward put into his hand, all Power in
Heaven and Earth henceforth is his, the Mediator is now the only Legislator,
and no Law is in force, but what he promulgeth; and thereupon as it was
delivered upon Mount Sinai to the Jews, it is by him dissolved, and we come
under obligation to it, not only as it is the Law Natural, but by virtue of a
new edition of it in the Laws of the Gospel, with which it is incorporated and
now enjoined, and becomes obligatory upon the gracious terms thereof and no
other.

The third circumstance considerable, with reference to this Mount, is this,
That it was not only situated in the barren Wilderness of Horeb, and was it
self a most barren fruitless place, full of nothing but unprofitable Shrubs,
fit only for the fire, but it was also a Place of wonderful retreat from all
the Business and Company of the World, a Place extremely solitary and retired,
in the midst of a vast and uninhabited Wilderness, and to this day remains the
most desolate part of the known World; here it was God was pleased to call the
People out to meet him; here he chose, of all the parts of the Earth, to
deliver his Law to them, and not without great expression and signification.

1st, This was to let us know, that when God speaks to us, we should have
nothing to do, but singly to attend him; that supersedes all other occasions,
is of greatest import, and all other affairs are to be postpon'd. God having
great things to transact with the People that came out of Egypt, in order to
sundry future as well as present designs of highest moment and consequence,
kept them Forty Years in the Wilderness at his own finding and providing, that
so nothing might interpose between him and them, nor interrupt that converse he
designed to have with them, and that trial he meant to make of them: when we
are to deal and transact with God, we should say to all the World as Abraham
said to his Servants when he was ascending the Mount to sacrifice Isaac, Stay
you here, while I go and worship yonder.

2dly, This was to signify to us, that when God powerfully declares himself in
the efficacy of his Law, he will bring Men into such a solitude, as that no
diversions whatever shall relieve them, he will set them nakedly before him
without the least shelter to cover or conceal them; many are the coverings Men
make to conceal themselves and their nakedness from God, and many the
subterfuges to which they retire from him, but one time or other God will have
every living Man removed from all worldly concerns to make his Appearance
before him; he will call every Family and every Person apart, and set their
sins in order before them, after they have accustomed themselves to such mean
and low conceptions of him, that at last they think him to be like themselves,
and thereby render the Notion of God nothing but an Idol in their own
degenerate fancy. God's choosing this place to deliver his Law, ought to be a
great and awful consideration to every Man that makes it his business to hide
himself by diversion from God, and the best part of himself, which is his
Conscience, the great present Relief that both evil Men and evil Angels find,
is by diverting themselves with the Noise and Business of this World, from a
solemn consideration of the relation there is between God and them, and how
great an accomptant every creature must needs be to his Maker, ill Men would
soon fall into great Agonies, was there nothing in their view but God and
themselves, for they carry about with them their own condemnation: 'Twas truly
and excellently said by a Heathen Author, Prima est haec ultio quod se judice
Nemo nocens absolvitur. Every such Man is in Practicals, what St. Paul tells us
an Heretic is in Doctrinals, (...), a Man condemned of himself; and it is
impossible to discharge such a Man. The meaning of the Apostle, I take to be,
that he that had at his first entrance into Christianity, that had at his
Baptism made a public Profession of the true orthodox Doctrine of the Gospel,
and after fallen in with corrupt and heretical Opinions contrary to it, had
thereby openly condemned himself, and pulled down what he before had built up:
So it is with all Men that profess to know God, and in Works deny him; that are
convinced of the Law, that it is good, and of the obligation they have to it,
but yet never measure their own Practices by it; sooner or later they will be
all brought into the circumstances the People were in at this Mount Sinai;
David diverted himself long from the sense of his Murder and Adultry, but at
last God singled him out, and so treated with him apart from all the concerns
of his Kingdom, as filled him with the deepest Anguish and Sorrow. How wise and
happy a choice is it to enter into our Closets betimes, to commune with our own
Hearts and be still, and to let our Reins instruct us in the still Season of
the Night, to set God before us, and all the World at a distance behind us, and
take a right and perfect view of our own state with reference to God, and never
take up our rest till we are arrived to those Terms he requires to qualify us
for our reconciliation to him, that we may upon good grounds reckon our selves
amongst the Called, the Faithful, and the Chosen. Under the Gospel there is one
sure never-failing trial of a safe condition, he that sincerely and as an
honest Man ought to do a thing, endeavors a perfect conquest over his most
prevailing and predominant Sin, that Man is a sincere Man in the Gospel
account, and without all controversy in the high road to Everlasting
Happiness; it is our great wisdom to possess our selves now with those thoughts
we shall be sure to have when God summons us to make our Appearance before him;
whatever it is that keeps us from so doing, engages us to the highest folly,
and renders a Man the Scripture-Fool, that is, the Fool in God's account, which
is the true Fool, a Man made up and constituted of folly about his greatest
concerns; when the mirth and pleasant part of the World is a diversion from
this, we may well say of Laughter that it is Madness, and when we employ our
selves in the wisest and most serious part of the World, in order to secure us
from this, we do but seed upon Vanity and Lies, a deceived Heart leads us
aside, and we cover our selves with such a sorry garment as will shortly be
stripped from us, and we shall be left exposed and naked; how great and how
miserable a Fool is that Man that is top full of this World, and the Business
of it, and thinks of nothing else, when God calls him privately aside, and
tells him, This night shall thy soul be taken from thee; and from henceforward,
to all eternity, thou shall have nothing to do but to converse with thy own
Sins and with me in the effects of my Justice.

Several appurtenant Circumstances the Apostle reckons up to this Mount, to
which they were not come, which they might contemplate with much satisfaction,
and the more highly value Gospel-Attainments:

1st, That it might be touched; the meaning of which was only this, that the
intangibility of it by Man or Beast, was only by virtue of Divine Sanction and
Command, and so it was but figuratively so; but the Mount in it self might be
touched, and was a carnal earthly thing suitable to that dispensation, which was
but an earthly Tabernacle pitched by Man; but Mount Sion, he compares it
withal, is a thing impossible to be touched, and is in its own nature purely
spiritual; the sum is, your Fathers came with their Bodies to a Mount that
might be touched, though it must not be touched; but by the Gospel, you are
come in your Spirits to a Mount that cannot corporally be touched, that is
altogether heavenly and spiritual. 2dly, It was full of Fire. 3dly, There was
Blackness. 4thly, Darkness: And, 5thly, Tempests. Fire is of all parts of the
Creation most dreadful to flesh and blood, and in it self terrifying,
tormenting, devouring; and therefore, to make his Majesty the more dreadful,
God it is said descended upon the Mount in Fire, and the Law here given is
thence called a fiery Law; in the 5th of Deuteronomy. we find the People three times
together expressing their dreadful fear of this Fire; and the Psalmist alludes
to this in the 97th Psalm, when he says, A fire goes before him. As the most
dreadful part of the Creation, Hell it self is oftenest set forth by it; this
Fire was accompanied with Blackness, Darkness, Tempest, Lightnings, Thundrings,
and Earthquakes, the most affrighting astonishing Composition that could be set
before Humane Eyes, and in that conjunction rendering each other more terrifying
and amazing, all representing the obscurity and severity of that Dispensation,
and the sad and sore Punishments the Law inflicted upon every transgressor; as
Hell is called Fire, so it is also called the Blackness of Darkness; and by the
Tempest, was signified what Storms and Confusions the Law makes in the Minds of
convinced Sinners, when no Remedy appears. It Is not now possible to conceive,
what a terrifying, heartbreaking, killing Sight, that Mount was so
circumstanced, and the Apostle gives them no small ground of consolation, when
he tells them they are not come to this Mount: It Is true, that all this is
called by the Holy Ghost, in the New Testament, Glorious, but it is meant of the
Glory of God's Justice and of his severity, which we are told is much excelled,
and in a sort eclipsed by the Glory of his Grace and Mercy.

6thly, and 7thly. To complete the Terror of this Mount the Apostle mentions
the sound of the Trumpet, by which God summoned the People to appear before
Him, and the voice of words which the people were not able to bear the hearing
of: Of the sacred use of Trumpets we read much in Scripture, sometimes to
summon to great Judgments, and sometimes preparative calls to great Mercies,
they were used in calling Assemblies, and in a solemn manner in proclaiming the
Jubilee every 50th Year; upon which account the People were said to be blessed
that heard the joyful sound: There was also every first Day of the 7th Month, a
Memorial of blowing of Trumpets to summon the People to the Day of expiation,
the preaching of the Gospel is often typically represented, by a Trumpet
sounding, it is also in the Revelation, introductive of all the great Judgments
toward the end of the World, the seven Trumpets there are said to sound for
that purpose; and in the very last coming of Christ, he is said to come with
the Voice of the Archangel and the Trumpet of God: This that the People heard
here was not a real Trumpet, but the sound of one, possibly the Voice of the
Archangel uttered in the sound of a Trumpet, as perhaps the Voice of the
Archangel and the Trumpet of God when Christ shall come, is only the Voice of
the Archangel uttered in the sound of a Trumpet, this Trumpet upon Mount Sinai
is said to wax louder and louder; signifying God's nearer approach until he
uttered the Law unto them: The sound of it was most terrifying and dreadful,
and had this signification, That God will call all Flesh before him and alarm
them to receive the Judgment pronounced by his Laws, and the call will be so
loud that no Mortal Ear can exclude it.

To the sound of the Trumpet is added the voice of words, with which the People
were so greatly affrighted, their fear arose not only from the Matter of the
Words, but from the manner of their delivery, and that dreadful sound in which
they were uttered, as appears by their petition put up, which was not that God
should not speak to them any more, but that he would speak by Moses, and not
himself personally any more least they should die. This appears in the
recapitulation of this story in Deuteronomy. 5. the People are there said to desire
Moses; Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say. The Apostle
adds, they could not bear that which was commanded, the weight of the Law was
unsupportable; and to add to the terror of all Disobedience to it, if so much
as Man or Beast touched the Mountain from whence it was delivered it was
immediately to die; and even Moses himself who had often been so near unto God,
and so conversant with him, was not able to abide this dreadful scene, but fell
into consternation and horror, [an evident intimation, that the best Man upon
Earth could not stand before God, under that dispensation;] which addition to
the story, God for some especial ends (we may be assured) gave to the Apostle
by Revelation, there being no such thing recorded by Moses himself.

In the 22th Verse the Apostle comes to the second Part of the comparison, the
affirmitive Part, showing what it is that the believing Jews when they embraced
Christianity came to, but ye are come to mount Sion: 1st, This in general is to
instruct the converted Jews, that by the Gospel they are come to, and embodyed
with the true Catholic Church, called in scripture, the fullness of him that
fills all things; of which the National Church of the Jews was but a Type and
a Figure: 2dly, That this true Catholic Church is partly in Heaven and partly
on Earth. And 3dly, The Apostle by intermixing these parts together in his
account of them, gives them to understand, that they are all of one piece and
together make but one Church and one Body under one Head, things in Heaven and
things on Earth being united in Christ as their common head, and by telling
them they are come, they are come to this Catholic Church: the Apostle
signifies this unto them, that as their Fathers after several Days Travel upon
their coming out of Egypt, and by great and solemn preparations, came at last
to Mount Sinai; so they and their Fathers having traveled through the former
dispensation, which was the great preparative to this, they are now safely
arrived hither, and are come to all the Glories and Privileges of the Gospel,
they are come in respect of Relation and Communion to all that part of the
Church that is in Heaven, and to all the true and real parts of it upon Earth,
not now confined to any National Constitution whatever; and this is the best
state and utmost that we can attain to in this World. The Apostles drift here
is not at all to describe the Church Triumphant, but the Militant Church; the
force of this Discourse lies in preferring the state of the Gospel Church here
upon Earth, beyond and before that of the legal and judicial Church, and the
Apostle chooses to represent them both by two Mounts, one where the Law was
given, (which was the greatest thing belonged to the Judaical economy;) and
the other from whence the Gospel first issued. If you ask why the Apostle
represents the Gospel state by Mount Sion and Jerusalem, that were places
proper and peculiar to the Jews; there are several accounts may be given of it.

1st, Because those places had Spiritual and Gospel significations even as the
Jews enjoyed them; and so the Apostle represents by them [the better to engage
the Jews] what they truly and really signified, and speaks of them in their own
native and proper representation: Mount Sion consisted of two parts, on the
highest part the Temple was built, and on the other the Palace of their Kings;
so that this Mount was typically comprehensive of their Civil and
Ecclesiastical state.

2dly, The Gospel first issued from thence, and it was prophesied that so it
should do, Esau 2.3. out of Sion shall go forth the Law, (speaking of the
Gospel) and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And the same Prophet tells us,
the deliverer shall come out of Sion; and upon that account in Psalm. 133. God
is said from Mount Sion to command the blessing, even life for evermore; the
meaning is, Christ himself came into the Temple upon Mount Sion in Jerusalem,
and from thence in person issued out the Proclamation of the Gospel, and
therefore the Apostle keeps up the Honor of this Mount, and this City, because
it had ever been by right and designation the seat of the true Worship of the
only true God, in opposition to all Idolatry, and upon that account called the
City of the Living God; and in regard of the most glorious Types and
Prefigurations were therein included, and at last therein appeared the great
end and substance of them all; the glorious Person of God-Man of Christ
himself; it seems in a sort necessary, if the Church were denominated by any
one place; it should be from this, as being comprehensive of the whole Church
and State of the Jews, and the very center of it, the Catholic Church under
the Gospel being under confinement to no one place more then another, no one
place could so give a denomination to it, as it might do to a National Church,
and therefore this place is made choice of by the Holy Ghost, and being
comprehensive of all God's sacred institutions of old, of the Jewish Church
Literally, and the Gospel Church Spiritually: The Catholic Church universally
thereupon is denominated from it, and by it, to the end of the World.

To which we may add in the Third place, That since all the promises in the Old
Testament that are made to the Gospel Church to the end of the World, are made
to it under those names of Sion and Jerusalem, that therefore it seems
necessary to keep up those names [as it has pleased the Holy Ghost to do] to
the end of the World, to show the punctual fulfilling of those promises in all
Ages. What Mount Sion and Jerusalem signified will not be completed till the
Consummation of all things, upon which account God was said to take up his rest
and dwell there for ever: Nothing therefore seems so proper, so decent, and
fit, as to denominate the Gospel Church by those terms; and as it was in the
Apostles times a great help to them to find out what Christ was to do and
suffer, by what was signified and typified of him under the Law, so it will be
to the very end of the World a mavelous help to the Church to understand the
glorious methods of his Kingdom and Government, by looking back and seeing how
it was set forth in the prefigurations of it that belonged to Jerusalem and
Mount Sion.

It pleases the Holy Ghost throughout the whole Scripture most frequently to
represent the Gospel in Judaical Types and Phrases, and two reasons we may
probably suppose for it.

1st, To show what an exact Agreement and Harmony there is in all God's
Dispensations, how every shadow truly represented the substance, and every
counter-part punctually agrees with the original.

And 2dly, As a means to promote the conversion of the Jews in the latter
times, when they shall lay to heart and consider, that all their own Religion
expressed in their own Language, is truly and fully to be found in the
Christian Religion, that the Law therein is exactly conster'd into the Gospel,
and every particular thing they most valued they shall here find by name
expressed, and fully to be enjoyed in the substance and perfection of it.

But for the more punctual and exact discovery of the Apostles sense in these
Verses, it will be needful to consider the particulars [to which he tells the
believing Jews they were come] severally, and distinctly.

The First thing he tells them they are come to, is to Mount Sion, of which for
the clearer comprehension of the Apostles meaning by it, some things may be
particularly considered of that Mount as it stood circumstanced under the Law;
and this in especial, that the great Honor that is put upon it in Scripture,
is principally with respect to the Temple that then stood upon the top of it,
and which was meant and signified by it; this was the place whither all the
Males were to come three times a Year, and the solemn part of all the Jewish
Worship could be no where else performed, and their private Worship where ever
they were at home or abroad, (upon Solomon's request to God at the first
dedication of it) was generally directed toward this place. This we may see in
the case of Jonah, who in the Whale's Belly thought of directing his Prayer
toward this Holy Temple; and the Prophet Daniel, when it was pulled down and
lay in Rubbish, prayed even then toward it three times a day, as we see in the
6th of Daniel. This Temple, placed upon Mount Sion, was the only sanctified
House where the mighty God was pleased to take up his dwelling since the World
began; the Tabernacle was small and ambulatory, and but preparative to this
glorious, sanctified, solemn Fabric; the City of Jerusalem and the Land of
Canaan, were only holy relatively and upon collateral accounts, the City with
reference to the Temple, the place of God's residence, but the Temple was
inherently Holy, made so by God's own dedication, and descent into it at the
first; this was the place where day and night God was served without ceasing,
according to his own ordination, and therefore he is said to love it above all
the dwelling places of Jacob. Here the long expected Messiah, the Son of God,
Christ himself was brought, and all that the Law required performed about ^im
in this Sacred House: But sure we are the Apostle intended nothing literal
about this Mount, his drift is wholly spiritual; and therefore, having premised
thus much of the literal, typical State of this Mount, we must now examine what
it means in this place, and as it lies in the comparison, and the sense
intended, seems very obvious; by Mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, and the
City of the living God, the same thing is intended and this is the meaning, ye
are come to all that was typified by them, and all that was promised on the
Churches behalf to them, to every Promise made to the Church under those
denominations, which is no other but the Gospel-state and the blessed
Privileges and Administrations thereof in its fullness and glory; the Apostle
declares the meaning of these places to be spiritual, and neither of private
interpretation nor literal signification, that the Jews might cease doting upon
them in that low and mean sense, and might be convinced that the Gospel
vertually contains all that was excellent in them; Mount Sion (as was before
said) had its value from the Temple that stood upon it, and therefore when the
Gospel is prophesied of by it, it is said the mountain of the Lord's house shall
be exalted on the top of the mountains. Now, instead of this material Temple,
every Christian under the Gospel is himself a living Temple of the Holy Ghost,
a Temple wherein God dwells, and all spiritual Worship and Service is
continually offered up, and the whole Church is one entire living Temple,
wherein God is always spiritually served, so it is expressed in the 2d of Ephesians.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with
the saints and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, in
whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an holy temple in the
Lord: And he that is arrived at this true Gospel-state, and all the glorious
Enjoyments of it, to have access to the Father, through the Son, by that one
Spirit, he is come to the true Mount Sion and the real Temple, where God will
dwell for ever, he abides in the nearest access to God he is capable of, and in
all those holy and sanctified Qualifications which the Temple signified, as it
was then the Seat and Center of all the true Worship of God.

The second thing the Apostle tells the Jews they are come to, is the heavenly
Jerusalem, the City of the living God, and although the signification of this,
is the same with Mount Sion, yet it is greatly farthering to the Apostle's
design, the mention of it, that so the Jews might think nothing valuable
amongst them was lost, but all to be found with great advantage in the
profession of the Gospel, the whole Religion of that National Church of the
Jews being contained in this City, and therein vertually comprised the whole
state of the Gospel. The Catholic Church, with great reason and signification,
under the Gospel every where spread, and under no confinement, is styled a
City, and is called Jerusalem; a vast difference there was between coming to
that dreadful, barren Mount Sinai, in the Wilderness of Horeb, and the City of
the living God. Several things are considerable in this City to heighten the
comparison, taking it to be made either with Mount Sinai or Jerusalem literal:

1st, The Noble and Honorable Government of this City: It Is governed by the
great Charter of the Gospel; none have any Rule but the living God himself; no
Laws are in force here, but what come from Christ's own Mouth; the Gospel
Church is built up and managed as the Temple was [which was the soul and glory
of this City] in every particular, by God's own punctual direction, and there
is his delight; there his Soul rests where he is served by Laws of his own
composing and enacting.

2dly, This City is a place of invincible strength and security; the Jews knew
to their cost the earthly Jerusalem was not so: here is the Mount Sion that
cannot be moved; the Gates of Hell can never prevail against it; it is sure to
remain against all opposition, till it be safely taken up into Heaven, from
whence it came.

3dly, The Inhabitants of it are all united; it is a City compact together, not
with carnal and earthly, but spiritual Ligaments; there is such an union in it
as God has chosen and takes pleasure in; amidst great variety, they have but
one Head; they all minister under him as fellow-citizens for the good of each
other; they are all guided and animated by one Spirit, and they all tend to one
and the same end.

4thly, It Is a City of wonderful Beauty, the City of the great King, the Palace
of the living and eternal God, as the Psalmist says comprehensively and
prophetically of it under the name of Sion, Beautiful for situation is mount
Sion, the joy of the whole earth: this Beauty lies in the Presence of God, and
in its Sanctity, and in that Image and Superscription of God that it bears;
here are to be seen the Beauties of Holiness, and the Stamp of all the Divine
Attributes: and this City, as it is called the heavenly Jerusalem, and the City
of the living God, is opposed to the earthly Jerusalem, as it abode during the
whole state of the Law; for we are told in the Epistle to the Galatians, that
that was in bondage with her Children as well as Mount Sinai; but Jerusalem,
which is above, says he is free, which is this heavenly Jerusalem he here
speaks of; the Apostle means not by Jerusalem above, the Heavenly State, that
is plain by the Context, but he means the State of the Gospel Church here upon
Earth: the thing to be enquired after is, upon what account it is called the
heavenly Jerusalem, and Jerusalem above, and that we shall find to be a most
proper and reasonable Appellation of it, and that upon several accounts:

1st, It comes originally down from Heaven, Divine Revelation is the Ground and
Foundation of it.

2dly, All the Inhabitants of Heaven dwell also here, both the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, by their gracious Presence and Influences; and in that
respect this is said to be their Dewlling Place, and their Abode for ever; and
therefore in the following words the Apostle tells them who the Inhabitants are
of this Mount and City to which they are come, God, the Judge of all, Jesus,
the Mediator of the New Covenant, and an innumerable company of Angels; the
Angels are all as ministering Spirits and Servants present in it and conversant
about it, and such Inhabitants must needs make an holy City.

3dly, It is made up of Members part in Heaven and part on Earth, the blessed
Angels, and the Saints departed, as well as the Saints living on Earth, are
parts of it, and so it has a good Title to be called Heavenly, and Jerusalem
above.

4thly, All the true Members of it, even upon Earth, are holy and heavenly
Persons, their conversation, (...), their City-conversation is in Heaven, and
they are all traveling toward their everlasting rest there. And so this
Heavenly Jerusalem is the Heavenly State of the Catholic Church under the
Gospel, which is not fixed to any one earthly place, nor can it be in bondage
or come under captivity, but is free, is the Mother of us all, comes from
above, and returns thither; it may be said of it as it was of Christ, when he
was the Son of Man upon Earth, he was also the Son of Man in Heaven; and so
this Jerusalem, this heavenly City, whilst it is upon Earth, it is also in
Heaven: the nature of it is purely spiritual and heavenly, and the whole World,
both Jews and Gentiles, are comprehended in it, making, as the Apostle speaks,
of them twain one new man.

The third think Believers are said to come to, is an innumerable company of
Angels; the expression is taken out of the 7th of Daniel, where it is said,
speaking of God, Thousand thousands minister unto him, and Ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him, ye are come to Miriads of Angels, which is well
rendered, an innumerable company of Angels; and this is made good several ways:

1st, We are come so to them as to be of the same Society and Family with them,
they are part of Christ's Household, only inhabit a Story above us; for by the
Blood of his Cross all things in Heaven and Earth are gathered together in and
under him as their Supreme Head and Sovereign, and make but one Incorporation;
they all join together in the same Adoration and Worship, for God has said,
let all the Angels of God worship him, and they declare themselves upon all
occasions to be fellow servants with the Saints in all Christ's Concerns, in
all the Affairs of his House and Family.

2dly, We are come to these Angels by having a secret, invisible, yet constant
and sweet Communion with them; great is the invisible influence the Angels have
upon us, and the converse they have with us, taking notice of all our private
Devotions, and farthering us therein, by many unthought of and undiscerned, yet
very advantageous circumstances, such as lies in their way to administer, and
also by being present in the public and solemn Assemblies of the Church, where
they not only join and concur in the Worship and Service performed, but without
all doubt in such methods as are proper to them to operate in, they are aiding
and assisting, and both in the private and public Worship of the Saints,
continually preventing and opposing the malignant endeavors of Satan and the
other Angels; and so there is always a sweet Communion maintained between the
Saints upon Earth and them in Heaven; as the Saints here look upwards and
rejoice in their fixed and established Happiness and Glory above, so they are
continually ascending and descending and visiting the Saints here below, and
using all endeavors to bring them safe to the same blessed state with
themselves, and beholding the whole Trinity so employed as they are for Man's
recovery, and taking such complacency in it, and they themselves having
received Orders in Heaven from their Supreme Sovereign and Head to that
purpose, their whole Endeavors tend that way, and to assist in the completing
of the Church, as it is their peculiar Province, so it is also their great
Delight and Satisfaction.

3dly. We are come to those Miriads of Angels, as they are Christ's supreme
invisible Agents and Officers in his Church, and to all the Advantages of their
Service and Ministry, in general, they have the care of all the Elect, the
whole Body of the Faithful are committed to their charge and keeping, we are
told the Angels of the Lord encampeth about them that fear him, as they did
about Elisha of old. How many gracious and wonderful Deliverances does Christ
effect for his Church in general, and each individual Member of it, by the
Angelical Ministry? the manner of which, though we enjoy the benefit, is to us
unknown; and as they were under the Old Testament employed to make
extraordinary Revelations of the Will of God to the World, so they are now
employed to be continually suggesting the Mind and Will of God to the Hearts
and Spirits of his chosen, and to counter-work the Devil in all his Temptations
and Suggestions to the contrary; this is not done in such a way as the holy
Spirit operates, who is an indweller with us and cohabits with the Soul, but
the Angels work upon us only as external Operators, and so what they do is by
making impressions upon our Faculties from outward and external Means and
Circumstances suited thereunto, and from our present Inclination and
Disposition, suitable to which they accommodate their Actings, but they convey
not, as the Holy Ghost does, any inward Power of Acting, nor any new Abilities
to our Souls.

4thly, As the evil Angels are constant observers of all the Transactions of
the Church in general, and of every Member of it in particular, in order to
accuse, calumniate and misrepresent before God, so these blessed Angels are
constant Spectators and public Notaries of all the Proceedings of the Church,
and all the Actings and Sufferings of every Member thereof, in order to bear a
faithful Witness before God, and be a punctual Record thereof at the Day of
Judgment: And in this sense we are come unto them, they are not only present in
public Assemblies, but conversant in the Closet of every Saint, and take an
exact view of all their devout and fervent Addresses unto God; upon this
account it is that St. Paul tells us, that the Apostles by their Preaching and
Suffering were a Spectacle to Angels, the holy Angels beheld their Spiritual
Courage and Conquest with wonderful satisfaction; and upon this account it is,
that St. Paul charge Timothy, before the Elect Angels, to look well to the
discharge of his Work and Office, because they are Witnesses appointed of God
to take punctual notice of his Behavior therein; and the Presence of the
Angels is made an Argument by the Holy Ghost for the well-ordering our selves
and all our Actions in Church Assemblies.

5thly, The Angels as they are God's Officers, employed for the guard and
security of the Church, so they are also for the revenging of his Wrath upon
their Enemies, so it often was under the Old Testament, and so it is under the
New, and will continue till the end; that wretched profane Herod, who added to
all his former wickedness to shut up John in Prison, and after added to that
addition to cut off his Head to please a Dalilah, and at last came to make
himself his own Idol, by taking to himself that glory that should have been
ascribed to God, at last an Angel smote him and dispatched him to his own
place, by a woeful and miserable Catastrophey: the Angels stood all ready when
our blessed Savior was led to the Cross, to have rescued him upon the least
Command; this our Savior himself told the Jews, when he was encompassed with a
Roman Guard, he could upon request to his Father have more then twelve legions
of angels to rescue and assist him, which exceeded the number of Men the Romans
then had in their whole Army, for their Army at that time did not consist of
twelve Legions; and in the Revelations we find the Angels constantly employed
by God as the great Executioners of his Wrath upon the Churches Enemies to the
end of the World.

6thly, We are come to this innumerable company of Angels, as to our truest
Friends and most faithful Companions, for they never leave us till they have
brought us home.

1st, To the rest of our Souls in Heaven, for they wait upon every dying
Believer to comfort and cheer his spirit so soon as ever it has left the Body,
and safely to convey it into that Blessed fellowship above, and into that
glorious place and state of rest called Abraham's Bosom.

And 2dly, They will be assisting and instrumental [though it be effected by
the mighty Power of God] to call and raise the Bodies of the Saints out of
their Graves at last: when Christ comes to effect the first Resurrection, he
will be attended with all his Glorious Angels, and by their Ministry the Dead
in Christ shall rise first, the Trumpet that will sound to summon them out of
their ashes will be an Angelical sound, probably the Voice of the Archangel;
and when they arise out of the Earth, they will together with all the Saints
then living, be caught up by the Angels and conveyed by them to meet the Lord
in the Air, [the last office the Angels will have to perform,] and so will ever
abide with him. Whose heart would not burn within him upon the contemplation of
these things, that God should be such a lover of Men, that the Eternal Son
should by his death redeem them; his own spirit by his influences come down and
dwell in them; and all the Angels in Heaven made their Guardians; and their
whole Ministry and Service employed on their behalf.

How blessed a condition does the Gospel instate us in above the Law, in
reference to this particular: When Man first fell by sin, the Angels became his
most avowed Enemies, and Executioners of Wrath, that went out against him; for
the Cherubims stood with a flaming Sword to keep the Tree of Life, and to shut
Man out of Paradise, he made his Angels Spirits, and at that time his ministers
a flame of fire. When the Law was given upon Mount Sinai, and Man considered
only in his natural state, the Angels were most dreadful and terrible in their
appearance; but now under the Gospel, Angels and Men by the Blood of the Cross
are embodyed into one Fellowship and Society, united in and under one head,
engaged in the same Worship and Service, and enjoy a sweet and most endeared
communion each with other; all which is fully insinuated and intimated by the
Apostle in telling the Believing Jews they were come to this innumerable
company of angels.

4thly, The Apostle tells them, they are come to the general assembly and
church of the firstborn which are written in Heaven: This is an expression of
that part of the Catholic Church here upon Earth, to which by the Gospel all
Believers come, and with which they are incorporated and imbodyed; two things
are intended hereby, to show the preference of the Gospel-state before that of
the Legal.

1st, That instead of the Assembly of all the Males three times a Year at
Jerusalem, which is called in Scripture the great congregation, they are come
now to the great Assembly of all the Members of the true Catholic Church
amongst Mankind, to all the true servants of God both of Jews and Gentiles,
that any where call upon God in Spirit and Truth, and that God would have such
a general Assembly, and such an universal Church of the firstborn throughout
all Nations, without any farther respect to the Jews or their Church, was a
secret undiscovered till the Gospel Revelation came.

2dly, That this assembly consists only of real and true Saints, such as have
the right of the first born: the great inheritance that men are born capable of
in this World, is the possession of Heaven at last; those that obtain that are
the eldest sons of this lower World, and the firstborn amongst Mankind in the
Scripture sense; and none obtain this inheritance but such as are eternally
elected in Christ to it, and therefore the Apostle when he names the Church of
the firstborn, adds, as explanatory of it, whose names are enrolled in Heaven,
that is in the Lamb's Book of Life, in the Roll of God's eternal purposes and
councels, there they are Registered, and not in an Earthly Register as the Jews
were; this Church of the firstborn is called in Scripture, the first fruits of
the whole Creation, unto God and the Lamb; they are said to be Heirs to God and
Joynt-heirs with Christ; they are made Kings and Priests unto God, and so have
all the Title and Right of Primogeniture appurtenant unto them. This infinitely
exceeds the state of the Jews who were but a typical People; their general
Assembly was but a national Assembly; and though many excellent particular
Saints were amongst them, yet they were in their National Constitution but a
figure and representation of this true Saintship, and the whole that belonged
to them was but a shadow and Image of this true Catholic Church, and not the
thing it self; they were enrolled indeed but it was upon Earth, and upon an
Earthly account to preserve their Tribes distinct, and so to adjust their
Earthly inheritances in Canaan.

The greatest difficulty that seems to be in this part of the Apostles
Comparison, is, what is meant by this expression, the general assembly; since
there neither was, nor ever will be, a time that all the Members of the Church
under the Gospel shall meet together till Christ's second coming; the words
(...) and (...) here used, I take to signify the same thing, and the latter to
be exegetical of the former; it is not meant of the Church, of the firstborn of
all assembling in any one place, but of that Church every where assembling in
several and distinct parts, it is spoken in opposition to the Assemblies of the
Jews, who were but one particular nation assembling at one place in Jerusalem,
to which they were confined; the generality the Apostle means, does not arise
from their meeting all in one place, but from their meeting without confinement
all the World over: to this general Assembly of the Gospel Church every
Believer is come, and to it is united, but it is after a Spiritual manner, and
therein lies the excellency of this Union; this Assembly where ever or in what
parts soever they are met are animated by one Spirit; they have the same Faith
and Hope, the same Privileges and Enjoyments, and [wherein the Life of the
Union lies] they are all united under one common Head, and are but one Body
belonging to it, and so the sense seems to be this, [which contains in it the
force of the Apostles comparison;] ye are not after an Earthly manner come with
your Bodies to any such assembly as that at mount Sinai, nor as that of the
Males at the earthly Jerusalem, but ye are come which is infinitely better, in
your Souls and Spirits, unto the Society and Fellowship of all the Sanctified
and saved throughout the World, who now everywhere Worship the Father in Spirit
and Truth, and are all present together in one Spirit, though corporally
divided, having but one common interest, rejoicing in the welfare and
prosperity of each other, and closely united in their mutual prayers and
concerns each for other.

This is of all others the most truly Honorable and Noble Society that we can
converse with in this World, here the Blessing is commanded life for evermore:
here is the Crown of all Man's glory and Happiness to be obtained; he that is no
Member of this Association is under a black Character, and comes no farther
then the Assembly of the fallen Angels and their Associates: the Scripture
informs us, that the Wrath of God abides upon every such Man, and the Judge
stands at the Door shortly to execute it; the foundation of this Glorious Happy
and Blessed Assembly stands sure, and this is the seal of it, the Lord knows
them that are his, they are those God has eternally designed for Happiness and
Glory, their Record is on high, their Names are in the Roll of God's eternal
Determinations: And this ought to seem strange to none, for no Man can with any
tolerable sense conceive that infinite Wisdom should make any thing and not at
the same time design it to its utmost end; it is contradicted by our own finite
and imperfect discretion, who still have our eyes upon the ultimate end of all
that we enterprise, and to me it seems that the whole system of those
objections that are made against the Doctrine of God's Decrees touching Men's
eternal condition is fully discarded with this one consideration; that God
infinitely foreseeing and perfectly knowing from all eternity whatever any
creature he made would do, and how he would behave himself when he should be
brought into being and existence, 'twas all one for him in point of Justice to
determine his condition before he was made, as to determine it at the day of
Judgment, after all the actions of his Life were over, the prescience of God
cannot with any tolerable satisfaction to our own reason be denied, for
whatever potentiality God created, he must needs know and foresee the utmost
extent of it, or else he could not design any certain end to himself by it, but
might remain ignorant of the success and event of a Creature which he had from
himself given being to, which is absurd to suppose, for infinite knowledge must
needs comprehend and look beyond all finite actions, and therefore when God
made Man with freedom of choice he must needs foreknow [that made that faculty]
which way his will would incline, and the utmost journey it could possibly lead
him, or else he must remain wholly ignorant what would be the suceess of his
own Work, and incapable of making any certain determination with himself about
him. We find in Scripture prescience and election always go together, and
prescience has the precedence, so in St. Peter's first Epistle he calls those to
whom he wrote, elect according to the foreknowledge of God, and St. Paul in his
deep and solemn discourse about this matter tells us, whom he did foreknow them
also he did predestinate.

5thly, They are said to come to God the Judge of all, they are come to the
Lord paramount of the Church, the great author and end of all transactions
therein; coming to him and drawing near to him in Scripture Phrase, is coming
to partake of his Fovour and Grace, or else coming to the Judge of all, were of
all conditions the most dreadful; the wicked he keeps at a distance, and is
said to know afar off; this is of all seize the most Superlative, all
that the Heart of Man can wish is included herein, to come to his Maker with
acceptance, and to find favor in his sight, whose favor is better then Life
it self; and to have the Supreme Judge of all on his side: As this mighty Judge
was accompanied with all possible terror and dread at Mount Sinai, and all the
People kept upon pain of Death at a great distance from him, to tell us how far
removed from God every Man is by the Law, and in his sinful estate, so by the
Gospel we are come as near to him as humane nature will admit, and he appears
to us in all the glory of his reconciling Grace, and receives us into intimate
fellowship and converse with him; for this is the declared state of the Gospel,
We have fellowship with the Father and with the Son, and the blood of Jesus
cleanses us from all sin.

Several things result from this Supreme Privilege of the Gospel, That we are
come to God, the Judge of all, as reconciled to him, and having his righteous
judgment on our side:

First, That he will certainly revenge the Churches Cause upon all their
implacable Enemies, who alone is the Judge of all Causes and Complaints, and
whatever Controversy has been at any time in any Age between Satan and the
Church, and between the wicked, profane, persecuting part of the World and the
Church, God the Judge of all will determine it on the Churches side, will
vindicate their innocence, and their faithful adherence to him, his own
interest and theirs being the same: And how great a comfort ought this to be to
every sincere Christian, however persecuted and oppressed by Men, to consider,
that yet the righteous God is of his side, and that the Supreme Judge, who
cannot do unrighteously, whose Judgment is the very perfection of Justice, and
whose Judgment is final and irreversible, will be sure to give judgment for him
at last, and reward his Enemies with shame and confusion.

2dly, He will certainly recompense all his Servants for every faithful service
they shall perform for him; the reward of all their Works will be sure to
follow them into the next World; this is the great stay and support to all true
Christians under their present pressures, that their labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord: this St. Paul encouraged himself in the prospect of, in the
midst of all the Heroclitons and Hurricanes of Persecution he met with, There
is, says he, laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give unto me.

3dly, All the dreadful fears and apprehensions of God that ever since the fall
have inhabited the minds of Men, are by this access unto God discharged and
dismissed; this is that which has kept the whole World in bondage all their
days, the fear of God as their Judge standing at the door, ready to execute
Wrath upon all Disobedience; this is the inward invisible Wound Mankind carry
about them; this is the inward heart-afflicting Fear and Terror of every
sinner: nor can he any way discharge or disburden himself of it, for it is
engraven in his being and is part of himself, every Man's own Conscience, which
is the ability he has to judge of himself, with reference to the Judgment of
God, is God's Viceroy, and whether he will or no, will give in evidence for
God against him, and justify truth against carnal and corrupt interest. What
sad and doleful reflections has the sense of God's judgment occasioned in Men?
Men think of God and are troubled, and say with Job, Destruction from God was a
terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. How uneasy
are Men in all Humane Comforts and Enjoyments where the sense of this abides? A
Man that has God for his Enemy at last, and nothing but this present World for
his Portion, is meanly and woefully circumstanced; now by the Gospel, all this
is removed, we come to the Judge of all as our best friend, and are able to say
with an holy boast and ex^ltation, Who shall condemn? it is God the Judge of all
that justifies; who shall lay any thing to our charge? since the Supreme Judge
of all the World is for us? what now can trouble us? what is it can now
engender sorrow in our breasts? we are now impregnable against ever being made
truly miserable, he that has God of his side can never be made unhappy; the
false corrupt judgment of this wicked degenerate World, will be of mean value
with us and little concern us, since the Judge of all is on our side, and we
are secure of being by his judgment made eternally happy; for as the Apostle
tells the suffering Saints, God will reward tribulation to them that trouble
them, but to those that are troubled, eternal rest and glory.

6thly, We are said to be come to the spirits of just men made perfect; that
is, completed in the full reward of their Christian course; the Apostle
mentions all the parts of the Gospel, Catholic Church, both in Heaven and in
Earth, to manifest to what a Noble and Honorable Society we are joined and
incorporated by the Faith of the Gospel, and how desperate and irrecoverable an
evil Apostasy from such a Communion were; this Expression throws that foolish,
idle Fiction of Purgatory quite out of doors, it is by this Expression of the
Apostle excommunicated and utterly cast out of the Catholic Church for ever;
for all the departed Saints are reckoned here to be in one only condition, they
are not some in one state and some in another, but they are all perfect and
complete, which utterly confutes all the fictitious doting Dreams of such a
refining state as Purgatory, every departed Saint's spirit is in a state of
perfection with God, they are all in his presence, and therefore they are by
the Apostle in this enumeration placed next unto him.

The best way of considering this Expression, is to discover what prospect we
can gain by it into the other World, and what can be certainly collected from
it of the state of the blessed in Heaven. These three things are very plainly
deductive from hence: 1. That all the Saints departed are in a state of
Perfection and enjoy a blessed Communion with God. 2. That they also enjoy a
Communion with the Church militant here. And, 3. That the Church here enjoy
also a Communion with them; both which last particulars are implied in our
being said to be come unto them. The Souls departed hence, have this Communion
with the Church below; 1. They worship as they do him that sits on the Throne
and the Lamb, they adore the Merit of Christ's Blood, and the Glory of free
Grace for ever; and wheresoever any Gospel Worship is offered up upon Earth,
they are present in spirit and concur in it, the Service and Worship of Heaven
is of the very same nature with that of the Saints upon Earth, tho performed in
the Royal Presence, and in the heavenly Temple, and in some respects
differently circumstanc'd. 2. They have a tender regard to all the laboring,
fighting, striving Servants of Christ here below, wishing a happy success to
them, well remembering that themselves were lately in that condition, the state
of the Church here that is at Sea and tossed with many storms, no doubt is much
in their minds, tho they are safely arrived themselves in the Harbor of
Eternal Rest and Happiness. 3. They rejoice greatly in all the Churches
prosperity, and particularly in its increase; if the conversion of sinners on
Earth cause great joy in Heaven, no doubt but the Spirits made perfect are
partakers of it as well as the Angels, for they are altogether as one Society,
and they are equally capable of it as they are, for they are like the Angels of
God, and they have much more cause to be concerned in the joy than the others,
because they themselves have traveled through all the stages of Salvation, and
all the Methods by which Souls come to glory, and are now experimentally
informed what blessedness attends and waits upon every converted saved Soul. 4.
They have communion with the Church here below, by being present with Christ,
and beholding his blessed intercession for it, taking unspeakable delight and
satisfaction therein, they behold all the concerns of the militant Church
constantly presented before the Father by the Son, and so are conversant with
it, and have the same vital love and concern for it that animates the whole.

3dly, Our being said to be come to them, implies some effect of that as an
attainment, and some communion that is had with them on our part; 1. We have
communion with them in this respect, when ever we address our selves to God and
perform any Worship to the Divine Majesty, we do it with this certain assurance
and knowledge, that he is encompassed with the holy Angels and all the Souls of
the perfected and blessed, and so in every act of Divine Worship we have a sort
of communion with them, he that converseth with any great King, has a relative
communion with his whole Court as appurtenant to him. 2. We are come unto them,
and have a communion with them upon this account, because we are in the same
state that brought them thither, we are in possession of the very same title to
glory that brought them to it, we have in faith what they have in fruition, and
we are continually waiting to be removed to them; we are therefore truly said
to be come to them because we are of the same Household and Family, and there is
nothing wanting but our dissolution to bring us actually into their Company,
and into the same Place where they now are: And lastly, we are come to them so,
as to receive great encouragement from them in our Christian Course, by
contemplating what it has brought them unto; we are much animated to follow
their example, and much advantaged every way by setting before us their
glorious and blessed state and condition.

7thly, We are here said to be come to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.
Here the Apostle sets down the Alpha and the Omega of all this catholic
Society; this Jesus is the Sourse and Center of all, the great Cornerstone
upon which all the Structure depends: In two things the force of the Apostle's
comparison lies, 1. They are come to Jesus himself a Savior, and a Mediator
far exceeding Moses: And, 2. to a much better Covenant, of which he is the
Mediator. The preference of Christ to Moses as a Mediator, is largely
discoursed of in this Epistle, Moses was but a typical Mediator, employed as a
middle person between God and the People, but Christ is the Son in his own
House. In this case God-man is the Mediator, and God is the person mediated
unto; which consideration perhaps may help to unfold that difficult expression
of St. Paul to the Galat. A mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.
In two things the Apostle makes the especial difference between Christ and
Moses to lie, 1. Christ was the Surety of the Covenant unto God on the Peoples
part; and so they are sure not to fail in the performance of their part: under
Moses the People constantly failed in their part, and he was no way to
undertake or perform for them. 2. Christ confirmed the Covenant by his own
Death, which Moses did not; what he did was by the Blood of other Creatures, of
Bulls and Goats; what Christ did, he did by his own Blood, and by the offering
up of himself; and therefore coming to such a Mediator as he is, Jesus a
Savior as well as a Mediator, that has redeemed the Church with his own Blood;
and such a Mediator as he is, that lives for ever to make intercession, is
infinitely better than to be baptized into Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea.

After all the Promises, Predictions, Types, and Prefigurations of him, the
Apostle tells the believing Jews, they are at last come to this Jesus, to this
Mediator and Savior, their Fathers having traveled through so many Ages and
Dispensations before they arrived at his appearing, it would be the very last
degree of all folly and contradiction to their own interest, to think of
drawing back and returning to those terrene Elements, by which he was
figuratively represented, and which have now by his appearance totally spent
themselves in his signification, coming to him as Mediator of this new
Covenant, implies coming to all the Benefits and Advantages of this Covenant,
for all the Promises of God are in him, yea, and in him Amen; it is certain the
Apostle, by calling Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant, intends to show
the excellency of the Gospel-state beyond that at Mount Sinai, for the Law
there given is said to be ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, which
Mediator was Moses, by consent both of God and the People; upon which account
they are said to be baptized into him, and in regard God designed Christ as the
glorious Mediator of a better Covenant, he well approved of what the People
said when they desired, that God would not himself speak any more to them, but
deliver his Commands by Moses, because it was a Preparative intimation of the
necessity of a better Covenant, attended with a more sufficient Mediator, who
had no sins of his own to account for, and so could approach unto God without
that dread and fear that accompanied Moses in the service he performed. Two
things will be necessary to be explained, fully to unfold the Apostle's sense,
1. What is meant by a Mediator; 2. What is meant by the New Covenant. By a
Mediator here, is meant one that represents the People, and intercedes to God
on their behalf, which was the circumstance of Moses; that these two
qualifications might be eminently appurtenant to Christ, to complete him for
that service in a way infinitely exceeding Moses, he is God and Man in one
person; as Man, a full and perfect representative of all Mankind; and as God,
such an Intercessor as procures Salvation to the uttermost for all that come to
God by him, and not only in Moses way, by a bare representation of the Peoples
condition before God, but by his own inherent Merit procuring all the grace,
favor and acceptance on their behalf they could either hope for or desire.

2dly, By the New Covenant we are sure Mount Sion is opposed to Mount Sinai,
and the Gospel set in opposition to the Law; we find in the New Testament
mention but of two Covenants, the law given upon Mount Sinai, which (is said to
grow old, and to be ready to vanish away) and is called the first Covenant, and
the Gospel preached of old to Abraham, and published at large by Christ and his
Apostles, which is called the New Covenant: This New Covenant is also called a
Testament, because the great Promulgation of it was to be a consequent of
Christ's death; and the Gospel that Law and Covenant of Grace, the Legacy he
left to the World, was to be dispensed to the Legatees by his grand Executor
the Holy Ghost: And whatever we read of God's Covenants in the Old Testament,
it is to be reduced to one of these two; for the Apostle in the 8th and 9th
Chapters of this Epistle, calls the Mosaical Covenant, the first Covenant, and
the old Covenant, the whole Mosaical economy was included in it, and reckoned
as part of it, but it was chiefly denominated from Mount Sinai, because there
was the most solemn promulgation of the most essential part of it. The Covenant
God made with Man in his Innocence, was peculiar to him in that state, and went
no farther, is not at all continued in any force since the fall. By a Covenant
of God in the Scripture sense of it, is meant a Law promulged, wherein God
obliges himself to such rewards and punishments; and Men stand obliged to such
duty and performance; this was the case of the Old Covenant at Sinai, and so is
the case under the Gospel; God has in Christ obliged himself to the salvation
of the World upon such and such terms, and Man stands obliged to the
performance of them if ever he will be happy: It Is a vain and a wild conceit to
think the Gospel offers Salvation otherways, then upon conditions to be
performed on our part; the first Proclamation of it is with this condition
annexed, he that believes shall be saved: And Faith is everywhere used in the
Gospel, as a Word comprehensive of all that is therein required of us.
Punctually to pursue the Apostles drift in this place by this expression, the
best way is to show in what particulars this new covenant to which he tells the
Believing Hebrews they were come, exceeded the old, which was the point he
designed to himself to make good.

1st, Both Covenants agreed in this, they both had a Mediator, an internuncius
between God and Man, which was to inform us of the vast distance sin had made
between them, what a vast gulf there was fixed between Heaven and Earth, and
that 'twas impossible there should be any converse between God and Man, by
virtue of any Covenant without some third Person interposing, and herein this
New Covenant has infinitely the preference; the Mediator of it being of so
glorious a composition and constitution, and so adapted to this matter as is
wonderful to conceive; he that intercedes to bring God and Man together, is
himself both (after a stupenduous and wonderful manner) united in one and the
same Person.

2dly, This New Covenant delivers us from all the Fear, Bondage, and
Condemnation, which the Old Covenant brought upon us, the Law left Men to
answer to God for their disobedience, without either assistance or remedy, and
so the case of every Man was, that when the law came sin revived, and he dyed;
by coming to the Mediator of this New Covenant, we are totally discharged from
any concern with the Law or the first Covenant, the satisfaction of Christ to
God's Justice is fully accepted in our stead, for all our disobedience of the
Law of Works, and by this New Covenant we are wholly discharged from any
obligation to the Old, God found fault with it, and it being in its nature and
designment to prepare for a better Covenant, it grew Old, and upon the
publication of the Gospel is quite vanished away.

3dly, This New Covenant much exceeds the other in its nature and constitution,
for it always admits of Repentance and Pardon, which the other never did, it is
an entire Law of Grace, accepts of sincerity of intention, in the stead of
perfection of action, and is accommodated with all imaginable tenderness to the
weak and frail constitution of Man since his fall.

4thly, And wherein the Glory of this New Covenant chiefly lies, and wherein it
fundamentally exceeds the other, and displays eminently the Glory of God's
Grace and Goodness to the World; a Divine ability is given from Heaven for the
performance of every part of it, whatever is required is given: the great
security of Men's Salvation under this New Covenant is, that we are kept by the
mighty power of God through faith unto salvation, and that when Men work out
their salvation, it is God that works in them both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure; it is his power that is perfected in weakness, and grace only
that proves sufficient for us in this case, the ways and methods by which this
Divine assistance of the Holy Ghost from above, is conveyed into the Hearts and
spirits of Men is admirable, but known only to God, and out of the compass of
all humane discovery, a Man born after the Spirit is compared to the Wind, the
effects of which we know, but we know nothing whence it comes nor whither it
goes, how far God is pleased at first in some to move and excite humane
abilities, and still to reward their motion Heavenward with more and farther
grace, and how far he is pleased in others to reward with Divine assistance,
endeavors purely Natural and Human, is a knowledge too high for us, and what
we cannot by searching attain to, this we are sure of, that grace is never
wanting to such as make a faithful improvement of what power they have, he that
under the Gospel does but what he can do, will be sure to be enabled to do what
he should do, I make no question but that generally speaking grace comes in to
the assistance of Humane endeavors, and is grafted at first upon such natural
improvements as are preparative to the reception of Christ and the Gospel, but
it is not always so, but Grace breaks in upon some in the height of their
carreer against Christ and the Gospel, as it did upon St. Paul, to make him an
instance in this point, and makes a perfect conquest of the Soul unto Christ,
where there is nothing but a Wicked Profane opposition against him.

Had not this Divine assistance been a gracious appurtenant to the Covenant of
Grace, Mankind had never reaped the benefit of it, no terms of Salvation that
were consisting with the Holiness and Justice of God, though never so
condescending and easy without this, would ever have made Mankind happy; so
desparate [and as to their own power] irrecoverable an apostasy are all Men
subjected to, so that if either we consider the Mediator of this New Covenant,
or the Covenant it self, we shall perceive the great advantage the Apostle has
of his side in the comparison, and what a foolish choice the believing Jews
would make to depart and apostatize from this New Covenant and this Mediator,
to Moses and Mount Sinai.

The last thing the Apostle mentions, and which he couples and conjoyns with
the Mediator of this New Covenant, as inseparably appurtenant to both, is the
Blood of Sprinkling, which he says, speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel; this is particularly and emphatically mentioned, because the death and
suffering of Christ, the shedding of his precious Blood, was the greatest
performance of his mediatory Work here upon Earth, the grand Fundamental of the
New Covenant, and of all the effects and consequences of it, all was purchased
by this as the price of it, and in regard the Jews had been much accustomed
under the Old Covenant to the shedding of Blood, without which there was no
remission; the Apostle instructs them, that this New Covenant infinitely excels
the other in that very particular, and he calls it the Blood of Sprinkling,
because there was no Blood at any time offered under the Law but part of it was
sprinkled, and as the Old Covenant at Horeb was confirmed by Moses the Mediator
of it, by sprinkling the Blood of the Oxen then sacrificed, so this New
Covenant is ratified by the sprinkling of Blood, but it is such Blood as of
which all that was shed before was but typical, and such Blood as is of an
infinite value, the Blood of God himself, and as the Apostle in the 9th Chap.
makes the comparison, if the blood of bulls and goats says he, could serve for
Legal, Typical, and Ceremonial Purifications, how much more shall the blood of
Christ who by the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot to God; purge
your Consciences from dead Works, so that by this expression the Apostle
calling this blood the blood of sprinkling, we are to understand that this is
the soul purifying, soul-justifying, and soul-saving blood, of which all the
Sacrificed Blood since the World began, since Abel's first Sacrifices were but
a Type, and Prefiguration, it is being sprinkled with this, that gives entrance
and admittance into Heaven, the true sanctuary, of which admittance into the
Earthly sanctuary by the sprinkling of blood was but a Type, and this blood as
it is of transcendent Power and Virtue, so it has a general and universal
efficacy, so the Prophet Esau tells us, Esau 52.15. Where it is Prophesied, that
Christ should with his Blood sprinkle many Nations; which refers to that
universal advantage the gentile World should reap by it, this blood is not like
the blood of the legal sacrifices, that was often shed, and reached but to one
Nation, this blood is of that infinite value, that the whole race of Mankind,
the whole World are sprinkled with it in order to Justification and Salvation,
and there needs no repetition of it, for by this one Sacrifice offered up,
Christ has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, and there remains no
more Sacrifice for Sin; this blood the Apostle says speaks better things then
the blood of Abel, which was a consideration of great moment unto the Jews.
Some modern interpreters [for I see it in no ancient Author] conceive by the
blood of Abel here, is not meant his own blood, but the blood of the sacrifices
he slew, which were the first we read of that God accepted, and he gave such a
Testimonial to them, that in the foregoing Chapter the Apostle says upon that
account he is yet spoken of, not as it is vulgarly rendered yet speaks, but is
yet spoken of: That which induced them to make this meaning of the Apostles
Words, was I suppose the little advantage there seems to be in the comparison;
to compare the blood of a Savior with the blood of a murdered Man, then which
nothing could speak worse, for it must needs call for vengeance and punishment,
and therefore there seems at first view to be little commendation given to the
blood of Christ by saying that it speaks better things then the blood of Abel,
for it could not speak worse, but to say it speaks better things then the very
first sacrifice we read of that God accepted and gave testimony to, and of the
best Man then in the World, carries great advantage in the comparison; this
interpretation upon this account seems probable and is plausable, but it is not
as I conceive the sense of the Apostle, and to me it seems rejected. By the
words upon this account, that the voice and cry that Abel's blood is said to
have, was after his death, and God tells Cain his Brothers blood cried unto
him, and so it was Abel's own blood that cried; now it is plain, the Apostle in
saying that Christ's blood speaks better things then the blood of Abel speaks,
alludes to the speaking and crying of Abel's blood from the ground unto God, as
it is recorded in Genesis, the Jews had not only many false and pernicious
instructors ready to diswade them from receiving the Gospel at first, but after
any of them had received it, there were many false Judaizing Apostles who
endeavored all they could to engage them to a relapse and apostasy either in
whole or in part, the Apostles business as has been often suggested is to
prevent this latter, and to establish such as had received the Christian
Doctrine, but were in danger of drawing back. Now it is most certain, that
amongst other discouragements that were suggested to the Believing Hebrews,
this was one of the chief, and with which they were much affected, that they
and their rulers having shed the blood of this Mediator, and taken it upon
themselves and their posterity; and some of the Apostles having openly to their
faces reproached the Jewish Nation with it, that they had been the betrayers
and murderers of this Holy and Blessed Jesus the Son of God, they could not
reasonably hope for nor expect any benefit from that blood they had so
murderously shed. To obviate this objection, the Apostle after he had mentioned
the Mediator of this New Covenant and his blood wherewith he sprinkles the
World, to which he tells them by the Gospel they were come, adds this, [which
is of peculiar force and reference to the Jews, and very emphatically
argumentum ad hominem] that this blood speaks better things then the blood of
Abel, Abel was murdered and his blood spoke and cried from the Ground to Heaven
for yengeance upon his brother that murdered him, but Christ was Betrayed and
Murdered, and his blood calls and cries aloud for pardon and forgiveness for his
very betrayers and crucifiers, so that none of them need to fall into Cain's
desparation, and quit the Gospel upon any such sad consideration, for this
Blood, though it was shed like Abel's, yet had quite another Cry and Language
attended it, it called for no vengeance upon any man, but for Peace, Pardon,
and Reconciliation for all men, even the very worst of his Enemies and
Crucifiers; and this renders the Comparison of wonderful advantage and efficacy
to that end for which it was intended. Nothing is more usual in St. Paul's
Writings [especially in his Epistle to the Romans] than to answer Objections,
that were then well and commonly known, without reciting them, of which we at
this day are often ignorant, and so his Writings seems to us the more difficult
and obscure.

Thus we have taken a brief view of the Apostle's Comparison of the Law with
the Gospel in this short Epitome of both, and seen the wonderful preference the
Gospel has to the Law, and the great and eminent Advantages and Privileges of
the one above the the other, and the glorious Inhabitants of this Spiritual
Mount Sion, and the Heavenly Jerusalem, not only all the true Saints upon
Earth, the Church of the firstborn written in Heaven, but even God himself,
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, all the Blessed Angels, and the Spirits
of just Men made perfect; nothing could be more destructive and ruinous to the
true Interest of the believing Hebrews, than to turn their backs upon such a
Communion, to go back to the Old Covenant that God upon Man's account found
fault with, and again put on that Legal Yoke that neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear; the Jews much boasted of, and rested in those
literal Typical Advantages they had above the rest of the World, upon which
they might with very good reason value themselves; and therefore the Apostle's
business is to manifest to them, how much by embracing the Gospel they changed
for the better; that instead of a Legal Temporary Temple built upon Mount Sion,
and an Earthly Jerusalem, they are come to the true signified Mount Sion, to
the Spiritual and Heavenly Temple, which is Christ Mystical, where God dwells
for ever, and the Heavenly Jerusalem, the name of which is Jehovah Shammai,
that is, the glorious spiritual worship of the Gospel, and the state of the
Catholic Church in all its parts, those on Earth, and those in Heaven, and
thereby to all that was signified by, and all that was any where promised unto
Jerusalem and Mount Sion, instead of that Dreadful Appearance of the Angels
upon Mount Sinai, with which they were so terrified, and from which they were
kept at so great a distance, they are now come to an innumerable Company of
Angels, that is, to a sweet Fellowship, Brotherhood, and Communion with them;
all which is employed in their being said to be come to them: under the Law
'twas firmly believed whoever should see an Angel [so great the distance was
thought between Mankind and them] should certainly die; we are now Men and
Angels all of the same Family and Household, and the Saints on Earth have the
whole Ministry and Service of the Angels employed on their behalf, they are now
always ascending and descending about their Affairs, and there is a most
endeared and intimate Relation and Affection between all the Myriads of Angels
above and the Saints below; instead of the National Church of the Jews
assembled at Jerusalem, they are come to the General Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven. To the general Assembling of the
true Catholic Church, who Assemble and Worship all the World over in Spirit
and Truth, without any confinement to any place whatever, they are come to
them, so as to be of the same Body and Society with them, to be fellow-Citizens
with the Saints and of the Household of God, and so as to partake of all their
Spiritual and Heavenly Advantages, and they are come to all the parts of this
Catholic Communion, as well those in Heaven as those on Earth, even to God
himself [which is as far as they can come] the judge of all: under the Law they
were not suffered so much as to approach the outward signs of his Presence, but
under the Gospel they have free access to himself, and to his very Throne,
which is now become a Throne of Grace, and nothing appears now from thence but
a Scepter of Mercy held forth, they are come to the Spirits of just men made
perfect, not only to the Fellowship and Fraternity of all the Saints living,
from the Fraternity of an outward, Typical, and only National Church, but to
those in the Heavenly state, all those mentioned in the 11th. Chap. before, and
all the Apostles, and those Blessed Saints they had conversed with in the first
times of the Gospel, who were then removed and gone to their rest, even to them
by the Gospel-state they were come, with them they are embodyed as Members of
the same Society, and with them in a short time they are sure to be resident,
And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, a Savior as well as a Mediator,
and a Mediator not of the Sinai, but of the Sion Covenant, a Covenant bringing
grace, life, and peace; a Mediator not like Moses, a mere Man, a Servant, a
Sinner, himself trembling in his Office, and weary of his Burden, and whose
Ministry was like his Person, decaying, vanishing, and dying. But to the Son
himself in his own House, able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by
him, in that he lives for ever to make Intercession for them, and to the Blood
of sprinkling, infinitely exceeding all the Blood that was sprinkled under the
Law, for that brought sin yearly and daily into remembrance, but those that are
sprinkled with this are for ever perfected, and to them there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin, and this Blood they are come to speaks a better Language
quite than the Blood of Abel did, although the Blood of both was most unjustly
shed, and they were both wickedly murdered and slain, yet they speak two
different Languages, Abel's Blood called and cried unto God for vengeance upon
Cain, but this pleads and cries aloud for pardon and forgiveness, even for
those very Persons that were most guilty of it, and deepliest concerned in it,
so that none are excluded from the benefit of it.

The Apostle winds up all with deep and solemn Admonitions and Cautions to the
Believing Jews, not to play fast and lose with the Gospel; it is of such Jews
St. James writes in his Epistle directed to the Twelve Tribes, when he tells
them, A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways; and let not such a man
think (says he) to obtain any thing from the Lord, for he halts between two
Opinions, and is unresolved whether he shall be a Jew or a Christian, the
Apostle conjures them upon their utmost peril not to refuse him that speaks
from Heaven, which is no other than God himself speaking by his Son, and
declaring by a solemn voice from Heaven, even from the excellent Glory, that he
was his Beloved Son in whom he was well pleased, which beloved and blessed Son
of God might well be said to speak from Heaven, because we are expressly told he
was also in Heaven when he spoke here upon Earth; he proceeds to mind them that
the Legal state was like an old House ready to fall upon their heads, for he
that once by his voice shook the Earth at Mount Sinai, and made the Mount to
tremble, will now once more shake both Heaven and Earth, and dissolve, the
Apostle tells them, their whole Religious Constitution and Fabric; and this
taking away of things that are shaken, is in order to this, that things that
cannot be shaken which are the blessings, and glories, and sure mercies of the
Gospel, may remain, the Gospel is the last and only remedy that God has
provided for sinful Man, it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands, and not
have this to plead, to fall into the hands of the living God, without an
interest in Jesus the Mediator of this New Covenant, and the Blood of
sprinkling appurtenant thereunto: he that has once embraced the Gospel, and
then out of choice refuses it, and turns his back upon it, refuses his
remedy, and thereby renders his Cure desperate and impossible, and to such a
man nothing can possibly remain but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment.

The Consideration of this Glorious and Honorable state to which by the Gospel
we are come, this Celestial Mount of Spirits, should always inflame our minds
with holy and thankful Contemplations, and also with fervent and devout
adoration of that infinite goodness that has made such provision for the
happiness, recovery and welfare of rebellious and apostate Man, that has opened
the floodgates of Heaven, and showered down all the blessings and glories
thereof upon the World, by the descent of the second person into Human Nature;
how happy were it if instead of mean, low, and perishing satisfactions, Men
would solace themselves with this heart-satisfying and everlasting Salvation,
let us follow the example of Moses, who when God proclaimed his Name unto him,
and caused all his goodness to pass before him, the Text says, Moses made
haste, and bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped, he only heard the
report of what we possess and enjoy, our whole business therefore should be to
exalt the Praises of so Gracious a Benefactor, and to Magnify that Glorious
being that has all possible Perfection, to whom nothing can be added, and from
whom nothing can be taken away, and to whom all Blessing and Honor, and
Praise, and all Worship, and Service, and Adoration will be due throughout all
Generations, from time to time, till time cease and is dissolved in Eternity,
and thence Eternally.

FINIS.

