February the 5th. 1679/80
I Do appoint Thomas Simmons, and Jacob Sampson to Print this my Narrative, and
that no other Print the same, nor any part of it.

Lawr. Mowbray.

THE NARRATIVE OF Lawrence Mowbray Of LEEDS, In the County of YORK, Gent.

Concerning the Bloody Popish Conspiarcy against the Life of His Sacred
Majesty, the Government, and the Protestant Religion.

Wherein is Contained

I. His Knowledge of the said Design, from the very first in the year 1676.
with the opportunity he had to be acquainted therewith; and the Reasons why he
concealed it so long; with the manner of his discovering the said wicked
Project to His Majesty, and His most Honorable Privy Council.

II. How far Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, etc. are engaged in the
design of Killing the King, and Firing the Cities of London and York, for the
more speedy setting uppermost the Popish Religion in England.

III. An Account of the Assemblings of many Popish Priests and Jesuits at
Father Rishton's Chamber, at Sir Tho. Gascoigne's House at Barmebow, with their
Consultations and Determinations.

IV. A Discovery of the Erecting a Nunnery at Dolebank in Yorkshire, by the
Popish Party, especially by Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with an Account of an Estate
of ninety pounds per Annum, settled thereupon by him.

V. A Manifestation of the Papists fraudulent conveying of their Estates,
himself being privy to some of them.

VI. A probable opinion concerning the Jesuits, the grand Instruments in these
Affairs.

With other Considerable Matters relating to the Plot.

Together with an Account of the Endeavors that were used to stifle his
Evidence, by making an Attempt upon his Life in Leicester-Fields.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson,
next door to the Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate Street. MDCLXXX.

To the Right Honorable Heneage, Lord Finch, Baron of Daventry, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
I Dare not permit the ensuing Papers to approach your Lordships presence
without an Apology; For had not your Lordship afforded some signal
Encouragement to the poor Author, nothing of This had presumed to interrupt
your Lordships great Thoughts and Cares.

And yet the subject matter herein contained (besides your particular Favors
afforded to my self) which I hope (at least in my desires and design) is
contributory to the prevention of eminent dangers to King and Kingdom, may
plead my excuse, as not unworthy of your Lordships Consideration, who is so
great a Lover of them both, and has so immediate a concern in their
preservation.

If I had the Pen of a Demosthenes, or a Cicero, or (to sum them up both in
one) your own, I might then have adventured to enlarge on the Theme of your
Lordships Merit, which is able to inspirit the most jejune and barren Orator;
but in regard it Transcends the small pittance of my disused skill, I shall
rather be silent than speak too little of what I am never able to speak enough.

I have read in our Chronicles concerning Q. Elizabeth, that never any Prince
who swayed the English Scepter had more sapient and vigilant Counselors than
Her Majesty. Amongst whom I have heard it reported of Sir Francis Walsingham,
Secretary of State in Queen Elizabeth's time, that he was so prudently watchful
over the designs of the Popish Emissaries and Priests, that he maintained
diverse private Agents for that purpose in Rome it self, who did so cunningly
and dissemblingly carry the matter, that the Pope himself, in suae
infallibilitatis opprobrium, paid Pensions to some of those Setters, who
probably pretended to do service on both sides; for no such Key to unlock the
Apostolical Chamber, nay, the very Conclave, as a disguised (yet fugitive)
Privado. It cannot be denied but those days were very critical, when Parry,
Squire, etc. were suborned, and encouraged by the Jesuited party to Murder
that Queen; and upon that account extraordinary diligence was required in the
Ministers of State, to prevent any inconvenience, which, by the policy of the
Romanists might accrue, to their Queen, Lady, and Mistress. And herein she was
as happy in her Servants, as they were prosperous in their success, leaving her
to expire in a good old age, as a fruit of their vigilance and care, next to
Gods blessing and protection over her.

I know our times are as designing as theirs, and the means used to accomplish
their purpose of destroying our King and Government, is suitable to what
methods were then put in practice, either by Poison, Assassination, or the
like. And therefore it is Gods goodness to our King and Kingdom, to raise up
many Walsinghams, I mean Honorable and Faithful Counselors, who watch night
and day for the preservation of His Majesty's person, and the true Protestant
Religion amongst us.

Amongst these, your Lordship is placed in the highest Orb, and that not by a
casual frolic (by which yet some are advanced) of blind Favor, but by a just
and acknowledged desert, after several remarkable Gradations of Dignities and
Offices, which were but praevious to that Eminency wherewith your Lordship now
shines.

It is therefore the happiness of His Majesty to be so served and secured; and
not his alone, but all those concerned in the discovery of this wicked and
hellish Design, have reason to bless God for the acknowledged protection and
encouragement which you are pleased to afford them, and in particular to my
self.

The Tribute I am to pay your Lordship, is only my humble acknowledgment (more
I cannot, less I may not); the same, which God is pleased to accept from
thankful supplicants.

I had it first in my thoughts to have made my Epistolary Address to His
Majesty himself; and I was encouraged thereunto by some Instances, wherein mean
persons have addressed themselves unto great Potentates to forewarn them of
their dangers. I shall only cite two Examples, both being of our Kings
Predecessors; one sitting on the Scottish, another on the English Throne, both
which are now happily united in the person of our Royal Sovereign.

1. When King James the 4th of Scotland was preparing his Army to fight against
the English, in the battle of Floddin, being in the midst of his Nobles and
Colonels at prayer, a Grave ancient Countryman pressed in through the crowd
to the Kings Chair, and leaning familiarly thereon, told him, That he and his
followers should not prosper in that War, and therefore he wished him to
desist, Buchan. Hist. Scot. lib. 13. The King not harkening to his counsel, was
slain in that Fight, together with the Flower of the Scots Nobility and Gentry:
There are enough which will sow Pillows under the elbows of Princes, and
flatter them even in their evils; for (as one says) as soon a hot May without
Flies, as Courts without Flatterers: But 'twere well if the Chambers of Kings
were sometimes open to the persons of Loyal and well-affected Plebeians, who
being but standers by (to speak proverbially) yet many times may see more than
the Gamesters; and their plain and sober Councels may be improved for public
benefit.

2. The other instance is mentioned in Roger Hoveden, and quoted by Speed, our
own Chroniclers. King Richard the First gave admittance to a poor Hermit coming
to him, to reprove him for his evils, to advise him of his danger, and to
preach repentance to him; which advice, though at first he seemed to neglect,
yet afterward upon a fit of sickness, he did seriously reflect upon, and in
some degree governed himself accordingly; so that Hoveden breaks forth into
this pathetical exclamation, How glorious is it for a Prince to begin and end
his actions in him, who is beginning without beginning, and who judges the
ends of the earth? Speed, p. 526. Book 9. Hoveden, fol. 428.

But to return upon second thoughts; notwithstanding the abovementioned
encouraging Examples, I judged it fit to interpose a Screen between the Rays of
Majesty and my mean self: Some able Patron, my fellow Witnesses, and my self
stand in need of, in regard of the many fears and discouragements we lie under
from without; and therefore I pitched upon a Mecaenas near to our Augustus,
that we may have a Friend next the Throne, who, in all just things might take
our parts, if false whisperings and dilations concerning us, should at any time
approach the Royal presence. It Is true, for my self, I have not hitherto
appeared in any public Trial, as a Witness for His Majesty, that part of my
duty and service (if God give life and health to perform it) is yet to come,
when public Reason of State (to which all private persons must submit) shall
call for, and appoint such Trials: My Informations have been only presented to
some of His Majesty's Justices upon Oath, as also to His Majesty himself in
Council, which it seems, have appeared so considerable to the adverse party,
that one night, as I was walking to my Lodging, I was stabbed, and felled to the
ground; upon which the intended Murderer fled, supposing he had done his work;
but it pleased God to elude his intention, and to preserve me for his further
service, I hope for his glory, and for the good of his Church; the particular
manner of that assault is accounted for in the following Informations.

I should not have instanced in the danger of so mean and worthless a thing as
my self, if the greatest Patriots, and some of them, either now, or lately
Assessors with your Lordship at the same Royal Board, were not threatened to be
served after the same manner; whom as God has hitherto miraculously preserved,
so I hope he will entail the same protection on your Lordship, who does succeed
and inherit their places both in Cares and Councels, which is the daily prayer
of,

My LORD, Your Honors in all humble and dutiful observance, LAWRENCE MOWBRAY.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton, Lord Mayor of the Famous City of
London.
Right Honorable,
IN brisk and dangerous Onsets, double Armor is of great use, especially to
those whose service is in the Front, and who are likely to endure the brunt of
the Enemy's assault. I am called forth with the rest of my Fellow-Witnesses,
for His Majesty, to stand the charge of the Romish Battalions, who have set
themselves in Array against the Protestant Religion, our King, Kingdom, and
especially against the City of London, as the strongest Bulwarks of all the
Three. No marvel then, if when the City's danger is discovered, I choose also a
City-Patron (as another mighty Second, I might say First) to defend a just
cause.

I do assume this boldness to my self, upon a double Account:

I. That Supreme Dignity which your Lordship holds by just Merit, amongst your
worthy Citizens, as their chief Magistrate and Head of their Government, for
this year, renders you able to protect me.

II. Your exemplary prudence and care, as well as zeal and activity for the
prevention of the Evils which are hereafter discovered, by the vogue of all
good men do make you a willing Patron to all those who are Co-operators in that
work. And herein your Lordships solicitude for the good of the public, has
not (as far as I know) been transmitted to the imitation of others in any
Print, though indeed it deserves to be writ with a Pen of Iron, and the point
of a Diamond, in most durable Characters, for your Honor and Renown.

I count it therefore a Felicity to me, to have the opportunity of being the
first public Admirer and Encomiast of your Lordships known actings against all
Popish Conspirators (I mean from the Press); which office, though your own
worth does loudly call for at my hands, yet (as I intimated before) I do
undertake the Province much upon the score of my own self-defence, whose danger
does excite me not to be contented with a single Address for protection to the
Lord High Chancellor of England, but does further prompt to accumulate security
by the accession of your Lordships favor, which I do hereby humbly supplicate
and entreat. I must needs say, by what I have heard amongst the Romanists in
their Cabals, That your City is looked upon by them as the Grand Emporium of
Heresy, (as they call it) as well as the Metropolis of England; for you are
criminated by them as the highest Countenancers and Encouragers of the most
Reformed Protestantism and its Professors; so that, as not long since (as I
have heard) this Motto was writ upon one of the Gates of the City of Rome, by a
waggish Pen, Hoc est Collegium Jesuitanum; satyrically intimating, that in
regard the Counsels of the Jesuits did so much prevail there for the present,
therefore the whole City was to be looked upon but as one of their Great
Colleges; so it is a true and more laudable Character of the City of London,
Hoc est Asylum Reformatorum; and this not in Pasquil, Lampoone, or as a brand
of Infamy, but as an indeleble mark of the Honor and Beneficence of its
renowned Inhabitants for ever. For, as it is the Glory of God to be
comprehensive of his whole Creation; so, those who are most like him, are
larger in their Protections and Reliefs (of such as are sober and quiet in
their principles:) than other men.

I add this last clause, because I know that the censure of the Papists upon
your City, is grounded not only upon your Protection of Established
Protestancy, according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, but also it
has respect to your countenancing, or at least harboring many sober and
peaceable Dissenters, which the Romanists look upon to be more numerous amongst
you, than (proportionably) in any other part of England, and whom, in regard of
their awakened principles, they look upon as greater Contrariants than the
formal ordinary Protestants. This indeed is the party which they would
willingly cajole, at least to silence (if it were possible); and I have heard
it resolved in Popish Juncto's, as an Argument fit to induce them to a passive
compliance, that the community of Sufferings should be propounded to them. The
Laws against Dissenters and Nonconformists being (in some things) as severe as
against the Papists. But hitherto they have not been able to obtain their
desired end, but have lost all their solicitations in this matter: And I have
heard some Papists say, They did despair of ever doing any good that way: For
though civil respects may pass as to the common offices of humane Life, between
persons of different Religions; yet when principles, in which oppositions have
their deepest root, do fight against principles; such parties can never
heartily unite. I mention this, that a just regard may be had in all our
Governors, toward the peaceable and well-affected of that Class.

My Lord, I have not, in what I have done, acted out of private malice or
revenge against any man's person, but have only been stimulated by the pricks of
my own conscience, to prevent those mischiefs which, I knew, were impending
upon our King, this City, and the whole Kingdom.

And herein I confess a prize was put into my hands, to have been the first
Discoverer of this Bloody Plot in the year 1676. But I must acknowledge, that
through the power of contrary temptations, I did succumb; and yet I was not
altogether unjustifiable in my thoughts; in that I undertook a journey to
London, from the North, on purpose to make this Discovery, so that my early
desires may somewhat atone for my slow and tardy actings; For which, as I have
obtained His Majesty's Gracious pardon, so I hope your Lordship will be
moderate in your judgment concerning me, seeing the Impediments I was then to
wrestle withal, seemed to me Invincible, as hereafter in the following
Narrative is declared. And the truth is, I did quiet my conscience at that time
by suggesting, that I reserved my self for the disclosing the Conspiracy some
other time, when the danger was nearer hand, and the design more ripe for
execution; Herein, though I was prevented by others, yet the scheme of my
thoughts being thus laid open, will, I hope, alleviate my censure amongst good
men. There are some particulars illustrative of what is hereafter declared,
which may be spoken to, when I am called upon to appear at any Trial, as an
Evidence for His Majesty.

I shall say no more to your Lordship at this time, but craving pardon for my
boldness, and recommending your Lordship with your great charge, the Honorable
City of London, to the Divine Protection, I humbly subscribe my self,

Your Lordships in all just and Christian service, LAWRENCE MOWBRAY.

AN Introductory Preface.
I Think it not amiss, before I mention my Informations, to give the Reader
some account of my self, and the opportunity I have had of being acquainted
with this black design, and the methods I took to discover the same after I was
convinced of the evil thereof; which last clause I mention, because, being
falsely principled by the Romish Priests at first, I thought it a meritorious
work.

The place of my Nativity was Worcestershire; but my Father removing his whole
Family into Yorkshire in my Infancy, I there received my Education in my
youth, and that in the Protestant Religion as established in the Church of
England; I was brought up in a Grammar School, in order to the University; but
other circumstances not concurring, and the times seeming not to look smilingly
upon learned men, my friends were diverted from those thoughts, and I was to
wait for a more favorable opportunity.

In this Interval, being about 18 years of Age, I was dealt with by some
Papists in the North, to reside awhile in Sir Thomas Gascoignes House; not
upon the strict terms of a servant, but as an ingenuous attendant, or rather
expectant of a better fortune, till the Clouds blowing over, I might (as my
intentions were) transplant my self into the University; and I was inclined to
Sir Thomas Gascoignes; rather than to any other Family, because he was
represented to me as a sober and temperate person, and a good Example for Youth
to imitate.

I had not been long there, but I was dealt with by Sir THOMAS himself, the
Lady TEMPEST, but especially by Father RVSHTON, Confessor to Sir THOMAS, and
his whole Family, to turn to their Religion; the Arguments they used, were
these, the Truth of their Church, and the certainty of Salvation therein;
whereas Protestantism (as they alleged) was but a Novelty risen up of late
years; and the Souls of its Professors were in great danger of Eternal
Damnation, except they did return to Rome, the Mother Church; and withal they
used many alluring provocations, and flattering promises of great and large
preferments, if ever it pleased God, to favor their Endeavors, that the Roman
Religion should again be established in this Kingdom, which they told me they
were in great hopes of, and that many heads, and hands, were at work in order
to the effecting thereof.

I, being not able to see through, those pecious pretenses, was ensnared by
them, and accordingly, yielding to their insinuations, was admitted into their
Church, being thereupon in great favor with them, and daily Assistant to
Father Rushton at the Altar.

And here (to note this by the way) the Zeal of the Papists does upbraid the
coldness and indifferency of many Protestants, who upon the entertainment of
Servants and Attendants little heed their Principles in reference to Religion,
but suffer them to go on, without any endeavor to rectify their
understandings in case any error reside in them; as if it were only lawful for
them to use the labor of their Bodies, as they do their Oxen and Horses,
without any regard to cultivate their minds: whereas you shall hardly have a
Servant admitted into a Popish Family, but they will sift his Religion and
Principles; and if he be a Protestant, they will endeavor to reduce him; and
they esteem themselves under a Religious Obligation so to do, whose Zeal
therein, if it were according to knowledge, might be instructive unto others,
who stand upon a truer Foundation, and embrace righter Principles. This by the
by.

Being thus turned Roman Catholic, as I have said, I had opportunity to be
admitted to the Privacies of Sir Tho. Gascoigne, Father Rushton, and others, in
whose frequent Consultations and Discourses, both amongst themselves, and also
with me, I soon found out the Intrigues of their Designs, and my mind was so
astonished at the thoughts of the King's Murder, and the Great Alterations,
which were designed by them, to be accomplished in this Land, that, I not only
returned to the Reformed Religion in my heart, which I formerly revolted from,
and since, by God's goodness, have re-made public profession of, but I
resolved also to repair to London, about the latter end of the year 1676. to
make a Discovery of what I knew in those matters. And I had then a fair
opportunity to disengage my self from Sir Tho. Gascoigne's Family, in regard
the Laws, being strict against Papists, and at that time pressed to be put in
execution, Sir Thomas was willing to abridge the number of his Household, lest
forfeitures should grow high upon them; taking therefore that occasion, I
withdrew from that House, and a while after undertook a Journey to London about
May 1677. long before Mr. Oats had made any public Discovery of a Plot, and
yet the Priests and Papists in the North, had some jealousy of my constancy in
their Religion; and being also conscious to themselves, that I could discover a
great part of their guilt, they used many menaces against me, even to my very
face, which I eluded, as well as I could.

Coming to London, under the discouragement of many circumstances, as my being
of small acquaintance at London, etc. and therefore not capable of making any
creditable applications to the Court; moreover highly threatened by the Papish
Party, both in the Country, and in London, besides juding it ridiculous in me,
standing alone, to appear against so great a Body of Opponents (for I then knew
of no other evidence, but my self) I was so far intimidated and disheartened in
my undertaking, as to return to Yorkshire again reintecta, and without making
any Discovery at all; but still under great inquietude, and dissatisfaction,
because I could not ease my mind, in making the Discovery I intended.

Arriving again in the Country, the pricks of my conscience did follow me
thither, insomuch that I could have no rest, till I had wrote up a Letter to a
Great Person at Whitehall, acquainting him, (as from an unknown hand) with the
designed Murder of His Majesty, and the Great Danger the Kingdom was in, by
those underhand machinations; the Copy of which Letter, in regard it was the
Embrio of my Discovery, I have here annexed.

My Lord,
How long I have concealed the intended and immediate malice of some disloyal
and traitorous persons (from whose merciless and bloody Design God bless our
Sovereign Lord the King. It is now full time, I think, to declare, (though not
in hopes of reward) but as a true and loyal Subject to my King) the wicked and
desperate Design of some Papist Conspirators, etc. That by an immediate
insurrection to proceed with Fire and Sword until they have altered the
Government, or settled the Crown (God bless King Charles the Second) upon the
head of some other, so by consequence the death of the King is conspired, and
sought for: This Conspiracy, my Lord, is of no little standing, but, to my
knowledge, contrived almost this three years ago, and now come to the height of
a desperate resolution: My heart is loyal and true to the King, but I must
confess that through the persuasion and urging of Father Rishton, etc. I have
my self subscribed to this wicked Design, and now am forced, as well through
Loyalty to my King, as to clear my stained conscience from that foul Design, it
to reveal; and will endeavor hereafter to discover and procure a List of these
Conspirators, which I have seen and subscribed to. But I am certain of the
after-mentioned persons (with many others) are subscribed in the List, and
great Promoters of this Act; and are still providing both Force and Arms for
their carrying on their Design. My Lord, I most humbly beg your Lordships
pardon for this my boldness, entreating your Lordship, as a true Royalist, to
communicate these Lines to whom your Lordship thinks most convenient. At
present, my Lord, I dare not subscribe my name, for several reasons, but at any
time upon protection from these Papists, (being at present within their claws)
I shall acknowledge the hand and mark subscribed, as to proceed from

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and obedient Servant, and to the King a
Loyal and faithful Subject.
York Jan. 1. 77/8.

These persons names who have subscribed that at present I remember, were --
Inglesby, Sir Tho. Gascoigne, Tho. Gascoigne Esquire Sir Miles Stapleton Barronet,
etc.

But the said Letter being sent by me, by the Common Post, and from one
unknown, I did therefore doubt whether it might come to the hands of that
Nobleman to whom it was directed, or if it did, how it would be resented in
regard of the extraordinary Novelty of the thing; wherefore I did not think my
self to have sufficiently discharged my conscience, in such a Crisis of danger
merely upon the sending of that Letter, without seconding the Contents thereof
by farther Applications; therefore afterward being encouraged by the
appearance of others in this case, I did resort to some Magistrates in
Yorkshire, viz. Justice Tyndall, and Justice Lowther, before whom I being
examined upon Oath, made a short Scheme of the said Design, as by the Copy of
the Examination before them, hereunto annexed may appear.

The Information of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds, taken before us upon Oath this
sixteenth day of August. 1679.
THE Informant says, that in the year 1675. to the best of his knowledge, he
being at Sir Tho. Gascoignes, he the said Sir Tho. ordered the Informant to
draw a Conveyance of his whole Estate to Sir Will. Inglesby, which Conveyance
the Informant says, he drew by the form of a Conveyance of Trust made from Sir
Miles Stapleton, of his whole Estate to Sir John Dawney. The Informant further
says, that though he was not witness to the aforesaid Conveyance of Sir Tho.
Gascoigne, yet he heard from Sir Tho. Gascoigne that there was a Defeasance to
the said Deed of Trust, and from Rob. Bolron, and Matthias Hickeringill, that
they were witnesses to the said Deed of Trust. And further, he speaks not to
the Deed of Trust. The Informant further deposes, that in the year 1676. to
the best of his remembrance, about Michaelmas Sir Tho. Gascoigne, Tho.
Gascoigne Esquire the Lady Tempest, and William Rishton Priest, etc. being together
in Barmebow Dining Room, he the Informant heard them hold several discourses
concerning a Design of killing the King, firing the Cities of London and York;
the Lady Tempest seemed to say jeastingly, if the Design did not take, they
would all be poor Gentlemen; Tho. Gascoigne her Brother answered her, if it did
not take effect, she would partake of their sufferings, being also concerned in
it; they all concluded it would be a meritorious undertaking, and for the glory
of the Church, and they would venture their Estates in it: The Informant
further says, there was then in the House one Doctor Stapleton a Priest, who
coming from another room, and finding the Informant at the door, went in, and
desired them in a low voice to forbear their Discourse, for there was one at
the door; Whereupon the Lady Tempest called in the Informant, and sent him down
to entertain some strangers below. The Informant further deposes, that he had
heard several Discourses from Sir Tho. Gascoigne, and William Rishton of a
Religious House or Nunnery was to be established at Dolebank, and Sir Thomas
would settle ninety pound per annum for their maintenance

Taken before us Brad. Tindall. Will. Lowther junior.


This Examination being transmitted by the said Justices to the Council, I soon
after, viz. August 31. 1679. wrote a Letter to Sir John Nicholas, one of the
Secretaries to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, (then in waiting)
acquainting him, amongst other things, that there were diverse circumstances,
relating to this discovery, very material, which were not inserted in my
Information made before the said Justices, but should be declared by me, when
ever the Honorable Council would be pleased to command a full account from me.

In Answer to which Letter, I received the following, dated and subscribed as
follows.

Council Chamger in Whitehall, Sept. 5. 1679. SIR,
Whereas by your Letter of the 31th of August last, directed to Sir John
Nicholas, which has this day been read to the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, you make mention, that there are diverse circumstances
very material, relating to the Information you have given, that are not therein
inserted; and that you are willing, when ever the Council pleases, to give a
full account thereof. I am, by their Lordships command, to pray and require you
to make your repair hither by the 29th day of this instant September, that you
may be ready to give their Lordships such farther Information as you have to
acquaint them with, on the First of October next. Their Lordships have
promised, that care shall be taken for the defraying of the charges of your
Journey, which being all I have in command to signify to you, I remain,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, THOMAS DOLMAN.


This noble Invitation and Summons was sent unto me by a Messenger on purpose,
superscribed, To Mr. Lawrence Mowbray, at his House in Yorkshire.

According to the tenor thereof, I did, as in Duty bound, repair to London, and
by Order, gave in a larger Information upon Oath before Edmund Warcup, Esquire one
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of Middlesex and City of
Westminster, a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed.

[Middlesex and Westminster] The Information of Lawrence Mowbray, of Leeds, in
the County of York, Gent. taken upon Oath the Second day of October, 1679.
before me Edmund Warcup, Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the
said County and City.
THis Informant says, That when he was examined before Mr. Tindall and Mr.
Lowther, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in Yorkshire, in August
last past, he did not discover the whole of what he knew, in Relation to the
late horrid Conspiracy, in regard he had some doubts of his safety in that
County amongst those Papists, whom he was to detect, and who threatened such as
they feared would discover the said Designs; and for that this Informant
conceived the danger he had run by concealment: But now this Informant will
tell his knowledge of the Plot, beseeching His Majesty's gracious Pardon. This
Informant being now sent for up, by Order of His Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, conceives himself under their protection, hopes they will
intercede for his Pardon to His Majesty; and on that confidence says, That in
the year 1674. he came to Sir Thomas Gascoign's, and was with him in his
Chamber till January, 1676. and in that time he observed Mr. Thomas Addison,
then Priest to Mrs. Killingbeck, and Mr. Fincham, Priest to Sir John Savill,
Mr. Thomas Twhing, Senior, Mr. Thomas Twhing, Junior, two Romish Priests, Mr.
Lodge, Dr. Stapleton (Brother to Sir Miles Stapleton) one Robert Killingbeck,
and diverse other Romish Priests, several times to invite, and privately to
confer with Mr. William Rishton, Sir Thomas Gascoign's Priest; and this
Informant being desired to assist, and be as obliging as he could to the said
Rishton, and to attend him at the Altar at Mass, became in great favor with
him, and was permitted to continue in the said Mr. Rishton's Chamber when the
Priests were in private with him: And he very often heard them discourse of a
Design, laid for the setting the Popish Religion uppermost in England, and how
likely the same was to succeed, in regard most of the considerable Papists had
undertaken to act for it: And that if the said Design was not to be compassed
by fair and lawful means, then it was to be done by Fire and Sword; and
particularly they declared, That London and York were to be fired, and then the
same course was to be taken in other places: And that being begun, the same
Design was to be prosecuted with the Sword also, and that force was to be made
use of, for destroying the Heretics and Opposers of this Design. And they
several times farther said, That the King, when he was in his Exile, had
promised to Establish their Religion, if ever he were restored; but that
hitherto he had not performed that promise, and therefore he was adjudged a
Heretic, and was to be killed, if he did not suddenly Establish the Catholic
Religion, which they now dispaired that he would do.

And this Informant further says, That Mr. William Rishton did one day
acquaint Mr. Addison, that he had according to agreement given the Sacrament of
secrecy to Sir Thomas Gascoign, and Thomas Gascoign, Esquire to Mr. Stephen
Tempest, and to the Lady Tempest, and others, in Sir Thomas Gascoign's Chapel,
and had thereupon communicated to them the whole Design; and that they had
severally engaged to be secret, faithful, and active, to their utmost powers,
in carrying on the said Design; and would thereto contribute as far as their
Estates would permit. And required an account of the said Addison, and of as
many other Priests (besides those aforenamed) as came to him, how far they had
proceeded therein, who answered the said Rishton, That they, in the several
Families and places they were interested in, had given the like Sacrament of
secrecy to their several Friends; and had thereupon acquainted them with the
Design, and the ways and means intended to carry it on; and that their Friends
approved thereof, and promised to contribute their utmost Interest, Power, and
Estates, for advancement of Catholic Religion.

And this Informant farther says, That by persuasion of the said William
Rishton, who was his Confessor, he likewise received from his hand the
Sacrament of secrecy. And this Informant very well remembers, that about
Michaelmas, 1676. there was an Assembly of many of the Priests aforementioned, and
others, whose Names this Informant cannot remember, at Mr. Rishton's Chamber,
where they did all agree, and declare, that the King should be killed, for that
the Pope had Excommunicated him; and it was not lawful only, but meritorious to
destroy and kill any Heretic whatsoever, and that when the King was killed,
Fire and Sword was to be employed against all such as should oppose the
advancement of the Catholic Religion in England, and that all or most of the
Catholics had engaged themselves in the said undertaking.

After which discourse, the said Mr. Rishton told the said Priests, he had a
List of many Papists who were engaged in the Design, and did produce a List of
Names, containing about 4 or 5 hundred, to the best of this Informant's
Observation, all whom, he said, were engaged in the Design; many of which Names
he read unto them, and amongst them, this Informant very well remembers he
read the Names of Sir Thomas Gascoign, Thomas Gascoign, Esquire Mr. Middleton, Sir
Miles Stapleton, Mr. Sherburn, Richard Townley, and Francis Townley, the Lady
Tempest, Mr. Stephen Tempest, Sir Francis Hungate, Sir John Savill, Sir Walter
Vavosor, and his eldest Son Dr. Peter Vavosor, Edward and Thomas Killingbeck,
Barney, Robert Doleman, Marwood, Thomas Priscick, and many others, (whose Names
this Informant now remembers not) were contained in the said List.

And the Informant farther says, That Sir Thomas Gascoign did often bid this
Informant to write Superscriptions to several Letters, some whereof were
directed to Mr. William Harcourt, others to Mr. Corker, others to Mr.
Cornwallis in London; and some of the said Letters to Mr. Cornwallis, were
directed to him by the Name of Pracid; other Letters by like order this
Informant directed to Mrs. Lassells, Mrs. Twhing, and Mrs. Beckwith, who were
to be Governesses, or to have other Offices in the Nunnery erected at Dolbank,
to which the said Sir Thomas Gascoign contributed 90 l. per Annum, and made a
settlement of an Estate at Mauston, the Tenant's name whereof was Alvery
Lofthouse.

And this Informant farther says, That he often heard the said Priests in Mr.
Rishton's Chamber say, That they had Commission from the Pope to prosecute the
said Design by all likely ways, and that all the Jesuits were particularly
engaged in the said Design, and were to be the managers thereof: And that the
Priests through England were to assist therein, and engage all the Families
therein, where they had any Interest. And they did also tell one another, that
sums of Money was collected for buying of Arms for carrying on the Design; and
that several of their Friends had paid in it their shares for that purpose. And
they sometimes said, That they had Orders from the Pope to be as brief in their
prosecution as possibly they could, that they might proceed to Execution: And
that they did communicate their several Letters from their Friends beyond Sea,
to the persons whom they had persuaded into this Work. And they also affirmed,
That the Pope would in a little time determine a settlement of both
Ecclesiastical and Civil Preferments, upon the Actors and Contributors of this
meritorious Design (as they termed it). And that the Pope had Excommunicated
the King, and all other Heretics, in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and had
granted a Plenary Indulgence of ten thousand years to those who should act,
either Personally, or in Estate, to kill the King, or any other Heretic, for
promotion of their Religion, besides a Pardon, and other gratifications.

And this Informant farther says, That by the command of Sir Thomas Gascoign,
he went to Robert Bolron, to direct him to go to Father Rushton, to reconcile
him to the Catholic Church, which was performed accordingly.

And he farther says, That the Paper now produced, dated the First of January,
1677/8. hereunto annexed, is all of this Informant's hand writing, and is a
Copy of a Letter which he directed to a Person of Quality at Whitehall, and
that he sent the said Letter by the Post from Leeds to London on the First of
January, on which day this Informant wrote the said Copy hereunto annexed.

Jurat die and anno superdict. Coram me Edmund Warcup.

Afterward His Majesty having received Informations of several persons in the
Counties of York, Northumberland, Lancashire, and Bishoppric of Durham, who
were suspected to be Papists, or favorers of Popery, or who could give
Information touching the Plot against His Majesty, was pleased to employ my
self, and Robert Bolron, Gentleman, to repair into those parts, and to execute
that Commission which is contained in the following Order of Council.

Whereas Information has been given to His Majesty in Council upon Oath, That
the several persons in the List annexed mentioned, are suspected to be
favorers of Papists, and to harbor and lodge Popish Priests and Jesuits, and
to have in their keeping Writings and Papers, relating either to the horrid
Plot against the Life of His Sacred Majesty, and his Government, or to
Collusive conveyances of Lands to superstitious uses; His Majesty was thereupon
pleased to command, and accordingly We do hereby Will and Require all and every
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to whom the Bearers hereof; Laurence
Mowbray and Robert Bolron, or either of them, shall make Application, to
receive in due form of Law, the Informations they shall exhibit against all, or
any of the said persons in the List mentioned, or any others, which the said
Laurence Mowbray and Robert Bolron shall justly suspect to be concerned in the
aforesaid Practices, and thereupon to proceed according to Law, for the more
speedy and effectual discovery of the Offenders, and bringing them to condign
Punishment. And the said Justices of Peace are hereby further required, to
issue out their Warrants (if they see occasion) for searching the respective
Houses of the several persons in the said List mentioned, or any other
suspected Houses, as well for Popish Priests and Jesuits, as for Papers,
Letters, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, Popish Books and Vestments, and other
superstitious Trinkers; and to proceed according to Law against such Popish
Priests and Jesuits, as shall be apprehended: And also to dispose of such
Papers, Letters, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, Popish Books and Vestments, and other
superstitious Trinkets as shall be found in the said search, as the Law
directs; except such Papers or Writings as relate to the said Plot, which are
to be safely conveyed unto us with all speed: And of what the said Justices of
the Peace, or any of them, shall do in pursuance of this His Majesty's
Pleasure, they are to return unto us from time to time an exact account. For
all which, this shall be unto them, and every of them, a sufficient Warrant.

Dated at the Council Chamger in Whitehall the 17th day of October, 1679.
Anglesey, Lauderdale, Henry Coventry, Bridgewater, Fra. North. Sunderland, J.
Ernle, John Nicholas.


According to which Order, Mr. Bolron, and my self, with the assistance of some
of His Majesty's Messengers, repaired into the Northern Parts, where in
obedience to the said Commission, and in pursuance thereof, I made the two
following Informations.

[Civitas Ebor.]
The Information of Lawrence Mowbray, taken upon Oath the 27th day of October,
1679.
who says and deposes,
THat about Michaelmas, Anno 1676. there was an Assembly of several Priests or
Jesuits at the House of Sir Thomas Gascoign, at Barmbow, in the County of York;
and that the said Assembly did then generally conclude and agree, That the King
(meaning the King of England) was to be killed, for that he was a Heretic, and
Excommunicated by the Pope, and that it was not only lawful, but meritorious to
kill the said King, or any other Heretic; and that they likewise said, That
all, or most of the Catholics in England, were engaged in the same Design.
After which discourse, one William Rushton, Priest to Sir Thomas Gascoign,
produced a List of Names, which he did declare were engaged in, and
contributaries to the said Design. And farther deposes, That the said William
Rushton read over many of the Names of the said List in the hearing of this
Informant, amongst which he mentioned Robert Dolman, Esquire And this Informant
farther deposes, That Dr. Peter Vavosor's Name was in the List aforesaid.

Capt. and jurat coram Richard Shaw,
Major and als. Lawrence Mowbray.

[ County of York and Lancaster.]
The Information of Lawrence Mowbray, taken upon Oath the Second of November,
1679. before us Henry Marsden, and John Ashton, Esquires; two of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said Counties.
AT an Assembly of diverse Popish Priests at Sir Thomas Gascoign's, at Barmbow,
was produced a List of Names, who were concerned and Contributors to a Design
of killing the King, and Establishing the Roman Catholics in England; and
amongst many others, there was the Names of Mr. Sherburn of Stonyhurst,
Walmesley of Dungney; Richard Townley and Francis Townley, of Townley, Mr.
Stephen Tempest of Braughton, Richard York, and diverse others, which this
Informant does not at present remember.

Lawrence Mowbray.

The rest of our time was spent in executing other parts of the said
Commission, His Majesty's Officers of Justice assisting us in all places
whither we came, and accordingly several Popish Trinkets, Books, and Vestments,
were taken by us, and disposed as the Law directs: And the effect of our
Journey having been presented to His Majesty at our return, was graciously
accepted, and entertained, both by himself, and by the whole Council; upon
confidence of whole favor, I count it my Honor, as well as Duty, to stand
ready to observe His Majesty's farther Directions in any thing, which may
hereafter conduce to the preservation of His Person, and the Establishment of
the true Protestant Religion amongst us.

Mention having been made by me, of an Assault made upon me, the manner of it,
as it was by His Majesty's Command given in to him by Council, is as follows:

Upon October 14. 1679. I being to attend upon the Right Honorable the Lords,
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, at the Treasury-Chamber at Whitehall,
departed from thence about Six or Seven a Clock at night, and going over
Leicester-Fields toward my Lodgings, at the Kings-Arms in St. Martin's Lane,
but intending in the way to call upon Mr. Bolron, at the Bear and Ragged-Staff
in Leicester-Fields, I was overtaken about the middle of the Fields by a person
unknown, whom I heard follow me very fast; I supposed his speed was to get out
of the Rain; but as he came up to me, being on my left hand, he with a Dagger,
or such like Instrument, stabbed me upon my left breast, the thrust entering my
Coat and Wastcoat, and lighting upon the Whale-bone of my Bodice, which,
unknown to the bloody Assailant, I did wear for my convenience, it prevented
his design; notwithstanding by continuing his thrust, I fell down to the
ground, being slippery by reason of the Rain; the party then ran away,
supposing that I had been slain: But still I not daring to speak or call out,
lest he should renew his attempt while he was near; but presently after his
departure, I called a Link-boy, who was at the other side of the Fields, who
lighted me to my Lodgings another way.

Lawrence Mowbray.

The Conclusion.
BEcause the Jesuits are justly looked upon as having a Grand influence on the
forementioned designs, I shall close this dicourse with a Scholastical
velitation, which, I hope, will not be unacceptable to the learned; for it is
worthy of a Pen far superior to mine: The question I would discuss, is this,

Whether that Order of men, in this our Age, may be supposed to be at their
vertical, or highest Exaltation? Whether they stand at a stay, or verge toward
their declension?

I Take the more boldness to propound such a question, because a secular Priest
has led me the way: for Watson in his first quodlibet, has these two queries.

1. Whether the Jesuits, having gone astray from their first institution, there
be any likelihood of their continuance? or if not, of their downfall; and he
inclines, perhaps prophetically, to this latter. Artic. 9.

2. Whether any danger to God's Church to err, and utterly to be Overthrown by
the Jesuits ruin, (if it happen) or no danger at all? which he resolves in the
Negative. Artic. 10.

I Know the Jesuits are much for Probable opinions; wherefore in consideration
of their Rise, Progress, and the Ways, and Methods they have taken to advance
themselves, together with their immoral and unlawful practices; I shall
propound the reasons, why some men suppose, that they are at their height, or
rather declining.

Arg. 2. Their Original is affirmed by some of their own Church to be by
surprise, and imposition upon the Sea of Rome. For upon the first coming of
Ignatius, and his Partners to Rome in the time of Paul the third, the Rules of
their order being presented to him, he committed them to three Cardinals to
examine, who thought good to refuse them, because their Obedience to their
General, was seemingly Superior to their Subjection to the Pope; for Maffaus,
speaking of their General, says, without controversy one must be chosen, to
whom all must be obedient, as if it were to Christ, to his word they must
swear, and esteem his beck, and his will, as an Oracle of God, Lib. 2. vit.
Ignat. Cap. 9. I pray what greater obedience could the Pope himself claim?
hereupon being repulsed, they reformed their Rule, and made their Obedience to
the Pope, and their General both alike; for these be the words of Ribadeneira,
who also afterward wrote the life of Ignatius. Lib. 2. Cap. 7. The order of
these Clarks must be, that by their institution, they be ready to obey the Pope
at a beck, and live by such a line, as he shall well consider, and determine
off. Upon the insertion of which passage, the Pope, having (as he thought)
secured his own Authority, lent a more favorable ear to them, and confirmed
their Order; yet with some jealousy, and with many scruples of Conscience, as
some of their own Authors speak; for at first, he allowed them not to exceed
the number of Sixty, and therefore well may their Constitutions begin with this
little Congregation, etc.

To improve this Argument, if there be a worm in the Root, the verdure of any
plant will in time decay. An Error committed in the first concoction, is never
remedied in the second, as Physicians say, no marvel then, if
homebred-jealousies do increase upon this Body of Men, now grown numorous, if
not formidable to the Pope himself; ab origin fuit Sic; and therefore
notwithstanding their pretended submission and vow to the Papal Chair; when the
Pope Crosses their purposes, as Xistus quintus did, he incurred their great
displeasure and hatred, to the shortning (as some think) of his life. After
whose death, they most Maliciously depraved him, and preached against him
openly in Spain: yea one of their Faction proceeded publicly to maintain,
that Homo non Christianus possit esse Romanus Pontifex, which Tenet amongst
them argued bitter spite, and unchristian disdain against their acknowledged
Head, Watson quodl. page 100.

It is the worst thing in the world to serve a jealous Master; for at one time,
or other, his dissatisfaction (though covered for a season) will appear to the
disgrace, if not ruin, of his servant: Let the Provincial of the English
Jesuits, in the room of Mr. Whitebread, apply this to himself, and his Order,
they are not quite secure on the otherside the water. Besides, Beneficia
cousque grata, dum exsolvi possunt, as the Historian speaks. The
extraordinary Merit, which the Jesuits pretent to, from his Holiness, as voting
themselves to be the Chief, if not only supporters of the Papal Chair, is but
an upbraiding of him, who sits therein; especially in doubtful and suspicious
times, great deserts in some Circumstances render a man as obnoxious, as the
highest guilt; some give an instance in Marshal Byron of France, in the days of
their Henry the fourth; in the Duke of Buckingham, in Richard the third's time,
and in the Old Earl of Essex, in Queen Elizabeth's days here in England. All
which (say they) were deprest, and broken under the weight of their merits to
their respective Princes.

If benefits procure such requitals, what shall injuries do? For the Author of
the Jesuits Catechism, Chap. 25. Book. 3. says, That the notorious interprize,
or usurpation of the General of the Jesuits over the Holy See, is such, that
there is no new Sect, which in time may be more prejudicial to it than this.

Arg. 2. It is ominous and fatal to break a settled Constitution, on which an
Order of Religion is grounded; for the Original Sanction is as the sacred Bond
or tie, which keeps that Order together. I will not trace the Conversation of
the Jesuit, throughout all his Vows; but certainly in that of Poverty, and of
not intermedling in secular Affairs, they have much deviated from their
Primitive Institution, and consequently have made forfeiture of their Interest
in the Privileges of that Sodality.

It is observed, That the eldest Children of Parents are more strictly
educated, than those, which are born in their riper years; because then the
severity of their Discipline melts into Lenity; and their Love, not guided by
Reason, turns to fondness. The like probably may be affirmed of the first
Institutors of this Order, who perhaps were strict to their Rules; but the
declining therefrom of their posterity, argues an old and doting Age, in the
Masters of that Family. Now that those two Constitutions of theirs, have been
sufficiently broken, small skill in History, or in Conversation will demonstrate.

1. Their Wealth amassed, and that wrongfully too, as some of their own say,
is a sufficient Argument how well their Vow of Poverty is observed; for as the
Prefacer to the Moral. Practice of the Jesuits, speaks, There is not any
Artifice, Injustice, or Violence they employ not to enrich themselves, by the
spoils of all sorts of persons, Secular and Religious; Sovereign and private.
And while after, Nothing escapes the claws of their Avarice.

2. All England knows, as well as other Countries, how far they have complied
with that Rule of their own making, That none of them should immix themselves
with the Secular business of Princes: for who greater Intermeddlers in State
matters, than they? Hinc illae lachrymae.

Arg. 3. The Practices and Methods, which the Jesuits have committed and used
both here and in other Countries, have been the overthrow of other Religious of
their own Church, and how then can they themselves expect better Quarter? It is
clearly proved against them here in England, that they have endeavored to
destroy His Majesty's person by a violent death: Now there was formerly an
order of the Humiliati in the Roman Church, and they had diverse Convents spread
over Italy; they were to spend their time in strict Exercises of Piety, and of
selfe-abasements, (as the Jesuits pretend,) whence they had their Name. But,
instead thereof, growing loose and wanton, and swerving from their first
Austerity, Cardinal Borrhomeo, a grave Prelate, undertook to be their Protector
and Reformer both, who entering upon his Office of Reformation, did so curb
their licentious Wickednesses, that some of them conspired to take away his
life, which accordingly was attempted by them, whiles he was at his Prayers, by
the discharge of a Pistol; (was not the like Method of Assassination designed
against our King?) which by Gods providence did pierce his garments, and not
wound his Body, to the hazard of his life. This Fact did so inrage Pope Pius
the fifth then sitting, that he sent out a Bull for the utter extirpation of
that whole Order, notwithstanding the King of Spain's Intercession to the
contrary, Anno 1577. which Bull is recited verbatim in Toscanus his Book
entitled, Summa constitutionum and rerum in Ecclesia Romana gestarum a
Gregorio Nono usque ad Sixtum Quintum.

If an Attempt upon a single Cardinal can work the dissolution of an whole
Order, what shall those many Attempts upon several Princes do, some having been
actually murdered, others designed to the slaughter by the Council and
Contrivances of the Jesuits; certainly their Case equals, if not exceeds that
of the Humiliati: Wherefore let them look to themselves; for when Christian
Princes are incensed, the storm must light somewhere, and why not on the most
guilty? Neither can the Pope himself, in such Circumstances, secure their
Interest (no more then Paul the Fifth could prevail upon the Venetian, to
hinder their Non-exclusion from that City.) For to save himself and his
Conclave, he will doubtless sacrifice any particular Order of Religious
whatsoever.

I know the Jesuit does labor to elude that Instance, by alleging the
disparity of Cases.

1. Say they, 'twas not one, or two single persons that conspired against
Cardinal Barrhomeo, but the whole Order of the Humiliati in general, and
therefore the Guilt being diffused over all the whole Sodalty, was justly
suppressed.

Answ. They prevaricate in this Allegation; for there were several Convents of
that Order spread over Italy, who cannot be presumed so much as to have known
any thing of that particular Fact, till after the Notoriety thereof by the
Event: So that it was the Attempt only of a few particular Members, which
redounded to the prejudice and overthrow of their whole Body; for when the
minds of Rulers are exasperated against any Society of men, for the Enormities
of some few of their number, then that saying of Tacitus takes place, Habet
aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, quod in singulos utilitate publica
rependitur. Yet I am apt to think, that if the whole Body of the Jesuits could
be put to the Test, there are very few of them, of any consideration, which did
not know and approve the late Bloody Designs against England, though few of the
Actors therein, in comparison, have been called forth to suffer.

2. It was the viciousness of their lives, say they, which was the cause of
their dissolution, and not their Attempt against the Cardinal.

Answ. The Bull it self speaks to the contrary, where, although the looseness
of their lives be instanced in, yet all is summed up into that Bloody
Undertaking against their Patron, grounded on their Impenitency and Hatred of
the Instrument of their Reformation. I judge, that the Jesuits are as much
concerned, to be reproved, regulated, and reformed by Princes, or Prelates, as
any of the Humiliati, unless perhaps they disguise themselves more, and work
more under ground in their Contrivances.

Arg. 4. In Scripture Decision, Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty
look before a fall. This Increpation will much concern that Order of men, if we
may believe many Writers of their own Church: For who more aspiring? Who more
supercilious, than they? Who greater undervaluers and underminers of others,
even of their own Religion. Neither are these faults objected to them by the
Envy of a Contrariant, but they are alleged by Members of the Roman Communion;
if it were fit for me to enlarge the number of Quotations, I could cite many
Authors to this purpose; but I shall content my self with one or two Instances.
1. In the year 1640. they printed a Book in Flanders, entitled, The Image of
the first Age, of the Society of Jesus, wherein they represent all the
differing Events, happening to their Society, since their establishment in
1540. which they pursue with so much Affectation, Vanity, and Pride, that as
the Prefacer to the Moral Practice of the Jesuits does speak. We cannot open
the Book without abhorring the Impudence of these Fathers, in turning all
things to their advantage, and laboring to draw glory from that, which ought
rather to humble and confound them.

2. There is a Book written Originally in the Spanish Tongue, by a Bishop of
that Nation, which contains an Apology for other Orders of Religion against the
Jesuits, addressed to Pope Innocent the Tenth, and printed at Conimbre, in the
year 1654. called, The Theater of Jesuitism; which, if it were commonly to be
had, it would so display the Haughtiness, Avarice, and other Enormities of that
Order, that the time of their expiration, without Repentance, may be judged to
be near at hand especially considering,

Arg. 5. The high disgust they have raised against themselves amongst most of
their other Ecclesiastics, which is a great Prognostic of their fall. I have
given an hint of this before; it is not to be questioned, but that other
Religious Orders of the Roman Church, were in being long before the Jesuits
were thought of, neither are they now so fond of them, but they can as easily
part with their Society; for no man in his right wits would court that which is
a prejudice and inconvenience to himself; yea that, which would labor to
supplant and ruin him? This is the present case, the Seculars have been put to
defend themselves against the Jesuits, and to evince their own usefulness in
the Church; that was the design of Watson's Quodlibets, and also of the
aforementioned Book, called the Theater of Jesuitism; certainly then they
looked on the Jesuits as their Supplanters and Underminers, so that unless they
are willing to court their own diminution, yea, total Abolishment, they cannot
have much respect for that Order: I say, total Abolishment, because Parsons,
the Jesuit, in a Book published heretofore, entitled, The Reformation of
England, concludes with this saying, That if England ever return to the Romish
Religion, all Ecclesiastical Estates must be put in common, and the care of
them committed to seven Sages of the Society of Jesus, to distribute them as
they shall think fit, and that no Friar of any other Order, must be permitted
to pass into England, and the Pope himself, for five years at least, must not
present to any Benefice, but refer himself wholly to those seven persons of
that Company.

If that Project of his aspiring mind had taken place, then farewell all
Seculars in England, yea, and all other Orders of Regulars too, unless such as
would have turned Pensioners to the Jesuits, and have truckled under them.

To close this Argument, he that shall consider what is said in the beginning
of the Preface to the Book called, The Moral Practice of the Jesuits, in these
words, There Is do doubt, but all who love the purity of the Moral Doctrine of
Christ are very sensible of the corruption the Jesuits labor to introduce
thereunto, by the Opinions they have invented; but it may be said, That nothing
is more dreadful in the Conduct of these Fathers, than to see them pursue those
corrupt Maxims in their practice, and that of the many things they allow in
others contrary to the Law of God and the principles of the Gospel, there is
not any they commit not themselves to satisfy their Avarice, or to promote the
Grandeur and Glory of their Society. And a while after; All the Catholic
Universities, particularly those of Cracovie, Lovanie, and Padua, those of
Spain and France, the Bishops, the Clergy, all the Orders of Religion, and the
Courts of Parliament almost every where, opposed their Establishment, as
contrary to the good of the Church and the security of States.

I say, he that shall consider these passages, will conclude that Order not to
be very acceptable to that Church, of which they are Members; and consequently
that other Orders would be glad to rid their hands of them, if they knew how:
These Reflections, made upon the Jesuits, have reached the hearts of some of
their own Members; for though in that Book, which I mentioned before, called,
The Image of the first Age, etc. they crown themselves with many glorious
Epithets, discovering a self-esteem, even to the Nauseation of the sober; yet
Mariana, the Spanish Jesuit, (he, who is most criminated for his King-killing
Doctrines,) has written an express Treatise of the faults and defects of their
Society, which (he says) was so much changed, that if Ignatius himself came
again into the World, he would not know it. And in chapter 14. he says, That their
Conduct is in some things capable to precipitate the Society into the Abyss of
destruction.

Hence also it was, that Mutius Vitteleschi, their sixth General, reflecting
upon that Criminal facility, wherewith those of his Congregation embraced all
the new Opinions, that tended (as his Phrase is) to corrupt and ruin the Piety
of the Faithful, says in a Letter addressed to the Superiors of all their
Houses, That there was reason to fear, the latitude and liberty of Opinion of
some of the Society, especially in the matter of Manners, would not only
utterly ruin the Company, but cause very great mischiefs in the whole Church
of God.

The impressions, which the matter of the former Arguments, or at least some
equivalent considerations, have made upon the two last mentioned Members of
their Society (who doubtless had some more Partisans amongst them, of the same
sentiment) is no good Omen of their long continuance: For as in an Army, if the
Gross thereof be routed, yet a particular Regiment or Brigade, if standing
close and compact together, are with difficulty broken though charged in Front,
Flank and Rear, but when once an Entrance is made in any part thereof, then all
further resistance is of no avail for their safety; so it has been hitherto
the great advantage of the Jesuit, that he continues, in great part, entire,
since his first erection, and has not admitted of those breaches,
sub-divisions and reforms, which other Orders have, for the Benedictines have
been reformed into Cluniacks, Cistertians, etc. to their diminution and loss;
such sub-alter^ purgations do carry more than a Tacit intimation of ill
humors, errors and defects, which the Body of the Jesuitical Order by no means
will admit; It Is true, Sabellicus, tells us, That about the year 1366. there was
an Order of Religious at Siena in Italy, called Jesuati, but the Historian
destribes these to have been a fort of Lay Hermits, which wrought for their
living, and not being in Ecclesiastical Orders, did celebrate no Mass, but
spending their time in Prayer, and often repeating the Name of Jesus, had
thence their denomination; I do not find any continuance of this Order, though
probably the Ignatian Jesuit might from them borrow his Title, with some small
variation, but their appearance in the World was many years before the Ignatian
Order, as now established, did peep abroad; so this does not affect the
Loyolists.

Of late years indeed, there has been a design to supersete a Female English
Order, under the Name of Jesuitesses; and as the first Preacher of the actual
Resurrection of Christ, was a Mary, so (they say) that the first of the
Jesuitesses had the same Name; but upon serious consideration of their graver
Ecclesiastics, the Itineraries of the Men, and the Lady Errantrys of the
Women, compared together, being likely to have more of the Romance th^n the
Evangely therein, I do not find it did succeed. So that the present Order of
Ignatius remains entire without any succeeding alteration, as to their Rules
and Government, more than what was allowed unto them by the Gr^^ts of Paul the
third, and Julius the third their Establishers; and indeed there was Liberty
enough granted them by those two Bulls; for thereby they had power to alter
their Constitutions, as they pleased, so that Pope Paul the third might seem to
evacuate his own Grant, and instead of prescribing Rules to them for their
Government, by the latitude allowed they might change and cast of his, and so
govern themselves as they pleased, for the words in the Bull, Englished, are,
That they may make particular Ordinances, which they shall judge fit for the
Society, to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the profit of their
Neighbors; And such as are already made, or shall be made hereafter, they may
change, alter or abolish according to the variety of place, time, and occasion,
and instead of them, make new. The which so changed, revoked, or new made, we
will that they be confirmed by the foresaid Authority of the Apostolic See,
And by the same Authority of our special Grace and Favor we confirm them. Well
then, the Jesuit in respect of his Order remains unbroken, let us now see, how
he carrys himself within doors, if no errors or miscarriages there, then surely
there appear no symptoms of his Declension.

Arg. 6. But if the contrary be manifest, then it may serve as a sixth
Argument, That their Order, unless reformed, is not long-lived.

Let us hear then what opinion Melchior Canus, Bishop of the Canaries, had of
this Order; when he heard of the first appearance of the Jesuits in Spain, he
believed that the end of the World did draw nigh, and that Antichrist would
forthwith appear, for that his Forerunners and Emissaries (so he called the
Ignatians) began to walk abroad;

But if he be excepted against by them, as a partial Author, because a
Dominican, let us call in their own Mariana again, for he tells us in his
forecited fourteenth Chapter, That if any one have but boldness enough, what
fault so ever he be guilty of, he remains in the Society, if he have but the
wit to frame an excuse, or any pretense for what he has committed; I pass by
(says he) gross Crimes, a great number whereof is winked at under color of
want of sufficient proof, or fear to have them noised, and so become public;
for our Government seems to aim at nothing else, but covering of Faults, like
them that rake the Ashes uppermost, as if the Fire, that lies under, would not
sooner or later send forth some smoke, etc. And a while after, A Provincial or
Rector shall turn all upside down, violate the Rules and Constitutions of the
Order, squander away the Estate belonging to their Houses, or give them to his
Kindred, without any punishment after several years miscarriage, but the
rendering his condition better than ever by discharging him of his Office; does
any man know a Superior chastised for such excesses, as these? And afterward,
amongst us the Good are afflicted, yea put to Death, and the Wicked upheld,
because they are feared.

Thus we see, by the judgment of one of their own, Evils and Miscarriages do
abound amongst them. The impression then being made upon their Body, they may
well fear a Total rout. And indeed the rest of the Fraternity, are so incensed
against this Spaniard, for exposing them so much, that they more freely except
against (and seem to condemn) the King-killing Doctrines in him, then in any
other Jesuit; Yea Mr. Gavan, lately executed, in his dying Speech did (though
mistakingly) impute that Doctrine unto him alone, of all their Sodality: The
Core of the Matter lay in Mariana's free increpation of their other Evils,
which gave them occasion to recriminate his opinion in that wherein they might
most plausibly except against him; and this may probably be the reason, why (as
I said before) the Jesuits turned Advocates for the Order of the Humiliati; and
would cast the intended murder of Cardinal Borrhomeo, only upon two or three of
them, because that Cardinal was no Friend of theirs, and against whom they had
a picque, because he had banished their Order out of Millain, where he was
Archbishop, and preferred Seculars in their rooms.

Let us hear what Watson says in this matter, This good Cardinal (says he)
speaking of Cardinal Borromeus, whose rare Virtues all Europe talked of,
observing well the pride of the Jesuits, their practices for enriching,
advancing, and bringing of themselves to be admired of all men, Lucifer like,
and their Cony-catching devices for the alluring of the fresh-wits, Chrildren
of most towardness, and those of rarest aspects, and great of hopes, having
intelligence how they held the like course and state, under color of teaching
and bringing up of Youth, in the Duchy of Millain, he thought them no fit men
to remain within his Jurisdiction; whereupon he banished them out of all those
places, esteeming it far more necessary to have such apt men, and those of the
finest wits, quickest spirits, and likelist to prove great Clerks, to become
secular Priests, as those appointed by institution divine to take upon them the
care of Souls; This he prudently conceited was more convenient, and the bounden
duty of them, that were indifferent what state of Life they took them unto in
the Church of God, rather to have them Secular Priests, than intruded into any
other Order of Religion or Monastical Life whatsoever, which intermedleth not
ex professo with any such Charge, but live after the prescript Rules of their
Orders, private to themselves, as their Vow and Profession bind all them to.
Thus he, and the same Watson, makes it one Article in his fifth Quodlibet,
Whether the Jesuits, or the Seminary Seculars, be fitter for Government in the
English Colleges beyond the Seas, and whether of the two is more necessary,
either respecting Gods Church, or the Weal of our Country (England) to have the
bringing up of English Youths there? Which question he resolves on the part of
the Seculars.

And indeed, the Education of Youth is one of the prime Artifices of the
Jesuit, whereby he labors to advance himself, and depretiate other Orders of
Religion. For this young Fry is, as it were, the Nursery of their Society,
which they study earnestly to maintain. And indeed, in the Admission and
Institution of youths into their Colleges, they use a great deal of exactness
and care; for the Rectors usually inform themselves of the Parentage, of the
Estate, or hope and prospect thereof; of the natural Complexions, Dispositions,
and Genius, of their promptness of wit, of the proficiency in Learning, in
their Novitiates and Scholars; all which they enter in their Adversaria, or
Leiger-Books, (like good Accomptants) in distinct Columns; and they make this
use of these particular Enquiries, that they may apply suitable Baits to engage
their Novices to the love of their Rules and Order, beyond any other sort of
Religions; so that if any should admire how so many able and learned men, and
such great Writers (as Alegambe has reckoned them up in his Book called
Bibliotheca Societatis) should as it were dote upon this Order, and esteem it
their privilege and honor to be cooptated or admitted thereunto. It does much
abate our wonder, when we consider the Philtre of Education, and the principles
infused into them at their first admission, with the charming and ingratiating
Allurements, used to them afterward, especially if noble, rich, and wealthy:
It is reported of the Irish, that when they grow up, they love their Nurses,
and Foster-Fathers, better than their own natural Parents, -- a Teneris
assuescere multum est, says the Poet, herein the Jesuit resembles them,
continuing to be so highly affected with his Gremial and Nutritious Order.

Those who do more strictly Anatomize this Order of Men, do divide them
principally into three Ranks; the knowledge of the division will not be
unuseful to Protestants.

1. There are some Gentlemen, ordinarily of good houses, and fair Estates, who
live wholly after a Secular way, as Lay-Brethren of the Society; they are not
actually obliged to the observation of the Rules of their Order, but enter into
a Vow, to put on the Habit, when it shall please the Father-General to command
them; and therefore these are called, Jesuits in voto; of such they make mighty
advantage, in order to the setting up of their Monarchy, or rather Pambasileia,
or Universal Dominion over all other Orders. For some of this Class are usually
maintained in the Palaces of all great Princes, and in the houses of Noble men,
who by the Mediation of their Adherents, are many times induced into the
Prince's or Noble-man's service, as Counselors, Secretary, or the like; these
again persuade that Prince or Great-man respectively to take some actual
Jesuit for his Confessor or Chaplain; and by this means the secret
Consultations of Princes are discovered, and their Designs prevented; and yet
things are so cunningly carried, that no man can fasten on the true Author, but
it commonly happens, that the greatest suspicion lies on the most innocent.
Thus an Author of their own Church.

2. The second sort is of those who are actually resident in their Monasteries
and Colleges, as Priests, Clerks, or Converts, who of themselves have no power
to leave the Order, but at the pleasure of their General and Superiors may be
dispensed with; these are mostly busyed in the Exercises of those Colleges to
which they relate.

3. The third rank is of those who are mainly given up to Policy, for the
aggrandizing of their Society, and enlarging the Power and Privileges thereof;
these are not always chosen out of the most deserving and best learned of their
Society, but out of the most confident, bold, or daring, as most likely to
serve their end, by insinuating themselves into the Affairs and Councils of
Secular Princes, that from thence they may fish out what is contributary to
their Designs.

The first and last sort are those who are chiefly excepted against, and to
whom Claudius Aquaria, one of their own Generals, did formerly impute two great
Evils, which he calls Secularity and Aulicism: The occasion was this, Their
said General having observed (as well as Mariana) the Defects and Errors in
their Government, wrote a Book, printed at Rome, A. D. 1615. wherein he lays
open the Diseases of the Society, and his Essays for the healing of them; take
his Reproof in his own words. Saecularitas and Aulicismus insinuans in
familiaritates and gratiam externorum, morbus est in Societate and intra and
extra periculosus, and istis, qui eum patiuntur, and nobis fere nescientibus
paulatim subintrat, specie quidem lucrifaciendi Principes, Praelatos, Magnates,
conciliandi ad Divinum obsequium hujusmodi homines Societati, juvandi proximos,
etc. sed re vera quoerimus interdum nos ipsos, and paulatim ad saecularia
deflectimus. Secularity (says he) and Aulicisme insinuating into the
acquaintance and favor of those without, is a Disease in the Society,
dangerous within and without, to those who undergo and suffer it, and it creeps
in upon us almost un-a-wares; the pretense is to gain Princes, Prelates, and
Noblemen, to the esteem of the Society, for the Service of God, and the good
of our Neighbor, etc. but the truth is, we seek our selves, and by little and
little revolt to a Secular Life.

The same Author in another Tract, entitled Institutiones pro Superioribus
Societatis, published at Rome also the same time, further describes that
mischief.

Est and alia malorum Radix long periculosissima, eoque periculosior, quo
minus vulgo noxia conseri solet, rerum, scilicet, externarum occupatio, in quam
superiores ferri, ac variis nominibus supra modum effundi solent. Sunt enim qui
naturae quadam propensione ad distractiones proni, non solum oblatas occasiones
cupide arripiunt, ut operam suam impendant, sed eas ipsimet ultro quaerunt, and
nasci quodammodo ac succrescere faciunt. Alii per speciem proximos lucri
faciendi, multis sese visitationibus implicant, iisque non modo non
necessariis, sed paerum etiam utilibus, atque in his ita versantur, ut a
saecularium moribus parum abscedant. The sense is, That their mixing themselves
in secular affairs is a dangerous evil in their Society, of which their
superiors are much guilty, some of which being naturally prone to raise
distractions, do not only greedily apprehend all occasions offered to promote
them, but also do their endeavor to create more opportunities to raise,
foment, and Cherish them. Others entangle themselves in many visits (on
pretense of gaining their neighbors) needless, and unuseful, and demean
themselves so therein, that they little or nothing differ in their manners from
Seculars.

The cure which he prescribes for the healing of this disease, which I wish all
of the Society would observe the method of, is, Instruct. 14. Cap. 7. in these
words.

Praecidantur initio istae familiaritates cum Principibus, ante quam adolescant
and radices agant, quae societati nostrae, nisi fortiter obsistamus, graviter
minitantur, praefertim cum superiores connivent, (i.) Let all those
familiarities with Princes be discarded at the beginning, before they be settled
or take root, which threaten a great mischief to our Society, unless we
strongly resist, especially our Superiors winking at it.

It seems this General was more sober and honest than the rest of his
predecessors; or else the censure of their Mariana aforementioned was ill
grounded (which we can hardly imagine) for he having in one Chapter laid to the
charge of their Society, That in distributing of rewards and punishments, there
was more equity amongst Thieves and Robbers, than amongst them. And moreover
that Virtue and Learning in their Sodality were rather an hindrance to
preferment than a step thereunto: In his 10th Chap. of the Regiment of the
Society, he imputes the cause of these evils to the Ambition, Pride, and
Arbitrariness of their Generals. I shall repeat his own words, Pervenimus nunc
ad fontem and Originem nostrarum turbarum ac molestiarum, quas in Societate
experimur singularis ferus depastus est eam. Monarchia ista, mea sententia, nos
humi affligit ac prosternit, non quia sit Monarchia, sed quia non sit been
temperata: Haec enim bellua est, quae quicquid attigit, populatur ac vastat
quam nisi vinculis compescamus, non est, quod ullam nobis quietem polliceamur,
etc. Et si leges habemus, easque plures numero, quam necesse est, Generalis
tamen nihil in Gubernatione leges moratur, neque in dandis officiis, neque
admittendo socios ad professionem, neque in Constituendis Collegiis, neque
innumeris in rebus aliis. Nam si leges sint, ille in omnibus, aut prope in
omnibus dispensandi ac legibus quem libeat solvendi auctoritate utitur. (i.) We
are now come to the Original and Fountain of all the Troubles, which we
experiment in our Society, One single Ravager has eat it quite up. Our
Monarchy, in my Opinion does quite overthrow us, not because it is a Monarchy,
but because it is not well tempered. This is the Beast, which wastes whatsoever
it lights upon, and unless we fetter and restrain it, we can promise our selves
no rest, etc. It is true, we have Laws, and those more than enough, yet our
General regards them not at all, in his Government, neither in bestowing of
Offices, nor in admitting Fellows to the Profession, nor in Constituting of
Colleges, nor in many other things; for although we have Laws, yet he, almost
in all things, uses his Authority to dispense with the Laws, as he pleases.
And a little after to this effect.

Thus Our Monarchical General, with a Provincial, and two or three Confidents,
to the grief of others more deserving, do govern all things in every Province
at their Pleasure.

To draw toward a Conclusion, It Is no acceptable work to me to dive into the
evils of men; or to pore so intently on their defects, as to overlook what good
may be in them. The worse I wish to all, is Repentance and Amendment of life;
Nevertheless, if I should enumerate all the particular Miscarriages, Injuries,
Frauds, Impostures, Obscenities, Treasons, and other Villainies imputed to this
Order of Men, by Members of their own (Church, many of them circumstantiated as
to time, place, and persons) I should swell my Tract a little too much: I know
the Jesuits have replied to some of those Accusations, and that, in most
things, leanly enough, for when the punctuality of Time and Place is given in
Evidence, upon unquestionable credit, it is beyond the Effrontery of humane
Nature, to expect credit upon a bare denial. He who desires to know more of
these Men, Let him read the Provincial's Letters, otherwise called, the Mystery
of Jesuitisme, with a Second part thereof, called, A further discovery of the
Mystery of Jesuitisme; Let him also consult those other two Books, one called,
The Jesuits Morals, Translated by Dr. Tongue; The other Entitled, The Moral
Practice of the Jesuits, composed by the Doctors of the Sorbon; And then no
doubt, he will receive ample satisfaction.

I shall close all with the Abridgment of one pleasant story, taken out of the
last mentioned Book. It is this, A Smith at Madrid in Spain, placed his Son
amongst the Jesuits there, giving them for his reception, the sum of 2000
Ducats, (for entertainments, you must know, are very dear, so near the Court.)
The young man being admitted, was a while after stripped of his habit, and
returned home, but the Money refused to be repai'd; The Smith sues them at the
Law, They by favor obtain sentence against him; The poor man betook himself to
his shifts, and resolved, because his Sons habit had cost him so much, he would
so order the matter, that it should regain him part of his Money: Whereupon
clothing his Son in the Garb of a Jesuit, he made him work daily at his Anvil,
the quick-sented Fathers, having notice of it, lest their Cheat should be
publicly known amongst the Common people, immediately sent for the Smith, paid
him his Money, and redeemed their Habit from a Mock-shew: But if they could have
bought silence, as well as the Robe and Hood, This story doubtless had never
come to our Ears.

FINIS.

