A MOST CHOICE Historical Compendium, Fitted for the use of all Ingenious and
Inquisitive Persons: WHO Are curious to know what wonderful Events have come
to pass for almost 1000 Years, under the Figure 8, from 818. to 1688. Inclusive.

Wherein is briefly Comprised, The Life and Death, Rise and Fall of Kings,
Queens, Noblemen, Clergymen, Warriors, and several famous Poets. With many
other Curious Remarks and Observations, not here mentioned.

Written in a Plain method, by A. M. Gent.

London, Printed for John Weld, at the Crown near Temple Bar in Fleet street,
1692.

TO THE READER.
THE best and must infallible Guide we have upon Earth (The Holy Writ) informs
us, that the wife and Omnipotent Creator of the World, was pleased to set out
six days to finish that vast piece of work, and blessed the Seventh day, and
hallowed it; Yet afterward, when the wickedness of Mankind increased to that
height, as to provoke the same Creator to destroy his works again by a Flood.
He commanded Noah to build an Ark, for the preservation of all manner of
Beasts, Foul, and Fish, etc. Noah had also a precept to enter the House of
Safety, and to take along with him his Family, which in all amounted but to
eight persons. Out of which number, the whole earth was repopulated, and
replenished to the incredulous number of Millions of Persons already known and
found out to this day, and finding many memorable passages, happening under
that number in many places abroad, especially in our own Kingdom of England,
and that also in very late years, the last being 1688. I shall here present to
thy unbyassed Judgment many Heroic actions done by our own Countrymen, both at
Home and Abroad: The Rise and Fall, the Birth and Death; the conferring of
Honor and Preferment, and also the Degrading of many persons, both Divines,
Lawyers, Warriers and Seamen; Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Private men, some
of a low degree, and some famous Poets, born and bred in the English Climate,
and all these begun or ended under the figure of eight, and no other. As for
example, England was first so called by Egbert a Saxon King in 818. Ethelbert
another Saxon King began his Reign 858. And many more English Kings and Queens:
so likewise Sir Hugh Calveley, Sir Walter Raleigh and many other persons, very
remarkable in their Lives and Fortunes, continuing on the same to this
wonder-working year 1688. as thou may see in this Treatise fully explained.
Here is also presented to thy veiw the Spanish Armadoe consisting of what Ships
and other preparations in 1588. the Murder of King Charles the first. The Death
of Usurping Oliver. The death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. The Popish Plot. The
publishing of a Birth of the Prince of Wales. The landing of the Prince of
Orange. The departure of King James and his Q. etc. out of the Kingdom of
England, and also an account of other matters included in the aforesaid years,
very profitable both for present and future Generations, and in these later
years being matter of fact, and truly stated and demonstrated, may be a good
Copy to write after; learning there by to carry our selves steadily and wisely
in our several stations, both in times of War and Peace, Prosperity and
Adversity. Now if any one should ask thee, why I took no other figure to end
in, tell him it would have swelled the Book to a greater Price, intending this
only portable for the Pocket, and for such as are not willing to go to a higher
rate: and if that answer is not sufficient, let them take the other eight
remaining figures, and use to their best advantage and pleasure; if this Tract
finds good acceptance, it may be an encouragement for a second adventure after
the same way and method for the future. However at present I will no longer
detain thee in the Porch, but open a passage into a fair Field, full of variety
and pleasure, desiring thee to reap the same, by perusal of these my pains and
willing endeavors.

Vale.
A CHOICE And most useful COMPENDIUM.
ENgland was first so called by Egbert a Saxon King, who began his Reign in 818.

Ethelbert another Saxon King began his Reign in 858.

Alfred another Saxon King first divided England into Shires, in the year 888.

Organs were brought into general use in Churches, about the year 828, and much
improved by Bernard a Venetian, and an incomparble Musician.

Herbert de Bosh^^ was a Manubus unto Tho. Becket, at whose Martyring he was
present, and had the discretion to make no resistance; he wrote the story of
his Master's death. Going over into Italy he was by Pope Alex. 3. made
Archbishop of Beneventum, and in December. 1178. created Cardinal.

St. Agelnoth the Good, Archbish. of Cant. is said to have given at Rome 100
Talents of Silver, and one of Gold, for the Arm of St. Augustine. B: of Hippo.
He expended much in repairing his Cathedral lately destroyed by the Danes,
assisted therein by the bounty of King Canutus. He dyed 1038.

Walt Episc. Carliel no great Clerk, being made Lord Treasurer of England, he
avowed his Accounts even when justly charged with a 100 l. Debt to the
Exchequer; upon which he resigned his Bishopric and became a Friar at Oxford,
where he dyed 1248. Where note that some persons will descend from a higher to
lower degree, to obtain pardon for sin.

Edward Son to Edgar K. of England, was in his Infancy whipped by Elfrida his
Mother-in-Law with wax Candles, so that afterward he could never endure the
sight of any such Candles; when he was King, Elfrida managed for the most part
all the Affairs of State, and afterward caused this Edward to be stabbed at
Corse Castle, whither he had come to visit her; An. 978. intending by that
murder to make way for her Son Ethelred to the Kingdom. He was buried at
Shaftsbury, which was formerly called St. Edwards.

Matthew Gournay, Born at Stoke under Hambden, Somer. where his family has
flourished since the Conquest, and there built both a Castle and a College. He
was the honor of his House in the Reign of Edw. 3 d. He fought at the Siege of
Algiers and Benemazin against the Saracens, at Ingen, Poictiers, Sluee, Cressy,
against the French, and at Nazaran under the Black Prince in Spain. His Armor
was beheld by martial men with much civil veneration, with whom his faithful
Buckler was a relic of esteem. He dyed in peace, aged 90. odd years, an. 1378.

Steph. Langton, born in England, bred in Paris, was one of the greatest
Scholars of the Christian world in his age. He was consecrated Cardinal of St.
Chrysogone, then by the Pope intruded Archbishop of Cant. in defiance of King
John; he wrote co^ments on all the old, and some of the new Testament. He first
divided the Bible into Chapters, which Robert Stephens a Frenchman subdivided
into Verses. Langton divided also the Kingdom of England, reducing King John to
sad extremities. He dyed, and was buried at Canterbury, an. 1220.

Stephen de Fulborn was made Bishop of Waterford, and Lord Treasurer of
Ireland, and after Archbishop of Tuam and (twice) Lord Chief Justice of that
Kingdom. He dyed an. 1288. and was buried in Trinity Church in Dublin.

St. Dunstan, born in, and Abbot of, Glassenbury, was Bishop of London and
Worcester, and Archbishop of Canterbury, and for promoting of Monkery was
reputed a Saint. His skill in Smithery was so great, that the Goldsmiths in
London are incorporated by the name of the Company of St. Dunstans. He dyed
Anno 988. He was the strictest of the Clergy, against the marriages of Priests
in his life time.

Sewald, bred in Oxford, was Scholar to St. Edward, who was wont to say to him,
Sewald, Sewald, thou will have many afflictions and dye a Martyr: Nor did he
miss much of his mark therein, though he met with peace and plenty at first
when Archbishop, but afterward opposing the Pope, who intruded one Jordan an
Italian to be Dean of York, he was for his contempt Excommunicated. Note that
at the same time there were 300: benefices possessed by Italians, who did not
only teach in the Church, but misteach by their lascivious and debauched
conversations. Let us now return to Sewald, who never returned into the Popes
favor, but dyed of grief in the state of Excommunication, An. 1258. yet was he
reputed a Saint in vulgar estimation.

Eleanor, Eldest Daughter to King Ed. I. and Queen Eleanor born at Windsor,
afterward was married by Proxy (a naked sword interposing between her and his
body) to Alphons. King of Arragon, who dyed before the consummation of
marriage. The Princess was afterward married to H. 3. Earl of Berry in France,
from whom the Dukes of Anjou and Kings of Sicil are descended, She dyed An.
1298.

Edward III. Son to Ed. II. and Queen Isabel born at Windsor, a pious and
fortunate Prince, was Passive in deposing of his Father, practiced on in his
minority by his Mother and Mortimer. His French Victories speak both of his
Wisdom and Valor: and though the conquests by H. 5. were thicker, his were
broader (in France and Scotland) though both in length a like, as lost by by
their immediate Successors. He was the first English King that coined Gold. He
first stamped the Rorse Nobles, having on one side Jesus autem transiens per
medium illorum ibat, and on the Reverse his own Image, with a Sword and Shield
sitting in a Ship waving on the Sea. He had a numerous and happy Issue by
Philippa his Queen, after whose death being almost 70 years old he cast his
assections on Alice Pierce his Paramour to his dishonor, it being true what
Epictetus returned to Adrian the Emperor asking of him what love was. In puero,
pudor; in virgin, Rubor; in Foemina furorin Juvene, Ardor; in seen Risus. In a
Boy Bashfulness, in a Maid Blushing, in a Woman Fury, in a young Man Fire, in
an Old Man Folly. However this King had few equals, none superiors for Wisdom,
Clemency and Courage. He dyed An. Dom. 1378.

Wulstan of Brandsford, was Prior of Worcester, and built a most beautiful
Hall in his Convent. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Worcester, 1338. He was
verus pontisex in the Grammatical notation thereof, building a fair Bridge at
Brandsford over the River Teme, and dyed not long after.

Jo. Eversden was breda Monk in Bury Abbey, whereof he was Cellerer or Caterer:
but mounting himself above this mean employ; he buried himself in Poetry, Law,
and History, whereof he wrote a fair Volume from the beginning of the World.
Being a Monk he was not fond of Friars: And observes that when the Franciscans
first entered Bury, a few years before his death, there hapened a hideous
Hurricane, lev^lling Trees, Towers; yet went they out with a clam, at the time
of the dissolution. He dyed 1338.

Anno 1378. Note that in this year (in the Reign of Richard II.) the Sussexians
of Rye and Winchel-sea, embarked for Normandy, and afterward entered by night
into a Towncalled Peter's Port, took all such Prisoners who were able to pay
ransom, and safely returned home with their spoils; amongst which were some
Bells the French had formerly taken from the Towns in this County, which they
lately invaded. It was a worthy advice which William Earl of Arundel gave to
his Son Henry Fitz-Allen, never to trust his Neighbors the French, which I
would commend to the inhabitants of this County, and indeed now and forever to
all England.

John Stratford, of Stratford, Warwickshire, being born there, was preferred by
the Pope to the Bishopr. of Winchest. whereupon falling into the displeasure of
Richard II. for a time, he took it in so ill part, that he forsook that King
whilst in his extremity: this cost him the displeasure of the Queen Mother and
Edw. III. till at last converted by his constancy, they turned their frowns
into smiles upon him. When he was Archbishop of Cant. he furnished the King
with great sums of money at his first seting forth for France: But when the
King sent to him again for another supply, instead of Coin, the Bishop sent him
Counsel, whereat the King returning into England, was so highly offended, that
the Bishop was forced to pass his public purgation in Parlia. by which he was
restored to the reputation of his Innocence. He built and bountifully endowed a
Beautiful College in Stratford. He dyed Anno 1348. having been a man of great
charity, meekness and moderation. Ralph Straford his Kinsman was Bishop of
London, and there being a grievous Pestilence there, this Bishop bought a piece
of Land for the burial of the Dead, lying near Smithfield called No man's Land.

Eustathius de Fauconbridge, was chosen Bishop of London An. 6. Hen. III. He
was chosen Chief Justice, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterward
Treasurer of England, and twice Ambassador to the King of France: He dyed
October 31. 1228. and was buried in the Presbytery.

Maurice Chamnee, bred a Friar in the Charter House. He only escaped when 18 of
his Order lost their lives, (by him written) for refusing the Oath of
supremacy. It Is said he warped to the will of H. 8. to preserve his Covent from
destruction. He dyed beyond the Seas about 1580.

Sir Amias Preston, of an ancient Family at Cricket in Somerset. An. 88. seized
on the Admiral of the Galiasses, wherein the Governor with most of his men
were burnt or killed. He took the Town of Puerto Sancto, and the Isle of Cochi;
surprised the Fort and Town of Coro, sacked the City of St. Jago, put to Ransom
the Town of Cumana, and entered Jamaica (all in the West Indies) and returned
home safely. He sent a challenge to Sir Walter Raleigh the Privy Counselor,
which was by him refused, having a Wife and Children and a fair Estate, and Sir
Amias being a private and single Person, though of good quality; because Sir
Walter condemned those for ill humors, where the Hangman gives the Garland.
These two Knights were reconciled afterward, and Sir Amias dyed about the
beginning of King James.

Rob. de Leic, a Frank in Oxford; was one that brought Preaching into fashion
in that Age: He wrote of the Hebrew and Roman Chronological Computation. He
died at Lichfield, 1348.

Sir John Philpot, (whose Family has long resided in Vpton-Court in Kent,) was
bred a Grocer in London, whereof he was Mayor 1378. He set forth a Fleet in the
Reign of ^. 2. at his own cost, to repress the Insolence of one John Mercer, a
Scot, who was taken with all his Ships, and rich Plunder therein. Two Years
after he conveyed an English Army into Britain, in Ships of his own hiring, and
with his own Money released more than 1000 Arms there, which the Soldiers had
formerly engaged for their Victuals. The Nobility accused him for acting
without a Commission; yea, pro tantorum sumptuum pr^mio veniam vix obtinuit.
That is, He searcely obtained his Pardon by a great charge, and by r^ward and
gifts.

Sir Hugh Calvely, born at Calvely in Cheshire, of whom it is said, He could
feed as much as two, and fight as much as ten men: his strong Appetite would
digest any thing but an injury; so that killing a Man is reported the cause of
quitting his Country, and going for France; where he became such an excellent
Soldier, that he converted the most difficult Achievements into easy
performances, by martial Valor. He was one of 30 English in France, who in a
Duel encountered as many Britains. He revenged the Blood of the English, who
whilst his hands were tied behind him, were slain before his Face, An. ult. E.
3. 'Twas he that after an unfortunate Voyage of the English Nobility, An. 1. R.
2. took Barkbulloign, and 25 other French. Ships, besides the Castle of Mark
lately lost, and by him recovered; and the next Year he spoiled Estaples, with
the Plunder of which he enriched the Calicians. He married the Queen of
Arragon, whose Arms are quartered on his Tomb. He died 1388.

John Booth, Bachelor of Law, was consecrated Bishop of Exeter, An. 6. Ed. 4.
He built the Bishops Chair, or Seat, in its Cathedral, which has not his equal
in England; but the sofest Cushion belonging to it was taken away, when Bishop
Vescy alienated the Lands thereof. When the Bishop had finished this Chair, he
could not quietly sit down therein, such were the troubles arising from the
Wars between York and Lancast. therefore retiring to his private Habitation at
Horsley in Hampshire, He died 1478. and was buried in St. Clement Danes in
London. There was an elder Brother, Sir Rog. Booth, of Barton in Lincolnshire,
Father of Margaret, Wife of Ralph Nevil third Earl of Westmoreland.

Theorithoid, a holy Nun at Barkin in Essex, after her death was reputed a
Saint. She died 678. This Nunnery was valued 1000 l. yearly rent, at the
dissolution in Henry 8.

Sim of Gaunt, born in London, was preferred Bishop of Salisbury by Ed. 1. He
gave the first leave to the Citizens thereof to fortify that place with a
Ditch and Walls, 1298. And no less was his care of the Church, than of the
City, making good Statutes; whereby it was ordered even unto our Age.

Henry, eldest Son to King John, born at Winchester An. 1208. was a pious, but
poor King: He was at first postponed to King Lewis of France; afterward
imbroiled with the Barons Wars, and imprisoned; yet at last he obtained a
comfortable old Age, by the means of his Son Prince Edward. He would be
governed by those he knew wiser than himself: the main cause of his peaceable
death, and pompous burial in the Abbey of Westminster, of his own foundation.

Philip de Repton became D. D. in Oxford, a great Asserter of the Doctrine of
Wickliff, but he recanted and became a Persecutor; wherefore he was termed (by
those he molested) Rampington. He was made Abbot of Leicester, Chancellor of
Oxford, Bishop of Lincoln, An. 1408. and was created by Pope Gregory 12. Card.
of St. Nerius, etc. though he had solemnly sworn he would make no more
Cardinals 'till the Schism in Rome were ended. He resigned his Bishopric,
after 12 Years possession.

Will. White, a Wicklevite, and the first married Priest since the Pope's
solemn prohibition thereof; was constant to his calling, and was as a Partridge
daily on the Wing, removing from place to place: he was seized, condemned, and
burnt at Norwich 1428. As for Marian Martyrs, those in this Shire suffered,
either by the cruelty of Griffin Bishop of Rochester, or Thornton Suffragan of
Dover.

William Gray, Son to the Ld. Gray of Codnor, was as honorable. He first
studied in Baliol Coll. in Oxford, then at Ferrara in Italy, where he was an
Auditor of Guarinus of Verona. He was made by H. 6. Pro^urator in the Court of
Rome, and was freely elected to the Bishopric of Ely by Edw. 4. He was Lord
Treasurer, the last Clergy*Man that ever was preferred to that Office, until
Bishop Juxton in our days enjoyed it. He died 1478. and lies buried in the
Church of Ely.

Will. Caxton of Caxton, a diligent and learned Man, bred beyond the Sea, and
lived 30 Years in the Court of Mary Duchess of Burgundy, Sister to K. Edw. 4.
He continued Polychronicon unto the end of that King with good Judgment and
Fidelity: He collected and printed all Chaucers Works, and on many accounts
deserved well of Posterity, and died 1488.

Stephen Brown, Grocer, was born at Newcastle, afterward Knighted, and made
Lord Mayor of London, 1438. In which Year happened a great Famine, caused much
by unseasonableness of Weather, (but more by some huckstering Husbandmen, who
may be properly called Knaves in Grain.) Sir Stephen sent some Ships to
Dantzick, whose seasonable return with Rye, suddenly sunk Grain to reasonable
rates, whereby many a languishing Life was preserved. He was one of the first
Merchants, who in want of Corn showed the Londoners the way to the Barn-Door. I
mean into Spruceland.

Edw. Fox, born in Duresly in Gloucestershire, was Almoner to King H. 8. he
first brought Dr. Cranmer to the knowledge of the King: He was afterward
Bishop of Hereford, and was the principal Pillar of the Reformation, as to the
managerie of the politic part thereof: Of the many Books he wrote, that De
differentia utriusque potestatis was his masterpiece. He was employed on
several Embassies into France and Germany, and died Anno 1538.

Mary Groy, the youngest Daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolk, frighted with the
infelicity of her two elder Sisters forgot her honor to remember her safety,
and married one whom she could love, and none need fear, Martin Kayes of Kent,
Esquire; Serjeant-Porter, and died without Issue, 20. Ap. 1578.

James Goldwel, born at great Chart in Kent, was Dean of Salisbury, Secr. to
Edw. 4. and at last Bishop of Norwich: He repaired the Church of great Chart,
and founded a Chapel on the South Side thereof: he died 1598.

His Brother Thomas, by Qu. Mary, was preferred Bishop of St. David's; and in
the Reign of Q. Elizabeth he went to Rome, where he procured Indulgences to
such as should go in Pilgrimage to St. Winifreds Well in his Diocese.

Robert Brassy, born at Bunbury, (i. e. Boniface-bury) in Cheshire; bred D. D.
in King's College in Cambridge, whereof he was Provost: being learned and
stout, he publicly protested against the Visitors in Q. Mary's Reign, as to
his own College, thereby taking off the edg of these persecuting Commissioners.
When many Doctors of Cambridge were resolved to sell their Right in
Sturbridg-Fair for a trifle to the Townsmen, he dashed their designs; which
manly opposition prevented the Vice-Chancellor's holding the Stirrup to the
Mayor. He died Ann. Dom. 1558. and lies buried on the South Side of the Chapel.

Thomas Stuckley was a younger Brother; of an ancient and worshipful Family,
near Illfracomb, in Devon, one of good parts, and great ambition, having spent
his Patrimony, and undertaking the Plantation of Florida, he blushed not to
tell Queen Elizabeth, That he preferred rather to be Sovereign of a Molehill,
than the highest Subject to the greatest King in Christendom; and that he was
assured he should be a Prince before his Death. I hope (said the Queen) I shall
hear from you when you are stated in your Principality. I will write unto you
(quoth Stuckley.) In what Language? (said the Queen.) He returned, In the Style
of Princes, To our dear Sister. His fair project being blasted for lack of
Money, he went into Ireland, where missing the preferment he expected, he went
over with treacherous intent into Italy: There he wrought himself with
ineredible dexterity into the very bosom of Pope Pius 5. vaunting that with
3000 Soldiers he could beat all the English out of Ireland. The Pope loading
him with the Titles of Baron of Ross, Visc. Murrough, Earl of Wexford, Marq. of
Lemster, furnished him with 800 Soldiers, paid by the King of Spain for the
Irish Expedition. But Stuckley chose rather to accompany Sebastian King of
Portugal, with 2 Moorish Kings into Africa: where behaving himself valiantly
with his 800 Men, in the Battle of Alcaser, he was slain, An. 1578. In vain he
had given good counsel to these furious Kings to refresh their faint Soldiers
before the Fight; for rushing on after their first Landing, they buried
themselves together in the same ruin.

A fatal Fight, wherein one day was slain
Three Kings* that were, and one that would be fain.
Agnes Pressed lived at Northcot in Cornwall, and was indicted before W. Stanford
Judge of the Assize an. 2. 3. P. and Mary, her own Husband and Children being
her greatest persecutors, from whom she fled because they would force her to
Mass: but being presented to the Bishop of Exeter, she was condemned for
denying the Sacr^ment of the Altar, after which she refused money from all well
affected people, saying, she was going to that City where money had no mastery;
she was burnt without the Walls of Exeter in Sothonhay, Nov. 558. ag. 54.

Tho. Leaver, B. D. in Cambridge, fled in the Marian days, and became Pastor of
the English Exiles at Arrow in Switz. He wrote a book entitled The right Path
way to Christ: He dyed after his return into England 1558.

Hen. Stafford, Baron of Stafford, was Son to Ed. Duke of Buckingham, beheaded
under Hen. 8. the Barony descended unforfeited to this Henry, placed here not
as a trans but a cis reformation man, for translating the book of Dr. Fox
Bishop of Hereford, (favourer of Luther) into English, of the differences of
power Ecclesiastical and Secular: He dyed 1558. some months before the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

Peter Petow, of an ancient Family, flourishing for a long time at Chesterton,
was a Franciscan, afterward Cardinal, being created by Pope Paul III. who also
made him Legate a latere, and Bishop of Salisbury. Queen Mary, in favor to
Cardinal Poole, prohibited this Legat's entrance into her Court. He died in
France 1558.

Thomas Savage, born at Macklesfield in Cheshire; his Father (a Knight) bred in
Cambridge, a Doctor of Law. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Rochester, and at
last Archbishop of York. A greater Courtier than Clerk, dextrous in managing
secular Affairs, a mighty Hunts-man. He was the first who was privately
installed by his Vicar: He maintained a numerous Family, and built much at
S^roby, and Cawood, in Yorks. He died 1508. his Body being buried at York, his
Heart at Macklesfield, in a Chapel of his own Erection.

Godfrey Gouldsbrough, born in Cambridge, bred in Trinity-College, and
afterward Fellow thereof: at last was consecrated Bishop of Gloucester, 1598.
one of the second set of Protestant Bishops, after those in the Marian days;
and before those who come within our Memory. He gave 100 Marks to Trinity
College, and died some Months after.

Sir Will. Drury, descended of a worshipful Family, long flourishing, at
Hantstead in Suffolk; answered his name (Drury in Sax. Pearl,) in the
preciousness of his disposition, clear and hard, valiant and innocent. His
Youth he spent in the French Wars, his middle in Scotland, and his old Age in
Ireland: He was Knight-Marshal of Berwick; at which time the French had
possessed themselves of the Castle of Edinburgh, in the minority of King James.
Queen Elizabeth employed this Sir William, with 1500 Men to besiege the Castle.
Which service he worthily performed, in reducing it in few days to the right
owner thereof. He was appointed Lord President of Munster; where he executed
impartial Justice, in spite of the Owners thereof. Entering Kerry with a
competent train of 140 Men, with which he forced his return through 700 Men,
belonging to the Earl of Desmond, who claimed Kerry as a Palatinate peculiarly
to himself. In the last Year of his Life he was made Lord-Deputy of Ireland,
dying at Waterford, 1598.

Tho. Cavendish, Esquire; of Trimley, Suffolk, intending Foreign Discoveries, on
his own cost victualled and furnished three Ships, (the least of Fleets,) viz.
The Desire, Admiral, 120 Tuns; the Content, Vice Admiral, 40, and the
Hugh-Gallant, Reer-Admiral, 40 Tuns; all three manned with 123 Men; and setting
to Sea from Plymouth, July 21. 1586. entered the mouth of the Magellan-Straits,
7 January following, where they suffered much hunger. Mr. Cavendish named a
Town there Port-Famine: The Spaniards intending to fortify the Straits, and
engross the passage, were smitten with such a Mortality, that scarce 5 of 500
did survive. On Feb. 28. they entered the South Sea, and frequently landed as
they saw occasion. Many were their conflicts with the Natives, more with the
Spaniards, coming off gainers in most, and savers in all Encounters, that in
Quinterno excepted, April 1. 1587. where they lost 12 men of account, the cause
that they afterward sunk the Reer-Admiral for want of men to manage her. Of
the many Prizes he took, the St. Anne was the most considerable, being the
Spanish Admiral of the South Sea, of 700 Tun, and 190 Men; there were 122000
Pezos (each worth 8 Shill.) of Gold, with other rich Lading, as Silks and Musk.
Mr. Cavendish landed the Spaniards, and left them plentiful Provisions,
surrounding the East Indies, and returning for England, landed at Plymouth,
Sept. 9. 1588. In his next Voyage he was severed from his Company near Port
Desire, by him so called formerly in the Magellan-straits, and never seen or
heard of afterward.

Queen Mary, eldest Daughter to K. Henry VIII. and Q. Katherine of Spain, was
born at Greenwich, Feb. 18. 1518. She derived a great Spirit from her Father,
and her Devotion from her Mother. She attained to the Crown by complying with
the Gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk, promising them to continue Religion, as
Established by King Edw. VI. After the breach of which Promise, she never
prospered; losing successively the hearts of her Subjects, the hopes of a
Child, the company (not to say affection) of her Husband, the City of Calais,
her Mirth, her Health, and her Life, which ended November 17. 1558. Cardinal
Poole died the same day.

Note, That in this Queens short Reign, being but 5 Years and 4 Months, many
were made Martyrs for the Truth of the Gospel; the Romish Superstition so much
prevailing and tyrannizing, that 408, or more, suffered Fire and Faggot;
whereof 44 of note were in the County of Essex. This was carried on chiefly by
Bishop Bonner, who was a Bastardson of one Savage a Priest, (brother to Sir
John Savage, Knight of the Garter, Privy-Counsellor to H. VII.) His Mother
Concubine to this Priest, was sent out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and laid
down her burden at Elmley in Worcestershire, where this bouncing Babe Bonner
was born; he caused the death of twice as many Martyrs as all the Bishops in
England besides; after 10 Years Imprisonment in the Marshalsea he died, and was
buried in St. George's Churchyard in Southwark. But enough of this
Herostratus, who burned so many living Temples of the Holy Ghost. Let them
which would be more fully informed of Queen Mary, and Bonner, read Fox's Works
lately reprinted in Folio, with new Copper Cutts.

Q. Eliz. 1558. The second Daughter to K. H. 8. born at Greenwich, who coming
to the Crown at Q. Mary's death upon the 17th November. (still a vulgar error,
accounted for Queen Eliz. birth day) who was born in September. She was Heir to
the Learning, Bounty, Courage, and Success of her Father, besides Goodness
wherein she was daughter to her Mother. Her learning appears in her two Latin
Speeches to the University, and a third a l^ttle better than extempore to the
Poland Ambassador. Her bounty was founded on merit. Her courage was undaunted,
never making her self so cheap to her Favorites but that she valued her own
authority. A prime Officer (with a white staff) was commanded by the Queen to
confer a place then void, on one of her servants whom she commended unto him.
Pleases your Highness, Madam (says the Lord) the disposal thereof belongs
to me by virtue of this white Staff conferred on me. True, said the Q. yet I
never gave you your Office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the
Quorum; but of the Quarum, Madam (returned the Lord) presuming on the favor of
her Highness. Hereat the Q. in some passion, snatching the staff out of his
hand, you shall acknowledge me, said she, of the Quorum quarum quorum, before
you have it again. The Lord waited staffless almost a day before the same was
reconferred. Her success was admirable, keeping the K. of Spain at Arms end all
her Reign, by her Policy and Prosperity. She was much beloved by all her
people, in so much that since it has been said, that Q. Eliz. might do that
lawfully, which K. James might not. Her popularity having sugared many things,
her Subjects thanking her for those Taxes, which they refused to pay to her
Successor. You shall find more of her valor and Noble Actions in 1588.. She
dyed at Richmond.

William Winter, Knight and Vice Admiral of England, assaulted the Fort of
French, in the Island of Inchkeeih in Edinburgh Frith: He (with Sir Tho. Smith)
demanded the restitution of Calais; he conducted a great Treasure of the Genoa
Merchants safely into the Netherlands in despite of the French opposing him
1568. He (with Rob. Beale) was sent into Zealand to demand restitution of some
English Ships. He did signal service when the Spanish Fleet was fallen toward
the coast of Zealand, 1588. Lidney House in Gloucester, the seat of the Family,
had produced many more Mariners happy in Sea Voyages.

John Russel, born at Kingston Russel, Dors. bred beyond the Sea, was a man of
great accomplishment, and was recommended by Phil. King of Castile (Father to
Chapter 5. Emp.) to Hen. 7. as a person of great abilities, he could see more with
his one eye than many others could with two. King Hen. 8. made him a Controller
of the Household, and Privy Counselor, and an. 1538. created Lord Russel; and
made him Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share of the golden shower of Abbey
Lands fell into his lap. K. Ed. 6. (who made him Earl of Bedford) sent him down
to suppress the Western commotion, and relieve Exeter: Which he performed with
great wisdom, valor, and success, and some few years after dyed, and was
buried at Cheineys in Buckinghamshire.

William Cecil, our English Nestor for Wisdom and Vivacity, born at Burn in
Lincolns. was Secretary and Treasurer above 30 years together. He steered the
Court at his pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Leicester would endure no equal,
and Sussex no superior, therein he by siding with neither served himself with
both: you may easily imagine how highly the wise Queen Eliz. valued so great a
Minister of State, coming once to visit him when sick, and being much hightned
with her head attire, (then in fashion) the Lord's servant, who conducted her
through the Door, may your Highness (said he) be pleased to stoop: the Queen
returned, for your Masters sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spains.
All England in that Age was beholden to him for his bounty (as well as the poor
in Stamford) for whom he erected a fair Bead-house, acknowledged under God and
the Q. their Prosperity, the fruit of his prudence. He dyed very aged 1598.

Jane Cecil, Wife to Sir Rich. Esquire; and Coheir to the worshipful families of
Ekinton and Walcot, saw (being near a 100 years of age) the preserment of her
Son Sir William, Treasurer of England; she Leaded and Paved the Friday
Market-cross at Stamford, besides 50 l. given to the Poor. She dyed 1588. and
was buried in St. Martins in Stamford.

Barnaby Potter was born within the Barony of Kendal Westmerl. 1578. and bred
at Queens Coll. in Oxford, whereof he became Provost: he was chaplain in
Ordinary to Prince Charles, being accounted at Court the Penitential Preacher,
and by K. Chapter the I. was preferred Bishop of Carlisle. He was commonly called
the Puritanical Bishop, and they said of him in the time of King James, that
Organs would blow him out of the Church: which is not probable, because he
loved Vocal Music, and could bear his own part therein. He was a constant
Preacher, and a hard Student: He dyed in honor, being the last Bishop that
dyed a Member of Parliament.

Roger Ascham, born at Kerby-wick, and bred in St. John's College in Cambridge,
was Orator and Greek Professor of the University; and in an. 1. Mary wrote
Letters to 40 odd several Princes, the meanest whereof was a Cardinal.
Traveling into Germany, he was familiar with John Sturmius, after his return he
was teacher to the Lady Eliz. to whom (after she was Queen) he became Secretary
for her Latin Letters; he was an honest man, a good Archer, and much delighted
with Cockfighting. His Latin style was facile and fluent, witness his Letters.
His (...) is a Book good for Young Men, his Schoolmaster for Old, and his
Epistles for all men. He dyed in December. 1568. and was buried in St. Sepulchers
in Land.

Tho. Benham, Fellow of Magdalens coll. in Oxford, renounced Popery an. 1.
Mariae, he assisted Hen. Bull one of the College, to wrest out of the hands of
the Choristers, the censer when about to offer their superstitious Incense;
flying into Germany he lived at Basil, Preacher to the English Exiles; toward
the end of Queen Mary, he was secretly sent over to be Superintendant of the
London Conventicle (the only true Church in the time of Persecution) where with
all his caution he hardly escaped. In an. 2. of Queen Eliz. he was consecrated
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield: He dyed in Febr. 1578.

Frances Sidney, Aunt to the renowed Sir Philip, she bestowed on the Abbey
Church of Westminster a Salary of 20 l. per annum for a Divinity Lecture, and
founded Sidney Suss. coll. in Cambr. She was Relict of Tho. Ratcliff Earl of
Sussex: She dyed childless 1588.

Sir Nich. Bacon Knight, born not far from St. Edm. Bury, of a very ancient
family, and bred in Ben. college in Cambr. (in which he built a beautiful
Chapel) after he had studied the Common Law, was made Attorney to the Court of
Wards, when he was preferred Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. An. 1. Eliz. 1558.
He married Ann second Daughter to Sir Ant. Cook of Giddy Hall in Essex,
Governor to K. Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth relied on him as her Oracle in Law, who
that he might clear the point of her Succession, derived her right from a
Statute which allowed the same, though there was a Statute which made the Q.
illegitimate in the days of her Father remained unrepealed, the rather because
Lawyers maintain, That a Crown once worn, clears all defects of the wearer
thereof.

Armigel Waad, born of an ancient family in Yorkshire, was Clerk of the Counsel
to Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. a man of great accomplishments, employed in several
Embassies, and the first Englishman who discovered America: He had by two Wifes
20 children, whereof Sir Will. Waad was the Eldest, a very able Gentleman, and
Clerk of the Council to Q. Eliz. this Armigel dyed in June, an. 1568. and was
buried at Hampstead in Middlesex.

Martin Forbisher Knight, born nigh Doncaster Yorkshire, was the first
Englishman who first discovered the North way to China and Cathay, whence he
brought great store of black soft Stone, supposing it to be silver Ore, but it
proved useless. He was valiant and violent. He was Knighted for his signal
service in an. 88. having (with 10 Ships) defended Breast Haven in Britain
against a far greater power of the Spaniards; he was shot in the side, his
wound not being mortal in it self was rendered such by the unskillfulness of his
Surgeon, who having taken out the bullet, left the Bombast behind, wherewith
the sore festred, and the worthy Knight dyed.

Michael, Undersheriff to Sir Anthony Hungerford commit. Wilts. 1558. in the
last of Queen Mary, was a right godly man. When the Writ, de Haereticis
comburendis, for the Execution of R. White and Jo. Hunt, was brought to him,
instead of burning them, he burnt the Writ, and before the same could be
renewed, Dr. Geffery (the bloody Chancellor of Salisbury who procured it) and
Q. Mary, were both dead.

Edm. Guest, Born at Asserton Yorkshire, was D. D. in Kings College in
Cambridge. He was Almoner to Queen Eliz. by whom he was preferred Bishop of
Rochester, then of Salisbury; having written many books, he dyed 1578.

Henry Rowlands, bred in Oxford, was consecrated Bishop of Bangor 1598. he
bought four new Bells for the Tower of St. Asaph, whereof the biggest cost 100
l. he also gave to Jesus College in Oxford, Means for the maintenance of two
Fellows.

Katharine, Daughter of Sir Tho. Par, was born at Kendal Castle, which
descended to her Father from the Brusses and Rosses of Werk: She was first
married to John Nevil Lord Latimer, and afterward to K. H. 8. She was a great
favourer of the Gospel, and would earnestly argue for it. Once politic
Gardener had almost got her into his clutches, had not Divine Providence
delivered her: yet a Jesuit (who was neither Confessor nor Privy Counselor to
the King) tells us, that the King intended, if longer surviving, to behead her
for an Heretic. She was afterward married to Sir Thomas Seymour Baron of
Sudley and Lord Admiral; and dyed in childbed of a Daughter 1548.

Henry 8. Son of Hen. 7. born at Greenwich, was a Prince in whom great Virtues
and no less Vices werein a manner equally contemperated; he was a man of an
uncontrollable spirit, carrying a Mandamus in his Mouth, sufficiently seated,
when he put his hand to his Hilt, he awed all to his obedience, which was great
in a King, and necessary in a Father of his Country. In the Play of K. Hen. 8.
there was a weak whining Boy that personated that King; one of his fellow
Actors perceiving him to act more like a Mouse than Man, told him, if you speak
not Hoh with a better Spirit; your Parliament will not grant you a penny of
Money. He came to the Crown in 1508. Many were the acts and changes in his
Reign. He dissolved as many Monasteries and Religious Houses, as amounted
yearly to 1865 12 l. besides the two Universities, and diverse Monasteries which
were undervalued. And though the Pope styled him Defender of the Faith (by
reason of a Book he writ against Martin Luther) yet he rejected his Holiness,
and made himself supreme without him. And Sir Tho. Moor and Bishop Fisher lost
their Heads, because they refused the Oath of Supremacy; and yet this King, as
appears by the six Articles, enacted by Parliament against the Protestants
(called the Cat with six Tails) viz.

1. That after the words of confirmation or consecration the real and natural
body and blood of Christ as he was conceived and Crucified was in the
Sacrament, and no other substance consisting in the form of Bread and Wine,
besides the substance of Christ, God* and Man.

2. That Communion in both kinds, was not necessary unto Salvation, the Flesh
only in the form of Bread sufficient.

3. That the Priests after they had received Orders might not marry by the Law
of God.

4. That the Vows of Chastity either in Man or Woman, ought by Gods Laws to be
observed.

5. That private Masses were necessary for the people, and agreeable to the Law
of God.

6. That Auricular Confession was expedient to be retained and continued in the
Church of God.

Now I hope none will deny, that what mischief and confusions ensued, and
caused by him as the Papists deeply condemn him for to this day, and tell us
(our Religion came out of his --) That he lived and dyed as severe a Roman
Catholic as any of them has showed themselves in this our Age.

And for his Wives he was dextrous in changing, beheading one of them, and the
very next day marrying another; but hear him on his death bed speaking thus:

Three Kates, two Nans, and one dear Jane I wedded,
One Spanish, one Dutch, and four English Wives:
From two I was divorced, two I beheaded,
One dyed in Childbirth, and one me survived.
They that will be more and better informed of this King's Reign, let them read
his Life written by that excellent and learned Lord Herbert.

Sir Tho. Offley of Cheshire, bred a Merchant Tailor in London, whereof he
became Lord Mayor; in his Mayoralty he began the custom of Night Bellmen. He
was the Zacheus of London, for his high Charity, bequeathing the half of his
Estate (being 5000 pound) to the poor, though he had children of his own; yea
he appointed that 200 l. (left to his Son Hen.) should be taken out of the
other half, and employed to charitable uses. Mr. Hugh Offley Leather-Seller,
Sheriff of London An. 1588. gave 600 pound to the City to put forth young men.
Mr. Rob. Brother to Hugh gave 600 pound for 24 young men in Chester, whereof 12
were Apprentices. On the first of these I suppose these Rhimes were made:

Offley three dishes had of daily Roast,
An Egg, an Apple, and the third a Toast.
Feasting himself moderately, that he might feed others by his bounty.

Miles Coverdaile of Yorkshire, became an Augustine Friar, but afterward
quitting that profession, he went into Germany, he labored greatly in
translating the Bible, and writing other books. He was made D. D. at Tubing,
and returning into England was made Bishop of Exeter, by K. Edw. 6. An. 1. Mary
he was deposed, though saved from Martyrdom, by the mediation of Fred. King of
Denmark: being enlarged he went over into Germany, whence in the Reign of Queen
Eliz. he returned into England, but not to Exeter. He was one of those that
solemnly consecrated Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth: He
dyed 1588. and lies buried in St. Bartholomews behind the Exchange, London.

Sir Christ. Wray Knight, was born in the Parish of Bedal Yorkshire, which made
his Daughter Frances Countess of Warwick scatter her benefactions thicker in
that place: His Ancestors came out of Cornwall, where his name is right ancient;
being bred in the Law, he was by Q. Eliz. made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench; he was moved with no fear but that of the Judge of the world; he was pro
tempore Lord privy Seal, and sat chief in the Court, when Secretary Davison was
sentenced in the Star Chamber, concurring with the rest of the Commissioners to
lay a Fine on him. His benefaction to Magdalen college in Cambridge was both
bountiful and seasonable. This worthy Judge dyed May 8th. 1588.

Rob. Crowley of Northamptonshire, bred in Oxford, confuted Miles Hogheard, who
writ against the poor Protestants. He fled to Frankford in Queen Mary's days,
and in the Reign of Queen Eliz. was made Vicar of St. Giles without Cripplegate
London, where he lies buried, having dyed 1588.

Cock, was in 1588. a Cock of the Game, being the only man of note amongst the
English, who fighting a Volunteer in his own Ship, lost his life, to save his
Queen and Country.

Sir John Howard, of Barkshire Knight. Son to Sir Rob. Howard, soon after was
created a Baron by Edw. IV. and Duke of Norfolk by K. Rich. III. as Kinsman,
and one of the Heirs of Anne, Duchess of York and Norfolk, whose Mother was
one of the Daughters of Tho. Mowbray, D. of Norfolk. Soon after he lost his
Life in Bosworth-Field, in the quarrel of him who had given him his Honor.
From him descended the noble and numerous Family of the Howards, of whom 4
Earls, viz. Arundel, Nottingham, Suffolk, and Barkshire; and 2 Barons, viz.
Mowbray, and Escrick, sat in the last Parliament of K. Charles I. Verstegan,
the great Antiquary, will have their Name to be Holdward, Keeper of a Castle,
or Trust; and they have well answered unto their Name. Did not Tho. Howard,
Earl of Surrey, well hold his ward by Land, when in the Reign of Henry VIII. he
conquered the Scots in Flodden-Field, and took James the 4th. their King,
Prisoner? And did not Charles Howard, afterward Earl of Nottingham, hold his
ward, by Sea, in 1558, when the Armado was defeated.

William Howard, Son to Thomas D. of Howard, was by Queen Mary created Baron of
Effingham, and made Lord-Admiral of England. He was one of the first favorers
and furtherers of the discovery of Russia. He died 1548. whose Son

Charles succeeded his Father in the Admiralty; an hearty Gentleman, and
cordial to his Sovereign, of a most proper Person, one reason why Queen
Elizabeth reflected so much upon him. The first evidence he gave of his
prowess, when the Emperors Sister, the spouse of Spain, with a Fleet of 130
Sail, passed the narrow Seas, his Lordship, accompanied with 10 Ships only,
environed their Fleet, and enforced them to stoop Gallant, and strike Sail. In
88. at the first news of the Spaniards approach, he towed at a Cable, with his
own hands, to draw out the harbour-bound Ships into the Sen. He was Commander
of the Sea Forces at the taking of Cadiz, and for his good service there, he
was made Earl of Nottingham. He resigned his Admiralty in the Reign of K.
James, to the D. of Buckingham, and died not long after.

D. of Medina Sidonia, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, An. 88. beholding Mount
Edgcomb in Cornwall, that belongs to Sir Rich. Edgcomb, who at one time, for
some good space, gave Entertainment to the English, Spanish, and Dutch
Admirals, and many other Nobles at Mount Edgcomb, a square Structure, having a
stately Hall affording a delicate sound, as one enters it, a Parlour and
Dining Room, giving a large prospect both of Sea and Land: It is near Plymouth;
the Ground about it being stored with Wood, Timber, Fruit, Deer, and Conies,
sufficient Pasture, Meadow and Arable Land, Marle, Stone, etc. and of an high
situation. And this Medina was so much in love with it, was resolved to have it
for his own possession in the partage of this Kingdom, which should have been
in 88.

And here I think it very necessary before we proceed any further, to make a
small description of this Spanish Invasion, called, The Invincible Armado;
which put England into such a consternation, when it should have been invaded,
in the Reign of Q. Eliz. 1588. viz. 150 Ships, some 1000 Tuns.

65 Galleoons. 25 Terras, 500 Tuns. 19 Pinnaces, some 100 Tuns. 20 Carvills. 10
Fulvas, 6 Oars a piece. 4 Galeasses. 4 Galleys.
In all, 57868 Tuns.

2630 Pieces of Cannon. Ensigns 171 Mariners 8650 Soldiers 19295 Gally-slaves
2808 Volunteers 224 Allowed Servants for the Can. 167 For the Hospital 58
Chyrurgeons 108 Churchmen 108

All these Preparations of the Spaniards did not daunt, or diminish, but rather
excite the courage of the Queen, who had also made ready a splendid Navy, well
furnished with gallant Commanders, Seamen, and Soldiers; and a Land-Army,
where they lay encamped at Tilbury-Fort in Essex; there the Queen appeared
amongst them on a white Palsrey, to their great encouragement. But when their
Armado should have engaged our Fleet, God Almighty took his own way, and raised
such Storms and Winds, that their whole Forces were all scattered and destroyed
without fighting, very few of them escaping to tell the news in Spain to their
Lord and Master, and their surviving Friends.

Now let us proceed to give an account of some memorable actions of noble
Persons since that great deliverance.

Tho. Stapleton, born at Henfield in Suss. of a very good Family; he was bred
in New-College in Oxford, and became Canon of Chichester, which place he
quitted An. 1 of Eliz. and having fled beyond the Seas, he became Catechist at
Doway; which place he having discharged to his commendation, he was preferred
King's Professor of Divinity in Lovain, and was 40 years together
Undertaker-general against all Protestants. Dr. Whitaker, professor in
Cambridge, experimentally professed, That Bellarmine was the fairer, and
Stapleton the shrewder Adversary. He died, and was buried in St. Peter's in
Lovain, 1598.

Edm Spencer, born in London, bred in Cambridge, a great Poet, who imitated
Chaucer: It Is said that he presented Q. Elizabeth with a Poem, with which she
was so well pleased, that she commanded the Lord Treasurer Cecil to give him
100 l. and when he alleged that Sum was too much, then give him (quoth the Q.)
what is reason; but being delayed, he presented these Lines to the Queen.

I was promised on a time
To have reason for my Rhyme;
From that time, unto this season,
I received nor Rhyme nor Reason.
Hereupon the Queen gave strict order for the present payment of 100 l. He was
afterward Secretary to the Lord Gray, Deputy of Ireland. He was an excellent
Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher, Mathematician; yet so poor (as being a Poet)
that he was thought fami, non famae scribere. Returning into England, he was
robbed by the Rebels of that little he had; and dying for grief in great want,
1598. was honorably buried nigh Chaucer in Westminster, the expense of his
Funeral and Monument, was defrayed at the sole charge of Robert, first of that
name, Earl of Essex.

Sir Walt. Raleigh, born at Budeley, Devonsh. of an ancient Family, but decayed
in Estate, and he was the youngest Brother thereof, was bred in Ori^ll College
in Oxford, and thence coming to Court, found some hopes of the Queens favor;
this made him write in a glass Window, obvious to the Queens Eye, Fain would I
climb, yet fear I to fall. Under which, her Majesty perceiving it, did write,
If thy Heart fail thee, climb not at all. But his Introduction into Court, is
said to have born an elder date, from the time he spread his plush Cloak for
her Majesty to step upon over a wet place: Yet the wise Queen in rewarding him,
made him to purchase by pain and peril, as well as Complement, what places were
bestowed on him. He seemed to be born to that only, which he went about, so
dextrous he was in all his undertakings, in Court, in Camp, by Sea, by Land, by
Sword, by Pen; witness in the last, his History of the World. Of his
detractors, he was wont to say, If any Man accuse to my face, I will answer him
with my Mouth; but my Tail is good enough to answer to such who traduce me
behind my back. Yet such a Traducer there was, that subtle Gondamour, the Span.
Ambassador to K. James, that never left his solicitations and intreagues with
the King, till he procured his Decollation, which was done Ann. 1618. Thus died
this learned and honorable Person, never to be forgotten, so long as wise Men
are living.

John Bray, Tenant to Mr. Richard Carew, carried upon his back, Ann. 1608. at
one time, six bushels of wheaten Meal, by the space, well near a butt length,
and upon the wheaten Meal the Miller, a Lubber of above 24 years of Age. And

John Roman, the Cornish Milo, so used to Burdens in his Childhood, that when
a Man, he would bear the whole Carcass of an Ox, and never tugged thereat.

Tho. Sackvill, Son and Heir to Sir Richard, (Chancellor, Sub-Treasurer of the
Exchequer, and Privy-Counsellor to Q. Elizabeth,) by Winifred his Wife,
Daughter to Sir John Bruges, was bred in Oxford, where he became an excellent
Poet, leaving both Latin and English Poems of his composing to posterity: Then
he became Barrister, and afterward in his Travels was for some time prisoner
at Rome; whence returning to the possession of a good Estate, he wasted the
greatest part thereof; and afterward being made (as is reported) to dance
attendance on an Alderman of London, who had gained great Penny-worths by his
former purchases of him, he was sensible of the incivility, and resolving to be
no more beholding to wealthy Pri^le, he turned a thrifty improver of the
remainder of his Estate. Others affirm that Q. Elizabeth, (his Cousin-German
once removed) diverted the torrent of his Profusion, by her frequent
admonition; after which she made him Baron of Buckhurst in Suss. sent him
Ambassador into France, then into the Low Countries, made him Knight of the
Garter, and Treasurer of England. He was Chancellor of the University, where he
entertained Q. Elizabeth with a sumptuous Feast. He was a person of so quick
dispatch, that his Secretarys seldom pleased him. Thus having made amends to
his House for his misspent time, both in increase of Estate and Honor, being
created Earl of Dorset by K. James, He died in April, An. 1608.

Tho. Bilson, born in Winchester, was Bishop of Worcester, then of Winchester;
as Reverend and Learned a Prelate as England ever afforded, witness his Works
of The perpetual Government of Christ's Church, and of Christ's descent into
Hell. The new Translation of the Bible was by King James's command ultimately
committed to his, and Dr. Smith's (Bishop of Gloucester) perusal. He died An.
1618.

Robert Smith, born at Mercate-Harborough, Merchant-Taylor in London,
Comptroller of the Chamber there, and one of the four Attorneys of the Mayor's
Court, gave 750 l. to purchase Lands for the maintenance of a Lecturer in the
Town of his Nativity, etc. as appears by the Settlement. He died An. 1618.

Sir Tho. Coventry, born at Croon in Worcestershire, was eldest Son to Sir
Thomas, Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. He was bred in, and
Treasurer of the Inner Temple 1618. being first Attorney General to K. James:
He was afterward made Lord Keeper of the Great-Seal, and 1. of Charles I. by
whom he was created, An. 4 Regis, Baron Coventry, of Alesborough in this
County. He enjoyed the dignity of Lord Keeper fifteen Years, if it was not more
proper to say, that Dignity enjoyed him. The Patent whereby he was created
Baron, makes mention of his most worthy Services to K. James, and K. Charles;
he died before the Civil Wars; never Lord Keeper made fewer Orders which were
afterward reversed, his being firmly grounded on the consent of Parties.

In this year 1618, were executed at Tyburn 19 Pirates, and one Garnet a Jesuit.

And the destruction of the Spanish Army sent against the Venetians.

Martin's Fort relieved by the Marquess Schomberge.

Ebsham-Waters (now Epsom) found out in a dry Season, the Water first observed
(in a Horse or Neats footing) run through some Veins of Allume, and are
abstersive and sanative, being outwardly and inwardly taken.

Sir Jo. Doderidg, bred in Oxford, a general Scholar, was second Justice of the
King's Bench; his Soul consisted of two Essentials, Ability and Integrity,
holding the Scale of Justice with a steady hand. He is famous for the
expression, That as old and infirm as he was, he would go to Tyburn on Foot, to
see such a Man hanged, that should proffer Money for a place of Judicature; it
being necessary that those who buy such Offices by wholesale, should sell
Justice by re-tale, to make themselves savers. He was commonly called the
sleeping Judge, because he would sit on the Bench with his Eyes shut, a posture
of attention. He died, leaving no Issue, An. 1628. and was interred in our
Lady's Chapel, in Exet^r.

Tobias Matthew, D. D. bred in Oxford, became Bishop of Durham, and at last of
York: when placed there, he merrily said, He wanted nothing but Grace: he died
An. 1628.

Tho. Tailor, born at York, and bred in Christ's College in Cambridge, entered
into the Ministry at 27 years of Age, continuing in the same at Reading and
London 35 years; a pious and charitable man, and a painful Preacher: A little
before his death he avowed, That we served such a Master who covers many
imperfections, and gives much Wages for a little work. He died about 1628.

Note also, in this year 1628. Dr. Lamb was murdered in the City of London, for
which the said City was fined 6000 l.

Nath. Shute, born at Gigleswick, Yorksh. and bred in Christ's College in
Cambridge, was an excellent Scholar, and solid Preacher, (at St.
Mildred-Poultrey in London,) though nothing of his is extant in Print, save a
Sermon called Corona Charitatis: He was an uncomfortable Preacher in one sense,
in that he left no hope of imitation for such as should succeed him. He died
An. 1638.

Note, There were four other Brothers to this Nath. viz. Josiah, Minister of
St. Mary Woollnoth, London, Robert in Linn, Thomas in Chester, and Timothy in
Exeter, all famous for Learning, and laborious Preachers.

Sir Rich. Hutton, born at Perith, Cumberland, of a worshipful Family, and bred
in Jesus College in Cambr. diverted from Divinity by the importunity chiefly of
George, Earl of Cumberland, became Barrister in Gray's Inn; and 'twas observed,
he seldom or never took Fees of Clergymen afterward; being Recorder of York
he was Knighted, and made Judge of the Common Pleas, and continued, though his
opinion was against Ship Money, the King using to call him the honest Judge: he
died, and was buried at St. Dunstan's in the West, An. 1638.

Joseph Mede, born near Bishop-Stratford, Eslex, wrote de Sanctitate relativa:
he was a learned Man, good Preacher, and charitable to the Poor. From that
place of Scripture, Judges 3. 30. And the Land had rest eight Years, he
observed that that was the longest time of Peace that the Church of God
enjoyed: And seeing the same lease of Halcyon days was expired in England,
since 1. Elizabeth, he did grievously suspect some strange concussion in Church
and State, which came to pass accordingly. He was a Millenary, and was as much
dishonored by some furious Followers, as even Aristotle was by ignorant
Pretenders to his Philosophy. He died An. 1638. leaving near 3000 l. to Christ's
College in Cambridge, where he was bred.

Edm. Doubleday, Esquire; a man of great Stature, Valor, Gravity and Activity,
attended Sir Tho. Knevet, November. 4. 1605. when he searched the Cellar beneath
the Parliament House, where they found Guy Faux, with his dark Lanthorn, in the
dead of the Night, providing for the death of many next Morning. He was newly
come out of the Devils Closet, (the inner Room where the Powder lay.) Faux
beginning to bustle, Mr. Doubleday ordered him at his pleasure, up with his
Heels, and the^^ with the Traitor lay the Treason (...) along the Floor, by
God's good (...) detected and defeated. Faux vow (...) that had he been taken
in the inn^^ Room, he had blown up himself and all the Company therein. Mr.
Doubleday died An. 1618.

John Moile, born in, or near South-Molton, Devon. bred in France, where he
became perfect in the Language, spent his youth in Military employments, and in
his reduced Age, was made an Examiner in the Court of Tho. Lord Burgley, and
President of the North: Afterward, being Governor to the Lord Ross, he went
to Rome with him, where that Lord was courted, and Mr Moile imprisoned in the
Inquisition; the Priests in vain hacking at the root of his constancy, he
continued 30 years in Prison, and died 1638. at. 81.

Salkod, a branch of a worshipful Family, bred beyond the Seas, either Jesuit,
or secular Priest, coming over into England to angle for Proselytes, his line
broke, and he was cast in Prison, whence being brought to King James, by his
Arguments, (with a Benefice bestowed on him in Somersetshire,) he became a
Protestant: he was not a little proud that the King was pleased to style him
the learned Salkod. See his true Character in the Book he writ of Angels. He
died An. 1638.

Benj. Johnson, (whose Mother married a Brick-layer for her second Husband,)
was bred in Westminster-School, then in St. John's College in Cambridge, (being
also honorary Member of Christ's Church in Oxford,) where he continued but few
Weeks for want of further Maintenance, being fain to return to the trade of his
Father-in-Law, he helped at the new Structure of Lincoln-Inn, when having a
Trowel in his hand, he had a Book in his pocket; some Gentlemen afterward
manumised him, freely to follow his own ingenious Inclinations: his Wit was
elaborate, wrought out by his own Industry; he would sit silent in learned
Company, and ^uck in (besides Wine) their several Humors into his observation;
he was paramount in the dramatique part of Poetry, and taught the Stage an
exact conformity to the Laws of Comedians; his Comedies were above the Vulgar,
(which are only tickled with downright obscenity,) and took not so well at the
first stroke, as at the rebound, when beheld the second time; yea, they will
endure reading, and that with due commendation, so long as either Ingenuity or
Learning are fashionable in our Nation: He died An. 1638, and was buried in the
Abbey Church of Westminster, under a small Stone, with this Inscription, O rare
Ben. Johnson.

Sir Robert Car, Son to Thomas, Lord of Fumhurst in the South of Scotland,
(who being active for Mary, Queen of Scots, was thereupon forced to fly to
York,) was born in this City. It Is reported that his first making at Court, was
by breaking his Leg at Tilting in London, whereby he came first into the
cognizance of K. James, who reflected on him, whose Father had been a kind of
Confessor for the cause of the Queen his Mother; besides, the young Gentleman
had a handsome Person, and a convenience of desert; Honors were crowded upon
him, made Baron, Viscount, Earl of Somerset, Knight of the Garter, Warden of
the Cinque Ports, etc. He was a good natured Man, doing himself more hurt than
any Man else; but yet much harm to others, viz. Sir Tho. Overbury lost the
favor of this Earl, by dissuading him from keeping Company with a Lady, Wife
of another Person of Honor, to whom afterward he was married, her first
Husband still living, Earl of Essex,) and had a Child by her, a Daughter, who
was afterward married to a Person of Honor: but Sir Tho. Overbury, under a
pretense for refusing to be sent Ambassador to Russia, was sent to the Tower,
and his strict restraint encouraged his Enemies to practice his death, which
was by Poison effected, for which diverse were executed; the Earl had the
sentence of death, which by K. James, contrary to his word; was never executed,
but gave him a lease of so many years, as a pardon for his Life; though he was
banished the Court, lived privately, even from the sight of his Wife, and in
much sorrow and grief died, An. 1638.

In this year 1638. Lewis XIV. King of France was born, or rather per ignotam
and illicitam viam, by that politic and governing Cardinal sent into the World
to be a Plague to all Christendom, a spoiler and robber of his own Country, a
troubler of the Gallican-Clergy, a great opposer of his Infallible Holiness, a
severe and cruel Tormenter of the Hugonots, first eating and plundering their
Goods by his Booted Apostles, (his Dragoons,) and then unmercifully abusing
their Bodies, by Wounds, Irons, Whippings, Prisons, Famine, and Death it self,
but without burial; which by us is never denied to any Roman Catholic. He
governs all his Vassals and Slaves, (that should be his Subjects) by his will,
rigor, and injustice; and when they have got any thing for their own Family,
the King's Officers take it for their Master; and there is no remedy for this
general contagion. But yet let me inform you of one piece of good nature that
is rooted fast to him, though he resists the Pope, he loves the Turk, and much
condemns the Emperor for fighting against him; and the French K. has many times
lately, assured his Brother, the Turkish Emperor, That he will divert all his
Enemies, (that is, all Christian Princes) from invading his Country by his own
powerful Armies. And pray do not think much of these his strange and
extravagant expressions; for he hopes as there is but one King of Heaven, so
there will be but one on Earth, and that must be a French one.

There was also in this year 1638. a many little Devils (called the
Covenanters) in Scotland, gathered into a riotous Body, and chused David
Leisley for their General, and solicited France for aid; (and though it took
little effect,) yet you may learn that the Scotch were always great lovers of
the English: Their Covenant consisting of 666 words, (the mark of the Beast)
was set on Foot, and every one, willing, or not, swallowed it down by the help
of laboring Preachers, the Covenanters. All this was but a preparative for
their coming into England, which they did the next year; and according to their
Covenant to settle the King in his Throne in Peace and Honor, and make him a
Glorious King, which (contrary to their Covenant) by Perjury, falsehood, and
selling his Person was accomplished in an. 1648. next to be observed, being a
year full of wonder and horror: but before we give an account of that take
notice there was four persons concerned in a Tumult in Moorfields, pretending
to reform by pulling down Baudy Houses on the Easter Holidays, who was
sentenced and executed as Traitors, May 9. 1638. I wish the Mobile in these our
days were well informed of this late action. Now also in this year take in John
Lilburn the Quaker, who was whipped at a Carts Tail, in Febr. 1638.

Anno 1648. At Preston in Anderness, Duke Hamilton Aug. 7th. entered England
with an Army. Most beheld him as one rather cunning than wise, yet rather wise
than valiant: however he had Officers, what did ^ken the geat of fighting, as
wool as any of oor Age. He would accept of no English assistance: Their Van and
their Rear were many miles asunder, and they met the resistance of Major
General Lambert, before they expected it. He at Preston, gave the Scotch Army
such a blow as stunned it, though it reeled on some miles more Southward into
Staffordshire. Where at Vlcester the Duke was taken Prisoner and utterly
defeated; and afterward made a Prisoner in the Tower, and then condemned and
executed with the Lord Capel, which is the next to be taken notice of.

Arthur Capel, Esquire; of Hadham Hartf. was by Chapter I. Created Baron 1641. after
the surrender of Oxford, he retired to his House, from whence he went to
Colchester. His Loyalty to his Master was proof against all Batteries, and
Solicitations of his Enemies. He was sent Prisoner to the Tower by the
Parliament (which was butindeed but a part of) the Dom. Com. He escaped from
the Tower in Feb. but was retaken and sent back, and the next day an Act made
for his Trial, and being condemned, was beheaded 1648. undaunted on the
Scaffold. Hence one alluding to his Arms (a Lion Rampant in a Field Gules
betwixt three Crosses) made these following Lines.

Thus Lion like Capel undaunted stood,
Beset with Crosses in a Field of Blood.
He wrote a book of Meditation, wherein judicious Piety is discovered, he was
Grandfather to this present Earl of Essex.

The Earl of Holland was executed at the same time with this Noble Lord Capel:
and Duke Hamilton March 9th an. 1648.

And now give me leave to bring in a Murder, without any former precedent, and
I hope none will be so wicked and horrid as to think of the like fact for the
future. Char. the I. our Lawful and good King was taken from his own House at
Holdenby in Northamptonshire, and carried to Childersley (by Cornet Joice) then
to Roysten, Hatfield, Windsor, Hampton Court, this was done in May and June.
Then the King escaped to the Isle of Wight, but stayed not long before he was
brought back: and Jan. 4. an Ordinance was engrossed, and read for the Kings
Trial, Jan. 20. he was brought before the High Court of Justice (falsely so
called) 22. day the second time, 23. the third time was brought before the said
Court; the 27. day sentenced to Death by that bold Traitor John Bradshaw, the
30. day barbarously murdered at his own Palace door, betwixt 1. and 2. a Clock.
So fell this Pious and Learned Prince, who will never be too much lamented, nor
forgotten. This sad Subject would make a Volume, but that is not my intention;
and there are several Tracts already written. That alone of Dr. Nalson's of the
Kings Judges under Phelp's own hand is sufficient: and note when the King was
murdered, Sir Tho. Fairfax was General, and Oliver Cromwell was Leiutenant
General of the Army: The latter over ruling, overawing* and over fooling the
former; or else Dr. Hammond's Letter would have turned that violent Torrent,
which with him took no effect, but was altogether slighted, or unregarded, but
would have converted any unbjassed person from doing or suffering to be done
such a bloody and unjust Act, by so many impious Regicides. Then the above
named false and confused Society adjourned Hilary Term. Febr. 6. the Kings
Office voted unnecessary and burdensome, the 7. the King's body removed to
Windsor, and there interred under a small Marble Stone, and so remains to this
day, without any show of Magnificence or Regal Monument, (where I hope his now
dust will rest quietly.) But before I close up this fatal year, let me produce
one little wonder. Note that in the Hundred of R^ckford Essex an Army of Mice
shaved off all the Grass at the bare roots, which withered to Dung, was
infectious to Cattle: the March following, numberless flocks of Owls from all
parts flew thither, and destroyed them, and 68 years before this year, happened
the like accident in the Hundred of Dengy in Essex.

Jo. Richardson, Born in Cheshire, of a most worshipful and ancient Family,
bred in the University of Dublin, where he was graduated Doctor in Divinity*
and was afterward made Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland. In the late Rebellion he
came over into England, a grave man and good Divine; verifying the Rule, Bonus
Texturius, Bonus Theologus, for he carried a Concordance in his memory. The
larger Annotations, especially on Ezekiel, an elaborate work, challenge him, in
a great measure, for the Author. Our Bishop who had been relieved, had his
bounty to bestow on others, and by his will bequeathed a considerable Legacy to
the College of Dublin. He dyed an. 1658. aged 74.

Jo. Cleaveland, Born at Hinkley Loic. (where his Father was Vicar) was Fellow
in St. John's College in Camb. and Advocate General in the Garrison of Newark,
a general Artist, pure Latinist, exquisite Orator, and eminent Poet. His lofty
fancy may seem to stride from the top of one Mountain to the top of another, so
making to it self a constant champain and Level of continued elevations. He
dyed an. 1658. and was buried at College Hill Church. Mr. Parson in his funeral
Sermon forbore his praises, seeing such who knew him not would sufpect them far
above, whilst such as were acquainted with him, did know them much beneath his
true desert.

In this year (58) Dunkirk was taken by the English, but not long after by the
English, or by a few of the better sort of the English, sold to the French
King, and surrendered into his hands, and 'twas such a Bargain for France, as
England has had reason, and I am afraid ever will, to lament and be much
afflicted for the loss of it; and a hard-task it will prove to reduce it to the
Crown of England.

In this year also being in July, Sir H. Slingsby and the Reverend and Pious
Dr. Huit was beheaded under the Tyranny of Oliver Cromwell: However he set up a
High-Court of Justice (called so then.) Dr. Huit was a very great and good
Divine, and though Oliver's Daughter very much besought her Father upon her
knees for his life (all was but in vain) however it was believed, that the
Monster of mankind Oliver never enjoyed himself long after, for he was much
troubled with Gravel, and a little after that, was much tormented with the
Stone in the Bladder, and though Dr. Bowls set him on his head and his heels
upwards, to remove the stone, and gave him some ease at present; yet he being
returned to his natural posture, and the Dr. into the Country with his Coach
and Six, which Oliver had bestowed on him for his fees and attendance, the
Stone pressed down again with that violence and force, and caused that horrible
pain, and that pain a Fever, and the Fever brought that which took the
insolent Usurper from his Protectorship, which happened Sept. 3. 1658.

Now let me desire you to accept of the Company of his Son Richard for a
Protector: Though he staid but six Months at the Helm, the Sea (the
Commonwealth of Engl.) grew very boisterous and sick, till Richard was spewed
up, and outed of his Protectorship. And he wanting his Fathers Courage and
Judgment, was outed accordingly; 'twas said, he had some kindness for King Chapter
II. and was willing to show it at that time, and help to restore him: but too
many eyes were upon him, and his own want of experience, made all ineffectuall
at that juncture of affairs; and the Government was put into other hands, as
shall appear afterward. This short-ruling Protector did very little in his
half years Reign, only got together things necessary for his Fathers Pompous
Funeral, which was upon Novomber 23. 1658. This funeral cost so much, that all
the Tradesmen and others concerned in it, were either forced to run away, or
hide themselves in some Alsatia ever after.

Anno 1668. In this year there were two Easter days, the one being in April,
and the other on March 23. 1668. and the precedent year had no Easter. A thing
to be noted, because it is to be found very rarely, either by looking forward or
the days past.

This year also by instigation of the Parliament to the King, an Order was made
to send the Earl of Clarendon out of England. He traveled to Montpelier in
France, where he stayed some years, and then hearing the joyful news of his
return, with excess of joy gave up the ghost: his body was brought into
England, and interred in H. 7. Chapel, close by the Steps. He was the first
Lord Chancellor under Chapter II. James Duke of York was married to his Daughter
Ann at the Kings return into England: from whom are descended Mary Our Gracious
Queen, and Ann Princess of Denmark. The first stone of the first pillar of the
Royal Exchange was laid by K. Chapter II. in this year 1668.

Anno 1678. In this year the Popish Plot was discovered, and 18 persons were
executed for the same: the chief of them was Viscount Stafford, beheaded at
Towerhill. Edw. Coleman Esquire; then Secretary to the Duchess of York, his House
searche^, and Papers seized (October the 1. day*) Wherein was found so much of
moment and matter relating to the subversion of Religion and Government here
established, and, as it appears by his Trial at large in Print, he was found
guilty, and was drawn, hang*d and quartered at Tyburn, avowing his innocence to
the last: it may be, he expected a Pardon; for he was heard to say, There was
no truth in Mortal Man; however, his Master was not sorry for his Exit, tam
cito.

Richard Langhorn Esquire; a Counselor, committed to Newgate upon the same
account, and suffered after the same manner. Mr. Staly the Goldsmith in Covent
Garden, for speaking some Treasonable words, suffered after the same manner.
Ireland and Grove were also executed at Tyburn, and afterward several Priests,
as Gavan, Whitebread, Oliver Plunket, and others executed. Also Harecourt, and
Blundel. In Oct. Ld. Will. Powis, Howard Viscount Stafford, Lord Arundel of
Wardour, Lord Petre, John Lord Bellasis surrendered themselves, are sent to the
Tower of London, where Lord Petre dyed. Viscount Stafford was beheaded on
Tower Hill, and after some years, the rest by the bold Lord Chief Justice
Jefferies (when all other Judges r^fused) was bayled out Of whose character and
carriage you may see more in 88. following.

In September. in this year 1678. Titus Otes* swears to his information before
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. On the 28th. Dr. Tongue, Kirby, and T. Otes discover the
Plot to the Privy Council: For Tongue and Titus there were assigned very good
lodgings in Whitehall, a strong Guard, so many dishes of Meat, and a very
considerable Pension; however it was not pleasing enough to Otes, for in
January after, he tells the Lords in plain terms, that if they will not help
him to more money, he must be forced to help himself; he was a man of a haughty
spirit and great considence; but his knowledge and honesty were best made known
by his Narratives, and several examinations before the Lords and Commons; and
at the Trials and condemnations of several persons who suffered death, as you
read before in this present year. And it was observed when he went before the
House of Commons or any Committee whatsoever, when he had pumped himself dry,
he would tell them, his memory would not serve him any longer at that time; and
then at the next time of his appearance, he would descend to the bottom of the
Plot, and bring new matter every time to be registered for the belief of future
Ages. But after some few months, there came in somany new Discoverers (finding
good acceptance) into the Plot-Office, as did a little abate the reputation of
the old ones, viz. Dugdale, Bedloe, Bolron, Mawbry, Comins, Allen, Dangersield,
Zeal, Boice, Prance, Jennings, Everard, Turbervile, young Tongue, Smith; Irish
Evidences, etc. These would meet by couples or sometimes more, and upon some
questions, interrogatories and debates that would arise amongst them, things of
small matter of moment would be made great; and improbabilities made plain
truths. Some pieces were made up and brought to perfection, and some laid by,
being they could not be hammered out according to their intentions. For the
King and Council finding out some of their designs in going too high in their
discoveries, thought it high time to turn the torrent of their swift and
ambitious proceedings, and so by degrees they dwindled away. And now I must
bring to your memory, the most sad and strange murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, a Gentleman of a very competent Estate, and in Commission for the
Peace in Westminster and Middlesex, was respected by the King, beloved by his
Neighbors, for his Government in the Parish, and his many works of Charity
largely and freely distributed to the poor and distressed, in St. Martins in
the Feilds. Being wanting four days from his House in Hartshorn Lane, a great
noise and rumor there was spread abroad, and great search made for him, but to
no purpose, till Octber 21. 6. days after his absence, one Broomwell a Baker,
and another with him a Blacksmith, both of St. Giles in the Feilds, coming by
accident into Primrose-hill, two miles distant from his own House, they found
his body in a sitting posture in a small Ditch, and his own Sword run through
it, his Hat and Gloves laid not far from him: the two persons abovesaid gave
notice to the Neighborhood, etc. No Actors in this Murder as yet could be
discoveed, The King. (Car. II.) was pleased to issue out a Proclamation
promising a pardon and 500 l. to any that should come and make known this
bloody fact; this reward of 500 l. put some heat into Mr. Wrenn, who applies
himself to Bedloe, and tells him one Miles Prance a Silversmith in Prince's
Street was wanting, and he believed he was one of the Murderers of Sir Edmundb.
Godfrey. These two agreed to divide the 500 l. and Bedloe presently sets up for
a discoverer, and informs the Privy Council against Prance, who being taken and
carried before the King and Council, owns himself guilty, and was committed to
Newgate. After a little time he denies it, and said he knew nothing of the
murder. The King sends for Prance, and took him into his Closet, and told him,
if he would tell him the truth, he would pardon him; if otherwise he should
certainly be hanged (these words* I had from Prance's own mouth) upon which
saying of his Majesty, Prance upon his Knees told the King what he had at first
confessed to the Council was true, that he was guilty with the rest, naming
Robert Green, Henry Berry, Laurence Hill, that they murdered him by the
Watergate in Somerset House, carrying his body into Dr. Goden's Chamber for
five days. Then they put his Body into a Chair, and Prance and another were the
first that carried him away, they set him down in the Piazza's in Covent
Garden, then two others took it up, being two Priests, Kelly and Fitzgerald,
and carried it to the Sohoe, where they left the Chair amongst the buildings,
and Green brought a Horse, whereupon his body was set, and Hill behind it, the
two Priests on each side to guide it: thus they carried it to Primrose-hill,
and left it upon that spot of ground, where it was found. Thus far this
relation came out of Prance's Mouth to the writer hereof several times, and he
would needs carry me one day to Primrose-hill to show me the place where the
body was left. Those that are not satisfied with this, let them read his first
and second Narrative, which give more particulars, and more at large.

But let us look back to see what the Coroners Jury did; super visum corporis
two judicious Chirugeons, Mr. Skelhorn and Mr. Cambridge gave in their
Opinions, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered, his neck being broken, and
beaten also upon his breast with some obtuse weapons, and upon this and some
other particulars the Jury brought in their verdict Murder, but the Murderers
then was not discovered. Now let us return to Prance, and take notice of his
first Confession, and the effect of it. Green, Perry, and Hill were all
apprehended, examined, and committed to Newgate, and at their Trial, upon
Prance's Oath and Evidence against them they were found guilty of the murder of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and upon Feb. 8. 1678. were executed, all living and
dying Papists. Now observe in all this, his own Sword that was thrust through
his Body, was never mentioned as the cause of his death, for if that Sword had
been made a party by the Owner, it would have equalized the Romances of St.
Dennis and St. Winifrid. Now remember also that Kelly and Fitzgerald the two
Priests were at the murder; and they would have run Sir Edm. through with their
own Sword, in Somerset House, but the other Homicides would not suffer them;
saying, the Blood would be a means to discover them. And the abovesaid Mr.
Fitzgerald, soon after the murder, said, in the hearing of Mrs. James, then
living in Katherine-Stree, That the PAPISTS had murdered Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, and that it would be their destruction. And when Mr. Edward Coleman
heard of the same Murder, he struck his hand on his Breast, with these words,
Then we are undone. And now to bring this relation to a period, I shall only
add, That Prance always told me, for many years, That what he had so often
declared to me of that murder, was true; and that he would justify it to the
last drop of his blood. And here we must leave him, being now turned.
Protestant, till 88, where you may find him a Papist again.

But to proceed, the House desired the King to give Bedloe the 500 l. reward
for his discovery, which Mr. Wrenn had, not long before, put into his head.
Capt. Bedloe gets the Money, but contrary to agreement of dividing it betwixt
them, the Capt. would not give one crum of comfort to the Wrenn.

There were also, in this year, several Gentlemen, and others, imprisoned in
the Country, and some brought to London, to see the Tower; but being they
neither suffered death, nor were Fined, we shall pass them, and come to a year
of more strangeness and wonder than this.

Anno. 1688. This year is ushered in with so much wonder, that if it be set
down here for a real History, not one of a Thousand will believe it; however,
it must be left to every ones own choice. Upon the great hopes of the Queen's
conception the King orders some of the Bishops to make an Order of
Thanksgiving, in behalf of the King, the Q. and the Royal Family, upon occasion
of the Queen's being with Child; which was performed accordingly throughout
England.

Then followed, by the instigation of the Priests and Papists to the King, a
Proclamation was procured for the reading a Declaration (for Liberty of
Conscience) in all Churches and Chapels in England: This proved very unhappy to
the King, in disgusting his best Subjects, the Church of England; nay, almost
the generality of the Non-Cons did not approve of it: The Romans did use their
utmost endeavors to promote it, knowing thereby their Religion would be
introduced, and extirpate all but their own: the Quakers and Anabaptists did
run with the stream; and Will. Penn, the Quakers chief Illuminator, was a daily
Solicitor to the King, and Father Peter's his Brother Priest, for Liberty of
Conscience.

The King, or at least the Priests, being not satisfied, brought the King to
put forth a second Declaration to the same purpose: All the Clergy (except some
few ignorant, and Popishly affected,) stoutly refused to read the said
Declaration. The Bishops also had a Conference about it, and not finding it
consentaneous to their Consciences, but on the contrary, would open the door to
let in all Heresies and Irreligion; and nothing should have been settled in
England, but Slavery, Popery, and Poverty. The Archbishop of Canterbury, being
Dr. William Sancroft, Dr. Kenn, Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Lloyd, Bishop of
St. Asaph, Dr. White, Bishop of Peterborough, Dr. Lak^, Bishop of Chichester,
Sir John Trelauny, Bishop of Bristol, Dr. Turner, Bishop of Ely

These seven Bishops, on the 8th. of June, applied themselves to His Majesty,
by way of an humble Address, to let him understand, They could not safely, and
with a good Conscience, suffer the Clergy in their several Dioceses, to read
the said Declaration. The King enraged at this, the said Bishops were all sent
to the Tower, and there remained Prisoners; their Crime being a pretended
scandalous Petition to the King, To let him know they could not read the said
Declaration, etc. And there they remained to the 15th. day of June, and then
was called to the King's -Bench-Bar, and upon their own recognizance, upon 100
l. a piece was Bailed, to appear 14 days after; upon which day, being the 29th.
of June, a Jury being sworn, the Indictment read, and argued on both sides by
the learned Counsel for several hours, the Verdict was brought in Not Guilty,
to the great encouragement and comfort of good Christians, and for levelling
the pride and insolence of the haughty Papists, and their adherents.

And now 19 days before this happy Verdict had delivered the Bishops from their
Prisons; I suppose you expect to hear of another delivery, that is, what became
of the Queen's Concept --: Now I must beg of you this favor, to remember, that
if the Concept -- was not believed, the Birth will be as little credited;
however, we had it by Tradition, as Papists have most of their Religion,
whether Articles of Faith, or matter and form of Worship; and so are imposed
upon easy Believers: But if you will be so careful to go to find out the
Pope's Infallibility; the inerrability of the Roman Church; the Supremacy of
St. Peter's Successors; pardons for sin at a cheap rate; the exact time of
blowing up the Fire of Purgatory; praying to Saints long since departed; but a
moiety of the Sacrament to the lay People; worshipping of Images, cum multis
aliis suchlike improbable Follies; after all your pains and enquiries, be
forced to take all upon trust, and without any plain mathematical
demonstration, sit down with an implicit Faith, and believe, as the Church
believes, not contradicting their report; for as there was a resolute party did
believe, and did also publish it abroad, after the murder of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey committed by others, he was his own selo de se, by sheathing his own
Sword in his own Body; yet how far that was congruous to reason, let the
discreet man give sentence.

Now, after this digression, you may understand, that there was upon the 10th.
of June, Anno 1688. (^ day long before appointed, and very precisely too, for
that purpose,) a Man-child brought forth into the presence of many persons of
great Quality, (but of the implicit Faith) Madam Wicks the Midwife, or Woman
of Honor, being a knowing Artist, and well instructed in such affairs, gave to
every one of her own persuasion a full and satisfactory account of the whole
matter, from the very beginning to the end, That He was the true product of the
-- forementioned conception; and that God by the earnest intercession of the
blessed Lady, had heard their Prayers, and granted their desires, in sending
them a Son; and, indeed, they knew it was a Son, before the 10th. day of June,
abovementioned; now this tradition was handed about to the great, and indeed
all places in England, by Letters, and otherways: And yet, for all this
specious and gilded information, if you would certainly know the truth of this
great birth and state, you will be forced to take their tradition, and b^lieve
it, as they believe it, be it true, or not true; yet, as I said before, every
one is left to his own choice: For if this blind huddled business should have
been acted more in the light, and in the presence of Her Royal Highness, the
Princess Anne of Denmark, and other persons of quality, of the Princess's
Religion, it would have given full-satisfaction to all, the now unsettled,
doubtful, wavering, and ever-disbelieving Persons of England, and settled a
firm belief upon future Generations.

The King, soon after great r^jo^cings, and illuminations for t^i^ n^w
Deodatus, perceiving, at a distance, a great storm arising in the East, applies
himself to raise several n^w Forc^s of Horse, Dragoons, and Foot; and sends to
the Earl of Tyrconnel, then Governor of Ireland, for 4000 or more, of the
Irish Foot, which was sent accordingly into England; very likely, and able, and
warlike Men, and coming up to London, was very well approved of by all the
King's Officers, but the Inhabitants had a prejudice against them, for the
Irish had got an ill name, and was not well spoken of; (though to do them
Justice) in part of London, and in the City of Westminster, they carried
themselves very civilly in their respective Quarters. Now it was observed by
the Politicians of War, that these Irish, sent out of Ireland, from the
adjacent parts of Londonderry, did so much comfort and encourage that City, as
to make it hold out so long, and to that extremity; and if that 4000 so
detached, had remained in Ireland, that City, in all probability and reason,
had been either taken, or surrendered to the late King James; who in this Summer
88, had formed a Campaigne on Hounsloe-heath, Horse and Foot, to the number of
betwixt 16, or 18000. where we must leave them at present, in their Tents, with
their several pieces of Canon, and take notice how the King was equipping his
Ships at Sea, to make a formidable Fleet, and made choice of the Lord
Dartmouth, as a chief Officer to muster up his Seamen, for most of them had a
great kindness for that Lord, who made it his business, and gathered up many
Seamen, and after a little time manned out several Ships to Sea; but in this
time the poor Seamen, being as it were spirited on board, and knew not what
cause they were to fight for, they begun by degrees to consider, and at last
take the boldness upon them to ask their Captains, upon what design they were
upon, and who they must encounter withal. The Captains gave them such dark and
aenigmatical answers, as gave them no satisfaction: Upon which some of the
Ships whole Crew came upon the Decks, and, as one man, told their several
Officers, That they would not fight for the Papists, but always stand for, and
maintain the Pr^testant Religion. Which unhappy news for King James, was
carried to him by the Lord Dartmouth. The King was much discomposed with the
hearing thereof, but made no great outward appearance about it at present.

The King's next design was to take off the Penal Laws, and Test, and for that
purpose a Parliament was to be called to sit at Westminster; and many crafty
Courtiers, being Papists, or so inclined, was, with suitable instructions, sent
down into the several Countys and Buroughs of England and Wales, to prepare
such Members as would throw overboard the Test and Penal Laws at one sitting;
but this took as little effect as the former, for the King hearing by his
Agitators in the Country, how that they could not make a party there prevalent
enough to throw down the two Bulwarks, it so was ordered, that the designed
Parliament never me together.

Then the King's Council, where Father Peter's was always of the Quorum, put the
King himself to examine those of his menial Servants, and those that held
Offices under His Majesty, as the Great Seal, Privy Seal, Secretaries of State,
Mr. Attorney, and Mr. Sollicitor-General, the Gentlemen of the Green Cloth, and
all the Officers in White Hall, the Commissioners of the Customs and
Fire-hearths; these, and many others, were all to give an account of their
opinions of the Penal Laws and Test, and then being Closeted by the King, they
gave in their private verdict in that place; if they would not condescend to
take away the two aforesaid Bars, their Offices and Preferments was ipso facto
taken from them. By this ^ly practice many Lords, and Gentlemen, and many other
inferior Officers, w^^ cashiered, and many of the red ^^^ter men substituted in
their places: but in all this the King gained but little ground, for the number
obliged, and the disobliged, were still equal.

Yet they would not let the King rest here, but they persuade him to closet all
his Judges of Westminster, which accordingly he did, and found some of them
according to his wish; the rest stoutly opposed, and was presently displaced,
and some mean Lawyers, and mean Persons, but Papists, or popishly affected,
mounted up into their seats, at the several Courts in Westminster Hall. By this
project the King lost the hearts of his Subjects, for these new Judges were so
mean in birth, some in breeding, some in learning, and all of them ignorant of
the Law; so that by their illiterate practice the Law was quite buried. For Sir
John Maynard, that old Sergeant of the Law, told King William, That if His
Majesty had not come, as he had outlived many good Lawyers, so he should have
outlived the Law it self: And the reason was plain, for these new erected
Judges, did all agree in this maxim, That any penal, or statute Law,
whatsoever, and though made and confirmed by the three Estates, yet the King,
by virtue of his Prerogative Royal, had power to dispense with it; and what is
that dispensation, but by the arbitrary will and pleasure of the Prince, all
Laws are abrogated, and all penalties thereof remitted. And the King taking
these Judges opinion in this matter, for good Law, upon this false bottom, the
King offered to admit, and many Zealots accepted places both Military and
Civil, without taking the Oaths and Test, and every one under that circumstance
is liable to pay 500 l. And hereby all Corporations was new transformed,
Papists made Mayors and Aldermen, Governors of the Forts and Castle^, Captains
at Sea, Colonels, and other Officers of Landforces. Obadiah Walker set up some
few weak Proselytes at Oxford, in despite of Authority; and, indeed, the
Tempest did arise higher, for Magdalen College refusing to admit some persons
by Mandamus from the King, contrary to Law, and the Statutes of their College,
were ejected themselves, viz. Dr. Hough, Dr. Fairfax, etc. Magdalen College at
Cambridge, had also part of the storm; for not admitting by Mandamus, whereby
Dr. Peachel, then Vice Chancell^r, was suspended, ex beneficio, during the
King's pleasure, being then either President, or Master: Some Clergy were also
preserred to ^ishopricks, viz. Dr. Parker to be ^ishop of Oxford, Dr. Wa^son,
bishop of Bangor, Dr. Cartwright, Bishop of Chester, by the King's
Dispensation, not taking the Oaths and Test. By these examples you may plainly
perceive, that the Law was perfectly buried. Not omitting the Reverend Henry
Compton, Lord Bishop of London, who was by an arbitrary, and unjust sentence,
suspended, ex officio, contrary to the Canon and Civil Law; and Dr. Sharp, Dean
of Norwich, and Vicar of St. Giles's in the Fields, was silenced from
Preaching, without any form of Law; but indeed was willing to obey his
Ordinary, and so ceased pro tempore, in his Ministerial Function.

In this Year also, the Pope was pleased to send over into England his Nunci^,
Count Dada, a Venetian, a man of great Abilities, and a comely Person, being
very graciously received by the King, and highly treated by the Courtiers, well
respected by the Ladies of the greatest qualities, and by the ignorant Bigots
admired and adored, and the more, by reason here had not been one resident
among us for above a hundred years, before this time; for the Law is very
severe both in receiving or treating any of that nomination: and if an act of
Grace had not obliterated most Offenses, that great Entertainment in the ^ity
of London, and several other miscarriages, by several persons of good note, had
been deeply punished. These are the most remarkable passages which happened in
this part of the year, being the latter end of September, and part of October;
and now see what follows after.

And for that purpose, pray recall to mind that I told you in some few
precedent Pages, That the King perceived a great Storm arising in the East, and
by this time it was got over the Pampus and the English Seas, and upon the
Downs, and so was driven on all along upon our Coasts by Dover, and Portsmouth,
and other Ports, 'till it safely alighted, or indeed arrived at Torbay, not
many Miles distant from the City of Exeter, upon the 5th. of November; and
though it was esteemed, and called a storm by some few, yet it was a most
joyful and golden Shower to most People of England; and as that day was
formerly noted under God's great Mercy and Goodness, to deliver us from
destruction intended, by that horrid Powder Plot: This day now will make
England truly sensible, that by the same infinite goodness, we are made free
from the slavery of Popery, Arbitrary Government, and many other imminent
Judgments, which would undoubtedly have fallen upon us.

And now let me tell you what this happy and joyful arrival was, and first it
produced that Magnanimous, Heroic, Noble, Undaunted, Martial and Victorious
William Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Stadtholder of Holland. The Forces that
landed with him were as follow, viz.

Foot 10692. Horse 3660* In all 14352.

Ships, being Men of War, of the second and third rate, 65. Flyboats 500. Pinks
60. Fireships 10. In all 635.

This Fleet and Army, through the coldness of the late season of the year,
their long Voyage by adverse Winds, upon the Sea, and perhaps the Prince's
first intention to have landed in another part of the Kingdom, had sustained
some loss, and was much wearied and weakened, and many was sick, yet was forced
to wade through the Water, to some considerable deepness, at their Landing.
After which the Prince was pleased to march to Exeter, for his head Quarters,
the whole Army being there, or very near it, and it being a large and plentiful
City, sufficient Provisions was made for the Prince, and all his Forces; the
Prince stayed there some Days, expecting hourly, with great impatience what
Nobility, Gentry Gentry and other Forces would resort to him, and join with his
Army: after some few days, before his hopes was quite withered, there appeared
in his Royal Presence, the Lord Colchester, the Lord Cornbury, etc. Colonel
Godfrey and others; and by degrees several other Lords and Gentlemen, who
carried along with them very good and effectual men, to augment the Army; and
as the Prince advanced, his Army increased. This news came presently to King
James from the first landing, who was daily and hourly precisely informed of
their several Movements and Advances toward what places. But the main design of
the Prince was b^lieved by all for London, which sell out accordingly.

The King in the junctu^e of these affairs was in great amasement; for some of
his Army, nay some of his Lifeguard had deserted, and went over to the Prince;
yet the King trusted to his Army, especially to the Irish, the rest being
English, some Scotch and some few French, being all mustred together with
several Trains of Artillery drawn out of the Tower; and in a Martial manner
marched away on the Roads toward their Enemies: the Prince likewise doing the
same in hopes to encounter with them after a little marching; but in his
marching, the Prince was pleased to put forth several Declarations, whereby the
end and intentions of the Prince's coming into England with his Army was fairly
and clearly discovered to the people, and with such satisfactory reasons
therein inserted, that all on a sudden the people desired his Royal presence,
especially in London and Westminster, both being places convenient to turn the
Tide of Affairs, if there had been any occasion. Within six days the Kings Army
was marched to Salisbury, the chief Rendezvous, the Princes Army being about 20
or 30 miles distant from them; and there happened betwixt several of their
Parties and Forlorn-hopes some small encounters and skirmishes, but very few
taken or slain of either side; the Kings Army or at least the main Body lay
still at and about Sarum; the Princes Army drawing nearer to that place,
insomuch that the King daily expected a Battle; but on a sudden the Scene was
changed; for a Rumor only coming to the King, that the Prince's Army was ready
at hand to fall upon his, the King forthwith without calling a Council of War,
or any other consideration, left them in great have and disorder, and returned
to London: the Army being thus deserted by the King; whether for want of a good
Cause, for the love they bore to the Protestant Religion, or their good will
and opinion for the Prince of Orange. Besides, an Order given to the Earl of
Feversham for their Disbanding, the great expected Battle was ended before it
begun, the Kings Army flying away, or at the best easily retreating, when no
enemy pursued after them; it seems they had read or at least heard of Mr.
Hobbs's self-preservation.

This supposed terrible Army being removed, leaving the Roads very clear and
quiet, for the Prince's Horse to march at their leisure, and come for London,
which by easy Marches in few days was accomplish^^, to the great joy and
rejoying of England. But before his Highness would arrive at White Hall, to
prevent disorders by tumults or otherways, which might have been raised by the
Romanists and other disaffected persons residing, and busying themselves in and
about London and Westminster, he was pleased to send three or more Lords to the
King, that he would be pleased to withdraw his person, and his Guards to
Windsor, or any other place, where his Majesty should make choice of. And
withal upon the word of a Prince his Majesty should be secured from all fear
and danger. This message came to the King about 11. or 12. a Clock in the
Night, which being delivered, the King presently prepared himself, and withdrew
into Kent, with a party of his Guards to Rochester. This was his first leaving
White Hall, December 10th, and going to Feversham in Kent, was retaken and
brought back to London in great state, and rejoicing by his Subjects, and the
Prince did appoint some of his own Guards, half Protestants and half Papists,
which latter went to Mass with him, and had liberty to go where he pleased; the
Guard being charged by the Prince to that very purpose. The Priests thinking
themselves in a snare, (which indeed did of right belong to them) made the King
very uneasy, and persuaded him to go away a second time, which was done 18.
December. and going into Kent with his Guards which the King himself commanded,
took shipping with a party with him, dismissing his Guards; whom by gratuities
he requited, and so sailed into France without any disturbance. Now let any
indifferent and unbyassed person judge if the King was forced by any rough or
unmannerly means or actions to leave his Kingdom, being upon 23. of December.
His Queen with her new found out Relation went away from White Hall, upon
December. 9. accompanied with Count Dada, Father Peter's and some Ladies of
Honor, and Gentlewomen to wait upon her person, with good store of
Household-goods, Jewels and Treasure; and also landed safely in France, where
the French King was pleased after his compliments passed, to provide for her
according to her Royal quality.

The King going away, as I told you upon the 18. day. Upon the same day the
Prince entered into St. James Palace: his whole Army marching with him increased
by this time to above 20000, and being very much wearied by their long marches,
and the winter Season, was all (except sufficient Guards) sent into winter
Quarters, into the adjacent Counties, but especially Southwark, Westminster and
the Suburbs were filled with sufficient numbers of them.

The Army being thus provided with Quarters, the Prince was pleased to assemble
a General Council consisting of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Gentlemen, and
Lawyers, in which Assembly the Prince was desired to send out his several
Precepts to all Counties, Cities and Borough-Towns, in England and Wales: these
precepts was directed to the several Coroners in their respective Counties (for
at this time the Sheriffs of most Counties were not settled) and as these
Coroners, so the Mayors and Sheriffs of Cities and diverse Corporations were
required to give notice to all in their several Jurisdictions at certain days
prefixed, and at such places as they should judge convenient, and there to make
choice of Able Persons, and Gentlemen of known integrity, to appear such a day
at Westminster, in the two Houses of Parliament, which accordingly was
performed, and received the Nomination of a Convention.

But before this meeting, the Prince was pleased to send for over into England
his Royal Consort Mary Princess of Orange; this Convention after some weeks,
taking into consideration the distracted and unsettled condition of the Nation,
wanting a Head, and power to restore the said Nation into its pristine Glory
and Safety, by the advice of the best Lawyers and Statesmen, and by search of
many former Precedents, wherein it did plainly appear, that in all reason, this
Convention so generally chosen by the consent of the Commons of England, might
be styled the Parliament of England to all intents and purposes. And
accordingly, under that denomination, all matters of State, and concerns of the
Public, were transacted.

And taking into their consideration the departure of King James out of the
Kingdom, after many arguments Pro and Con. it was agreed, that by such
departure out of the Kingdom, without any compulsion, but his own free accord,
he had absolutely abdicated his Kingdom; and it was absolutely necessary, the
Crown should be conferred on the next lawful Heir, which was, without any
further arguing, adjudged to be M^ry Princess of Orange.

Nevertheless the Parliament, wisely searching into the State of the Kingdom,
into what great dangers it was relapsed, both by reason of open Enemies and
seeming bosom-Friends at home, the Devilish Intreagues of that deadly hater of
Christians, and almost all Mankind, Lewis the French King; for preventing these
mischievous designs now on Foot against England, Scotland and Ireland, it was
Voted by Both Houses of Parliament, Nemine contradicente, that the Prince of
Orange should be invested in the Crown, with his Lady, and so made King and
Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, with all other Dominions
thereunto belonging, and they were immediately Proclaimed at Whitehall-Gate,
Temple Bar, and the Royal Exchange, with the usual Solemnities, and with great
signs of rejoicing and satisfaction to all sober People; and then Proclamations
were sent down into all the Counties of England to the same purpose, which was
performed with great joy and alacrity, as appeared by their many Bonsires,
Ringing of Bells, and several other demonstrations of gladness: they would take
up several Sheets of Paper if they were to be fully mentioned in this small
Treatise; and for the Coronation of this blessed Pair, it falls not under my
figure. Yet I hope the Readers Patience will hold out till April 11th, in the
next ensuing year, where in other Writings he may be sure to satisfy himself
in the truth of the whole Proceedings.

Scotland knowing very well all the several transactions of England, and being
well approved by them, take the same measures, and tread in the same steps,
calling together the States of the Land, being the Nobility, Gentry, and other
Degrees amongst them, and being assembled, were likewise named a Convention,
and afterward a Parliament, who presently addressed themselves to our King,
and humbly begged his Protection, and Proclaimed William and Mary their King and
Queen according to the Scottish Custom, and after a little time came to London,
tend^ing their Crown by Commissioners to their Majesty's, which was accepted
very graciously.

Poor distressed Ireland however, the major (but in the genuine sense) the
better part thereof, would have willingly and cheerfully followed the former
Examples of England and Scotland, but the Commands of the late King James, the
crafty Projects of the French King, the fly Persuasions of the Irish Priests
closely and hourly made -- and applied to the Earl of Tyrconnel, then Lord
Deputy, or at least Governor of Ireland, he also hoping by his not submitting
to gain great Honor and Preferment; if not the whole Country for his own
proper use and benefit; but therein he ^ight easily perceive his error, for
Iewis that aspi^ing Monarch had designed it long before to be annexed to his
Flower de luces, but the poor Irish Harp would have caused but doleful Music
to the Hibernians; yet a melodious tune to the wooden shooed French, which
would presently have bin dancing in that Country; however the reasons before
mentioned, m^de Tyrconnel* so obstinate, that with what Forces, and that little
Courage he was possessed of, to defend and preserve Ireland for his two
M^sters: what the event was, some few years will tell you, however this light
you shall have at present, that things proved quite contrary, after several
Conflicts and Battles, to his expectation.

But let us return into England, and there behold how many potent Enemies the
King had secured in several Prisons for the security of Their Majesty's
Persons, and the Kingdoms Welfare, Peace and Happiness, viz. George Jefferies
Baron of Wem, and Lord High Chancellor of England, the Earl of Peterborough,
the Earl of Salisbury, the Lord Castlemain, the Lord Preston, the Earl of
Feversham, the Lord Chief Justice Wright, Baron Jenner, Sir Edward Hale,
formerly Governor of Dover, and after Lieutenant of the Tower of London; and
let Miles Prance, the Silver-Smith, a timely Discoverer, have the honor to be
taken at Gravesend, with a false Pass, and there committed to Prison by the
Secretary of War, when he intended to pass the Seas. There were many more
persons of high and low rank taken into custody, but by reason their
Deliverances or Trials hereafter will make them more public, I shall at
present omit them all, except Dr. Obadiah Walker, the Proselyte-maker at
Oxford, who was sent to the Tower of London, but not amongst the Records to
make search for the place of Purgatory; but foretell his own fortune, either by
calculating his Nativity, by the often Singing of his Ave Maria, or numbering
his Beads at their appointed Seasons, whether by day or night* but let Obadiah
rest, being accounted but one of the small --

There were also in this Juncture of time many persons secured in several
Counties of England, alway^ having an eye and great care of the Red Letter-men,
and of those ho^ headed-persons that took places of Trust and Commissions from
the late King James, never regarding the Penal Laws and Test; the Priests
likewise were apprehended as soon as discovered, yet not many, for knowing
their sins to be of a dark color, they would not abide the reckoning, but went
off with the next Oars.

Also about this time the King was vigilant over his Army that served under the
late King James, not suffering any of them at present to come for London,
especially in any great Parties, but sent them into several Parts and Counties
of England, by degrees modelling of them a new; first breaking the old
Regiments both of Foot and Horse, etc. and then formed them into new Bodies, so
as to take away all suspicion of their disloyalty to their King, which perhaps
was unjustly cast upon them; however by this honest Stratagem of War, all the
known Papists, and those that appeared disaffected to the King and Government,
were quite cashiered; and then the King was so well satisfied with the
remaining part, that they were sent to Whitehall, and took their Guard-days in
the same manner (as they had formerly) part of that Army which came out of
Holland, being of the Guards there, were either all, or in part, removed from
that Station.

By this time the Reader may be pondering with himself, that there is an
absolute necessity for great Sums of Money, not only for defraying the charge
of the Fleet that brought the King and his Army over into England, but likewise
the vast expense and charges which our English Fleet and Army had brought upon
the Nation; and these two Fleets and two Armies united, and all to be paid by
one Master, would in a short space of time rise and multiply to an incredible
account.

The Parliament taking this and other matters of the like nature, being of
great concern, into their consideration, after mature deliberation; Voted
several Sums for that purpose to be raised, viz. by additional Excise of Ale,
Beer, some small Branch of the said Revenue, being ready to drop down, was by a
new A^t reunited, also a Land Tax at 12 d. per Pound was Enacted by Parliament;
the Customs and several other Duties belonging to the Crown, were by the said
Authority, confirmed and settled upon the King and Queen.

The Affairs of the Kingdom now being in a hopeful way of Settlement, as so
small a time had bin allowed for so great a change, and new modelling both of
Persons and Offices, the King and Parliament in all matters very well
concurring; the King was pleased amongst other of his favors and elemency, to
declare he would stand by, and defend the Protestant Religion, the Church of
England as by Law established, to his utmost power against all opposers
whatsoever; and withal care should be taken for the Non Con's, and differing
Opinions, the Kings gracious pleasure being thus published, made all his
Subjects to be filled with joy, admiration and liberality to that degree, that
the Citizens of London, of their own accord, proffered to lend the King what
Money His Majesty pleased, and almost in an instant, great and vast Sums of
Money were brought into Guildhall, and that Citizen thought himself the most
happy which was the first leader, and brought the biggest Bags; for which at
present, they were very willing to accept of the Kings word for their several
securities.

The King by this time, being the latter end of March, having got into
possession some money, but that which equalized, or rather exceeded it, the
affections of his People; would have bin very happy together by his peaceable
Reign over his Subjects here in England, had not the Rebels in Scotland and
Ireland by the fair promises of Rewards and Preferments of the late King James
and Lewis the 14th of France, bi^ instigated, and hurried into Arms and bloody
Wars against this King William; so that both Scotland and Ireland wanted his
assistance, and being willing and ready, the King resolved to reduce them both
to his obedience; but this Year being drawn to its period, and my figure to be
out of date, because I will not leap into another, but conclude my Eighty
Eight, a Year full of Wonders and Changes, yet in hopes it will be the
introducer of England's Glory, and do verily believe, that future Generations
will call it happy, because it restored Our Lives, Religion, Laws and Liberty,
and I desire it may make us all truly thankful to him who was the beginner and
finisher of so great and good a work.

By this time the Reader may give this account, that any man of reason being 58
years of Age in this Year of Jubilee 1688. may demonstrate and make it plainly
appear to others of younger dates, that he has lived under Eight Governors and
Governments, viz. In the Reign of King Car. I. Car. II. James II. William and
Mary, and is truly called Monarchy, then under the power and Tyranny of two
persons Regalwise, in respect they were single persons, and had the power of
Calling and Dissolving Parliaments, making War and Peace, to condemn or save
guilty Malefactors, Robbers and Rebels; and indeed Oliver's power did much
exceed that Authority which King Charles I. did take upon himself; yet this
Oliver and his short-Reign'd Successor Richard, wanted the Crown, the Royal
Title of a King, and were content to enjoy the Nomination of Protectors, with
this addition upon the Great Seal of England inscribed, By Divine Providence,
etc.

He then was under the arbitrary will and disposal of Parliaments, ends and
pieces, formerly called the Rump Parliament, which in the last eight Years of
King Charles I. were the sole Lords and Rulers of England, raising War against
their King, and likewise great Funds of Money, which was also raised by
imposition of the first Excise of Ale and Beer in England, and not only public
but every private House paid for all the Beer they brewed and consumed; the
Butchers in all places paid so much for a Cow, or Heifer, a Bull or Ox; so much
a Calf, and also for Sheep; and six pence in the pound for all Woollen Cloth
that was made and fold; and there was an imposition upon Salt, and several
other things in this Nation. This Domus Communis, for brevities sake Dom. Com.
Voted down the House of Lords, called the Upper House, and Voted themselves the
Supreme Power of the Nation, and this was performed by an intrinsic virtue,
and an occult quality latent in their unknown Prerogatives, their Ordinances
were more efficacious than our Acts are in these days.

A blind Order from a beggarly Committee would fetch up a Delinquent, put him
into Prison, take his Estate, and no Appeal to be made, but at Goldsmiths or
Haberdashers-Hall, and there your composition was made upon such hard terms,
that the poor Cavalier was forced to sell part of his Estate to save the rest,
and this punishment was inflicted upon those that out of a Principle of Loyalty
took up Arms in defense of their Prince and Country; let us pass by the two
Aping and counterfeit Kings, Oliver and his Son and Successor Richard; only
tell you, that the former would whip a Parliament out of the old House in a
moment, and because he would have an able Parliament, he caused his own men, as
well Troopers as Officers, to be chosen Members thereof.

Let us not forget Barebon's Parliament, that zealous Leather-seller, who was
taking care by bringing his Bills into the House to extirpate the Family of the
Stewarts, Root and Branch. How he came by the name of Praise-God-Barebones, is
uncertain, but some of the Family has informed me, that the Constable and
Watchmen of St. Martins Ludgate were his Godfathers: however I am in hopes,
that before he departed this life he repented of his bad actions, and for the
Act of Grace did truly Praise God, or else, Fare ill Barebones.

Then a Committee of Safety was appointed to regulate and govern this poor
tossed Commonweal, much distempered, and so much out of Order, that this
new-formed Commissioned Company knew not how to behave themselves in their New
Corporation, only made some small offers of Reformation, and of settling a firm
peace to their simple and ignorant Admirers; put out their new lights, seeing
they could proceed no farther, every man dissolved his own individual body, and
retreated into the old Dom. Com. and there stayed till General Monk came out of
Scotland for London, and played a new Game with them, and made the lawful King,
Charta Dominatrix, to rule over all the rest. These last four Milcellanies
Hotchpotch Gallimawf^y Governments, at least so called, must be denominated
Democracy, being a fu^ious and confused Government of the uncertain and
dissatisfied People of England, this last Page had been omitted, not falling
under my figure, but it gave clear demonstrations how to bring in 48 and 58.
Their dark actions being discovered in these intervals, I judged they might
seasonably in this place be interposed. And now Reader, having brought thee,
according to my promise, under the figure of 8 to the year 1688, I leave thee
there, and bid thee Meditate on what was acted therein, and heartily* wish that
the remembrance of that 88, may admit no

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX.
REginald Pole, Born at Stoverton Castle in Staffordshire, was second Son to
Sir Richard, Knight of the Garter, and nearly related to King Henry 7. His
Mother Margaret Countess of Salisbury, was Niece to King Edward 4. and Daughter
to George Duke of Clarence; He was bred in Corpus Christi College in Oxford,
preferred afterward Dean of Exeter, Henry the 8th. allowing him a Pension,
sent him beyond the Seas. He studied at Padua, conversed much with the
Patricians of Venice, and in sine, became a perfect Italian, and could not be
prevailed upon by the King, or his friends, to return to England, whereupon his
Pension was withdrawn, living afterward in a Venetian Monastery. He attained
great Credit for his Eloquence, Learning and good Life. It was not long before
he was made Deacon Cardinal, by the Title of St. Mary in Cosmedin, by Pope Paul
the 3d, who sent him Ambassador to the Emperor and French King, to incite them
to War against K. Henry the 8. He afterward retired to Viterbo in Italy, where
his House was the Sanctuary of the Lutherans, where he himself became a
racking, but no through-paced Protestant, insomuch that being appointed one of
the three Presidents of the Council of Trent, he endeavored to have
Justification determined by Faith alone; during his living at Viterbo, he was
taxed for getting a Bastard, which Pasquil published in Verses affixed to his
Pillar, that Blade being made of all tongue and teeth, would not stick to tell
where the Pope trod his holy Sandals awry. Yet he had some Relation to the
Beast in the Apocalypse, in that under the name of Pasquil, there has been a
Successive Corporation of Satyrists. After the death of Paul 3. Pole was at
Midnight in the Conclave chosen to succeed him, the refusal whereof under the
notion of a Deed of Darkness, was by the Italians looked upon as a piece of
dullness in our Cardinal: next day expecting a re-election, he saw Julius the 3
d. his professed Enemy chosen in his place, yet afterward, he became alterius
Orbis Papa, when made Archbishop of Canterbury by Queen Mary. He was a person
free from Passion. His youthful Books are full of the flowers of Rhetoric,
whilst those of his old age are dry and dull. He died a few hours after Queen
Mary, November. 17. 1558. at Lambeth.

Sir John Cavendish Knight, born at Cavendish in Suffolk (where his name
continued until the Reign of King Henry 8.) was made Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, anno. 46 Edw. 3. he died a violent death, an. 5 Rich. 2. on this
occasion, J. Raw, Priest contemporary with J. Straw and Wat. Tyler, advanced
Robert Westbroom a Clown to be King of the Commons in this County, having 50000
Followers, these for eight days together, in savage sport, caused the Heads of
Great Persons to be cut off, and set on Poles to kiss and whisper in one
another ears; Chief Justice Cavendish chanced to be then in the Country, to
whom they bare a double Pique, for his honesty and learning; besides, they had
heard that John Cavendish, his Kinsman, had killed their Idol Wat. Tyler in
Smithfield, whereupon they dragged the Reverend Judge, with Sir John of
Cambridge, Prior of Bury, to the Marketplace, and there beheaded them, whose
innocent blood remained not long unrevenged by Spencer the warlike Bishop of
Norwich, by whom this Rascal Rabble of Rebels was rooted and ruined.

Leonard Maw was born at Rendlesham in Suffolk (anciently the Residence of the
Kings of E. Angles, where King Redwald kept at the same time a Communion Table
and Altars for Idols) was Master of Peter-House, then of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and in five years disengaged that Foundation from a great Debt. He
was Chaplain to King Charles whilst he was Prince, and waited on him in Spain,
by whom he was made Bishop of Bath and Wells, a good Scholar, grave Preacher,
mild man, and gentile in his deportment. He died in 1638. and left some of his
Estate to Mr. Simon Maw of Epworth in Lincolnshire.

Sir Fulk Grevil, Knight. Son to Sir Fulk Senior of Beckam-Court Warw. was bred in
Cambridge. He came to Court, backed with a fair Estate in the Reign of Queen
Eliz. He was a good Scholar, and a great friend to learned Men. Bishop Overall
owed his Preferment chiefly to him, and Mr. Camden tasted largely of his
liberality. His Studies were most in Poetry and History, as his Works do
witness. King James created him Baron Brook of Beauchamp Court, as descended
from the sole Daughter and Heir of Edward Willoughby, the late Lord Brook. He
was murdered 1608. by a discontented Servant, who conceived himself not soon or
well enough rewarded, first wounded his Master mortally, and afterward
dispatched himself. He lies buried in Warwick Church, under a fair Monument,
whereon he is styled, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counselor to King James, and
Friend to Sir Phillip Sidney, dying unmarried, his Barony descended on his
Kinsman, Robert Grevil, Lord Brook, Father to the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Brook.

Thomas Morton was Son to a famous Mercer (reputed the first in York) and
allied to Cardinal Morton Archbishop of Canterbury. He was bred in York-School
(with that Arch-Traitor Guy Faux) and afterward in St. John's College in
Cambridge, and (for his merit) was chosen Fellow thereof; before eight
Competitors, commencing D. D. He made his Position on his second Question
contrary to the expectation of Dr. Playford, replying upon him with some
Passion, commovisti mihi stomachum, to whom Morton replied, Gratulor tibi,
Reverende Professor, de bono tuo stomacho, coenabis mecum hac nocte. He was
successively preferred Dean of Gloucester, Winchester, Bishop of Chester,
Coventry and Lichfield, and Durham. The Foundation which he laid of foreign
Correspondency with eminent Persons of different Persuasions, when he attended
as Chaplain to the Lord Evers (sent by King James Ambassador to the King of
Denmark, etc.) he built upon to the day of his Death. In the late Long
Parliament, the displeasure of the House of Gommons fell heavy upon him, partly
for subscribing the Bishops Protestation for their Votes in Parliament, partly,
for refusing to resign the Seal of his Bishopric, and baptizing a Daughter of
John Earl of Rutland with the Sign of the Cross; two faults which compounded
together in the judgment of wise and honest men, amounted to an high innocence;
yet the Parliament allowed him 800 l. a year (a proportion above his brethren)
for his Maintenance, but the Trumpet of their Charity gave an uncertain sound,
not assigning by whom, or whence this sum should be paid. Indeed the Severe
Votes of Parliament ever took full effect, according to his observation who did
Anagram it, Voted Outed. But their merciful Votes found not so free
performance, However this good Bishop got 1000 l. out of Goldsmiths-Hall, which
afforded him support in his old Age. He wrote against Faction, in defense of
three innocent Ceremonies, and against Superstition in his Treatise called the
Grand Impostor. Many of the Nobility deservedly honored him, but none more
than John Earl of Rutland, to whose Kinsman, Roger Earl of Rutland, he had
formerly been Chaplain. Sir George Savil civilly paid him his purchased annuity
of 200 l. He died at Easton Manduit in Northamptonshire, the House of Sir Henry
Yelverton, aged near 98.

George Paling born at Wrenbury in Cheshire, was bred a Merchant in London,
Free of the Company of Girdlers. We may call his Benefactions, The golden
Girdle of Charity, for with our Savior, He went about doing good. To Wrenbury
he gave 200 l. to purchase Lands for the relief of the Poor. For building of an
Almshouse in and about London 900 l. To St. John's College in Cambridge 300 l.
To the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark 50 l. To the Preachers at St. Paul's
Cross 200 pounds. Toward a Chime in Bow-Church 100 pounds. To six Prisons in
and about London 60 pounds. To Brasen-Nose College in Oxford, two Scholarships,
to each yearly 4 pounds. To the College of St John Baptist in Oxford, two
Scholarships of the same value. To Christs-Church-Hospital 300 l. To the Church
and Poor of Wrenbury, to buy them Gowns 70 pounds. He died 1608.

James Pilkington D. D. of an Ancient Family, before the Conquest, (when the
chief of them then sought for) disguised himself a Thresher, has for his Motto,
Now thus, now thus, in Allusion to the Head of his Flail, or to himself
embracing the safest condition for the present. He was bred in Cambridge, and
fled an. 1. of Mariae into Germany, where he wrote a Comment on Ecclesiastes,
and the Epistles of St. Peter, after his return he was made Bishop of Durham
1558, and nine years after the Northern Rebels came to Durham, and tore the
English Liturgy, the Bishop had fared no better if they had found him; when the
Rebellion was suppressed, the Bishop commenced a Suit against Queen Eliz. for
the Lands and Goods of the Rebels attainted in the Bishopric, as due to him:
but the Parliament interposing on special consideration, pro hoc tempore,
adjudg'd them to the Queen, and after eight years of the Rebellion he died in
peace.

John Easday, of most honorable Extraction, bred in Cambridge, was Dean of
Canterbury. He was the first Clergyman who carried Tidings of the English
Crown to King James. He reduced the Court of Trinity College to a spacious and
beautiful Quadrangle, and added a stately new Court at his own expense of above
three hundred pounds. He died 1618.

Richard Rich Knight, well descended, was Solicitor to Henry 8. upon his
Deposition chiefly, Sir Tho. More was beheaded. Under Cromwell he was a lesser
Hammer to knock down Abbeys, some of which stuck (justly) to his fingers. By
Edw. 6. He was made Lord Chancellor of England, being an opposer of D. Dudley,
he resigned his Office by prevention, having got a fair Estate at Lees Abbey in
Essex, whereof he was Baron. He died in 1558. being direct Ancestor to the
Right Honorable Charles Rich, now Earl of Warwick.

Richard Mulcarter, of ancient Extraction, was born in Westmorland, and bred in
Kings Gollege in Cambridge, afterward in Oxford. He was chosen the first
Master of Merchant-Taylors School in London, where his Scholars prosited so
well, that the Merchant Tailors intended to six him, as his Desk, to their
School, till Death should remove him: this he perceived, and therefore gave for
his Motto, fidelis servus, perpetuus asinus; but after twenty five years, he
was made Master of St. Paul's School. Such was his Discipline, that the
Indulgence of Parents, rather increased than mitigated his severity on their
offending Children. He was plagiosus Orbilius, and (which qualified the matter)
unpartial: Amongst the many excellent Scholars which he bred, Bishop Andrews
was most remarkable: At last, quitting the place, he became Parson of
Standford-Rivers, and died very aged, Anno 1578.

William Wilford, born nigh Plymouth, was a valiant and successful Seaman:
After the French had by a sudden Invasion burnt several hundreds of Houses in
Plymouth, on that side of the Town called since Britain-side, he took 40 Ships
on the Coasts of the Britains, and burnt as many at Penarch, repaying the
Monsieurs in their own Coin. He died in 1508.

This brave exploit was done in the Reign of Edw. IV.

Sir John Popham, of most ancient Descent, was born at Huntworth in
Somersetshire; when a Youth, he was stout, and well skilled at Sword and
Buckler, and wild enough in his Recreations: Afterward he applied himself to a
more profitable Fencing, the Study of the Common-Laws, wherein he became
Eminent. He was preferred the Queen's Attorney, and afterward Lord Chief
Justice of England. He deposed upon his Oath, in open Court, at the Trial of
the Earl of Essex, 1600. That he had been violently detained at the Earl's
House, by his Military Men there assembled, which some conceived ^antamount to
an Imprisonment. Note the rarity of the precedent. He cut as^nder the knot of
Northern Robbers, and others, with the Sword of Justice: He represented
effectually to King James, the inconvenience of frequent Pardons. He used
exemplary Severity against Malefactors (shunning the dangerous Rock of cruel
Mercy,) whereby the Lives of many Thousands were preserved. He died an. 1608.

T^omas James, born in the Isle of Wight, D. D. and Keeper of the Library of
Oxford, was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parliament of Oxford, I.
Car. where he made a motion, that some might be Commissioned to peruse the
Manuscript Fathers, in all English Libraries, for detecting Popish Editions. He
was Sub-Dean of W^lls, and died 1628.

Sir Will. Mounson, Knight. of an an^ient Family in Lincolnsh. was made
Vice Admiral in an. primo Jac. (S^r Richard Leveson Admiral,) by whose
diligence and valor, Trading was killed on the Coasts of Portugal, and a
Caract of 1600 Tun taken, which had in her 300 Spanish Gentlemen, and amounted
to the value of 1000000 Crowns of Portugal account; though the Marquess de
Sancta Cruce lay hard by with 13 Ships, and all were secured under the Command
of a strong Castle; in the Dispute, the Syllogisms of Fire and Sword, which
were used by the English, (though the Premises were opposed with the best Spanish
Logic,) were answered by the Opponent, with a fair concession. In the
conclusion, the Goods gotten in the Caract might be valued, but the Good gained
thereby, was inestimable; for henceforward the Spanish beheld the English with
admiration, and quitted their Thoughts of Invasion. This worthy Knight died,
according to the best computation, in 1608. The Family still Flourishes with a
very large and plentiful Estate of 6000 l. per Annum, at Burton, near, (or as
some call it under) Lincoln.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books lately Printed for, and Sold by John Weld, at the Crown
between the Two Temple-Gates in Fleet Street.
1. AN Historical Account of making the Penal Laws by the Papists against the
Protestants, and by the Protestants against the Papists, etc. The true Ground
and Reason of making the said Laws being very necessary to be known by all
Gentlemen and Practitioners of the Law. Fol. By Samuel Blackerby, Barrister of
Gray's Inn.

2. The Sacrifice; a Tragedy. Written by the Honorable Sir Francis Fane,
Knight of the Bath. In Quarto. The Second Edition Enlarged.

3. Mr. Henry Hurst's Funeral Sermon. Preached and Published at the earnest
Desire of his Relatives and People. By Richard Adams, M. A. sometimes Fellow of
Brafen-Nose College in Oxon. Quarto

4. A New Discovery of the Private Methods of France, to Frustrate the Glorious
Designs of the Confederate Princes, etc. Wherein is contained some secret
Passages, (never before known to the World,) how the late King James was only
made a French Tool, during his short Reign, to enslave these Three Kingdoms to
the unsupportable Tyranny of France. Quarto.

5. The Lives of Famous and Illustrious Men, who lived before our Blessed
Saviors Nativity: Translated into English by several ingenious Gentlemen in
the University of Oxford, for the benefit of such as do not understand the
Original Language. Octavo.

6. The Life of God in the Soul of Man: Or, The Nature and Excellency of the
Christian Religion: with the Methods of attaining the Happiness it proposes:
Also an Account of the beginnings and advances of a Spiritual Life: With a
Preface. By Right the Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum. The
Second Edition, Corrected, to which is added a Table. Octavo.

7. England's Alarm: Or, The French King's Cruelties exposed. Containing a true
account of what Usage these Three Nations may expect, if ever they are so
unhappy as to become a Prey to that most Cruel and Bloody Tyrant. Octavo.

8. A Discourse of Wit; wherein is shown what is meant by it; the Causes,
Variety, Original, Progress, and Signs of it; with a Character of a great Wit,
and of one that is only a pretender thereto: Also the Ingenious Art of Writing
and Translating well; with a pleasant Discourse, whether Women can be really
Witty, or no. The Objections alleged that they cannot be Witty answered, and
the contrary plainly proved, by their Sagacity in managing Intriegues, whether
good or bad; with a true Story of a Lady's Dexterity to be rid of two Husbands
at once, etc. Twelves.

9. Dr. A. Horneck's Practical Discourse of the great Necessity and
Indespensible Obligation, which lies upon every Christian, to apply himself
betimes to the Serious Practice of Religion. Twelves.


