THE PORTRAICTURE OF Roger L'Estrange Drawn to the LIFE: As it was taken in the
Queens Chapel.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

THE PORTRAICTURE OF Roger L'Estrange Drawn to the LIFE.
YOU may as well tell me, that the Moon is made of a Tosting-Fork; because she
appears sometimes with two Horns -- Believe what? -- That ever Roger L'Estrange
Esquire, was at the Queens Chapel, since the Kings Restoration -- Why, his
Picture was taken there -- His Picture taken there! that is impossible -- For he
goes always with a Hood over his Face -- Why he is Pictured so -- So that when
ever you see a man painted with a Hood upon his Face, you may be sure that is
Roger L'Estrange, Esquire. Some there are that picture him with two Faces, like
Janus, the one looking toward the Protestant, the other toward the Popish
Religion, with a wide Mouth; endeavoring, like Saturn, to devour the Evidence
of the Popish Plot, and a Label, crying out, Oh! the Profuseness of the Press;
carrying in his Hand either a Dialogue, or a Letter to a Friend, or a Quotation
of his own Pamphlets to make up the Price; and lastly, an Attorney Sticking in
the waste of his Breeches, like an old fashioned Pen and Ink-horn. Others
picture him with a pair of Scates, sliding out of harms way, with a painted
Coat upon his back, containing the Pedigree of his Gentility, supported by
Vainglory, and Ostenta^ion, with his two great Purification Oaths, by his
Maker, and the Everlasting God. Thus much for his Outside.

Now for his Inside, the Painters have found out a new way to dip their Pencils
in Credible Testimony, and Authentic Deposition; the Colors of which have
that Property, that they are never to be defaced. So that if you should see him
painted in the Queens Chapel, in the Colors of these Depositions, a hundred
years hence, you would almost swear him to be alive, and the very same man.

Now for your better satisfaction, I Will give you a sight of all these
Depositions, which I perceive you have not not seen, though Printed already in
their particular Sheets. There Is your Vltramarine, there is your pure Lake,
there is your rich Vermillian, there is your fine Ceruse, and there is your
delicate Cherry-Stone black. As for Example, There Is first, Mr. Prances
Deposition, taken before the Earl of Clarendon, and the Earl of Craven, October.
25. 1680. This Deponant says, That about three years since he saw Mr. Roger
L'Estrange three or four times kneeling at Mass, in the Queens Chapel.

Middles. ss.
The Information of Lawrence Mowbray, taken upon Oath the 25th. of October,
1680. Before the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, and the Earl of
Craven, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County.
THis Deponent says, that about the first or second Sunday in June 77. An
acquaintance of one Anderson (which Anderson was Servant to Mr. Allabon in
Greys-Inn) being with him in the Queens Chapel, saluted immediately, after
Mass, a Person, whom he told this Deponent was Mr. L'Strange, who Licensed
Books. This Deponent says, that he has once since seen the said Mr.
L'Strange at Mass in the Queens Chapel, and saw him to be the same man he
formerly saw there.


Hitherto, there is nothing Sworn, but that he was seen at Mass, concerning
which I have given my sense already, that all that went to the Queens Chapel
out of Curiosity were not presently to be accounted Papists. There must be
something else then to make men Judges what other Inducements carried him
thither; or whether any other Inducements or no? To which purpose I have
inserted these Informations that follow.

Middles. ss.
The Examination of Jane Curtiss, taken Before the Right Honorable the Earl of
Clarendon, the Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Craven his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the said County of Middlesex, October, 27. 1680.
THis Examinant says that about the middle, or toward the Latter end of the
Month of June Last, Mr. L'Strange came to her house (her Husband being out of
Town) and there accused her and her Husband for Printing and Publishing diverse
books, which he said were very dangerous against the Government, naming
several Pamphlets which she knew nothing of; and though she truly did deny her
self concerned in any such thing, yet he persisted that he would prove it, and
proceeded to threaten that it lay in his power to ruin her and her Husband, and
then told her of his great Interest at Court, and that if she would tell him,
who set her on to publish such books, he would take her off from all trouble,
and promised to do great things for her Husband. But she denying that she was
ever concerned in such practices, or had ever been urged or instigated
thereunto by any, he said that was false, and that she had been influenced and
staid up by ill men, and that he believed it was Oats and his Gang, and, said
he, you know what some of them (speaking of Oats and those he called his Gang)
are come to already, and I do not question but I shall see them all hanged ere
long. And he refused to License several books wherein there was any thing
against the Papists, more particularly those two books she showed your
Lordships, which he Swore by his Maker, he would not License for five hundred
pounds; which books upon the first sight were Licensed by the Lord Bishop of
London.


Westmin. and Libert. ss.
The Information of Joseph Bennet of St. Giles's in the fields Stationer, taken
upon Oath before the Lords Committees, for examination of matters relating to
the late horrid Plot Sworn before the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon,
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said City this 30th. of
October. 1680.
WHO says, that he did become bayl, and entered into Bond before one of the
Clerks of the Council for one Captain Eli, that he should appear the first day
of this Term at the Kings Bench bar, which said Captain Eli was then a
stranger to him; but Roger L' Strange Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, being at Mr. Hintons the Apothecaries, near this Informants House, sent
for this Informant, and then told him, Captain Eli was a friend of his, and an
honest man, and therefore he the said Justice did request this Informant to
become Bail for the said Captain Eli, and the said L' Strange did then promise
this Informant to give him security to save him harmeless, and pretended he
would then have done it, had he not been in great have. And the said Mr. L'
Strange did tell this Informant he, had sent for another person to bail the
said Captain Eli, but he not being to be found, he therefore sent for this
Informant, and said he would take it as a great kindness from this Informant.


The Information of Richard Fletcher, of St. Vedast alias Foster, London,
Phisician, taken as before.
WHO says, that about three years ago he met Roger L'Strange Esquire at the
Half Moon Tavern in Cheap Side about Licensing a book entitled, The works of
Geber an Arabian Prince and Philosopher, and gave Mr. L' Strange a Guiny for
his License, and a discourse happening about Religion, Mr. L' Strange asked of
what Religion this Informant was? who answered, a Catholic. L' Strange replied
are you a Roman Catholic? This Informant answered that was Nonsense. Catholic
being universal, and not to be circumscribed. Then L'Strange bid this Informant
explain himself. I answered, that Faith that wrought the fear of God and to do
righteously, does declare those that are of the Catholic Church, which I take
to be the Church of England. Mr. L'Strange then declared himself to be a
Catholic of Rome, and to believe the Faith of that Church, and told this
Informant that his difinition was too large. This Informant then asked the said
L' Strange, whether the Pope were the head of that Church, of which he
acknowledged himself a Member? who answered he was, and hoped ere long, many
others would return to that Church, or to that effect, and further says not.


As to my own Affidavit, which is the first here produced, I do find Mr. L'
STRANGE triumphing in the 35. Page of his Appeal, that I had seen him no more
than three or four times at Mass, at Somerset House. Whereupon, (says he,) I
did with the most horrid Solemnity of Imprecation Imaginable, declare my self
to be of the Religion of the Church of England, and that I had never entered
into any Popish Chapel, or been present at any Mass since his Majesty's
Return. Which Protestation I do here again resume, intending by these words,
His Majesty's Return, the Kings blessed Restoration in the year 1660. And
then, as if he thought this Protestation not sufficient; he makes a note upon
the great abatement of my reckning? as being assured by report, that I had
sworn in the company of Care, Curtiss and others, that I had seen him at Mass,
at least, or about a hundred times.

As for what he was assured of by report, I value it not: neither is it
material to the Point; as being of little or no force against him. The
difference is between his Protestation, and my Oath. Which I have here
confirmed by the Oath of another Person, Mr. Mowbray by name, who likewise
swears he saw him twice in the year 1677. at a Popish Chapel, that is to say
at Somerset House: To the great disparagement of that part of his Protestation,
never since the Kings Restoration, which was in the year, 1660. Now I would
never have taken notice of Mr. L' Strange's solemn Declaration, had it been
upon any other account but this, that either he has some particular reserves to
himself, or I must be perjured, and that should he now go unanswered (which is
a thing he boasts of) the sharp Twits which he has given the Kings Evidence
would pass for Current, and he would come to be a quoted Author against Us. And
therefore I do as publicly and as solemnly declare as he has done, that I am
as tender of Swearing to the detriment of my Neighbor as any other person that
aims at the Enjoyment of a future Happiness. For my part I know not to what
very great purpose the latter part of his Declaration was made. For having so
solemnly declared himself of the Church of England, what if he had been seen
twenty times at a Popish Chapel? But that part of his Potestation was
perticularly levelled at my Oath, which I am obliged to uphold so far as
honestly I may. And that too without any reflection upon Mr. L'Estrange's
Honesty or his Loyalty, fully believing neither to be inconsistent with the
Profession of the Popish Religion.

In his Case, where he talks to himself in his own Cause, under the Persons of
Zekiel and Ephraim, like one that plays at Tables with his right Hand against
his left; Ephraim tells Zekiel, that he was rounded in the Ear, that Prance had
Ten Witnesses in readiness to prove that L'Estrange had been Forty times at
Mass here, and solemnly Worshipping according to the Profession of the Romish
Communion.

And thus I who made a Confession so remarakble, and thereby discovered that
bloody deed of darkness, which enlightened the whole Nation, am here rendered as
one that kept Witnesses in readiness, or rather, pickled Witnesses for present
use. By this means, in a short time, the Murder of Sr. Edmonbury Godfrey, will
be as little believed as the silly Story of Mr. Powel. To which purpose Mr.
L'Estrange's Narrative of the Plot seems to have but odly Coupl'd that foul
Fact, with the ridicule of Mr. Powel's escape, which renders the Frame work
very suspicious. For though it be true, that the disparagement of a juggle, no
way weakens the Truth; Yet there may be that manner of speaking, and that Art
made use of in the contexture of Words, that may overturn that Maxim. With
submission to Mr. L'Estrange, there is in that place ( Nar. P. 19.) such a
mixture of the meanest fourberies of Report, which the most inconsiderable
Circumstance of the Discovery, that my slender Opinion is, that a more prudent
Progression in Logic ought to have supported the violent Death of Sir
Edmunbury Godfrey. For if the Story of Monsieur Choqueuz Fireworks, were never
proved the suspicion of Tukesbury Mustard-Balls, was never yet accounted the
greatest Argument of the Plot. And if the business of Sir Henry Titchbourns
Arms were not made out, the Surmise of the Black-Bills lies as much at the
Mercy of any man's Belief, without any prejudice to the Belief of the Plot; and
thus Posterity shall Argue from Circumstances not much material, whether they
are believed or no, the falsehood of the greatest Discoveries of the Grand Plot
that ever was made in the World. Especially when Mr. L'Estrange shall go about
to convince the World of the falsehood and Perjury of the chief Evidence of his
Murder. For my part, I much wonder why Mr. L'Estrange should so much trouble
himself with his Schismatical-Plot. They who discovered the Popish-Plot,
produced the Conspirators, named their Names, brought their Evidence against
them, and were the occasion of Sentence and Execution. If Mr. L'strange knew of
any Schismatical or Phanatick-Plot, He ought to have done the same. Otherwise
upon no other Grounds but the wandering Notions of unlicens'd Books, to cry out
a Phanatick-Plot, is but just, as when they cry out Thieves at one end of the
House, and at the same time to cry out Thieves at the other end, and thereby to
distract, and discompose the Defense of the whole.

In the next place I observe, that when, in your Appeal, you have dignified Mr.
Care with the meanest of Characters (though in some Sheets of Mr. Cares there
are those things produced, that will take up Mr. L'Estrange a full year to
Answer by way of Dialogue.

You tell the World he wrote my Narrative. That is to say, my Narrative was a
pitiful contemptible thing, and consequently little to be credited.
Nevertheless. in such a Narrative as that, neither the Language, as I humbly
conceive, nor the person that wrote it were so much to be regarded, as the
Verity of the matter of Fact. And many people perhaps see with Mr. L'Estranges
Eyes, and out of a Respect to his Ingenuity, Judge with his Judgment. In which
Respect I am a little induced to question Mr. L'Estranges so often by himself
asserted difference and kindness to the Kings Evidence, for giving such a
public Advertisement of my Narrative, after he had made the Writer so
miserably Ridiculous, he might have prosecuted his Revenge, without such an
unseasonable Reflection. But whoever assisted as to the Form, the matter was
mine, and public Justice is satisfied.

I come now to the Information of Jane Curtis, the substance of which is, That
Mr. L'Estrange speaking of Oats and his Gang, said, He did not question but to
see them all hanged ere long, and that he refused to License 2 Books, Swearing
he would not do it for 500 l. which afterward the Lord Bishop of London
Licensed at first sight.

In the first place I must certainly conclude my self to be comprehended in Mr.
L'Estranges kind wishes, as confessing my self to be one of those which he
called of the Gang. As for the woman that swore the Oath the World has not been
heard as yet to give her any other Character than of a Painful and Industrious
Woman, very much entrusted, and a fair Dealer: Whether she have sworn true or
false, I will not undertake to determine, that is to her own Conscience. But if
she have sworn true, as there is little reason to misdoubt, where there is so
little reason to surmise to the contrary. Then it is not his twitting her
Husband with a Foolish trick he has taken up of winding up his Nose and
showing his Teeth, will free him from the heavy censures that will follow: But
it was no wonder he fell so foul upon the Husband, when the Wife lay so heavy
upon him.

What will be thought of him, who in an Appeal to the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and the three Estates assembled in Parliament, had produced so many
Quotations from his own Writings to testify the Esteem and Honor he had for
tht Kings Evidence? What will be thought of those Quotations themselves? and
that particular Ejaculation to the Doctor, They are wonderful things, Doctor,
which you have done, and I am persuaded that you are reserved for more
wonderful things to come, but that they were only the Compliments of Scorn and
Derision? For Derision is many times as Complimental as Friendship it self. And
this is most certain, that he that wishes another man hanged, can never have an
esteem for his Person. For my part until this Difference be decided, I must be
convinced he has no kindness for me. And then the World must conclude him
partial as to my concerns. And I will go a little farther to put it to the Vote
among all those of the true Church of England, how well it became the Charity
of a declared Church of England-Man, to wish Oats and all his Gang in the
Hangman's Nooze? And it may be questioned, whether such a one be what he
affirms himself to be, let him protest never so deeply.

As for the latter part of this Information, I will not undertake to be a
Compitent Judge of Mr. L'Estrange's Learning, or whether it be superior to that
of any one of the Lord Bishop of London's Chaplains; but me thinks it seems a
little od to my weak Judgment, that there should be such a vast difference in
the Opinions of two such Eminent men of the Church of England, as Mr.
L'Estrange and the Bishops Chaplain, that the one should refuse, and swear by
his Maker, he would not License a couple of Sheets, no, not for five hundred
pounds (a good smiling Temptation) which the other did Gratis, at the first
sight. And yet we have as little Reason to question the Loyalty and Integrity
of my Lord Bishop of Londons Chaplains, as we have to question Mr. L'Estranges.
So that it follows, that it must be either a very great weakness or oversight,
either in the one or the other. Now you will say, what were the Titles, or what
the Subjects of those two Sheets. The one was, The Character of a Turbulent
Pragmatical Jesuit, and Factious Romish Priest. Epitomizing their Continual
Disturbancies of Church and State, and particularly giving an Account of the
Death of the Emperor Henry the 7th, who was Murdered by one Bernardine, a
predicant Friar, that gave him Poison in the Holy Eucharist. Licensed, Oct. 15.
1678. The other, A Letter from a Catholic Gentleman to his Popish Friends,
then to be exiled from London. Ironically advising them to obey their Ghostly
Fathers, and not the King; and thereby taking an occasion to show how little
the Papists regarded Tests or Oaths, to whom a Dispensation from the Pope was
always an Infallible help at Maw, against Perjurie. Licensed, 1678.

These were the two scare-Crowes that so terrified Mr. L'Estrange, and which
were of such dangerous consequence to the Government, and the Church of
England, that he would not License them for 500 l. And yet it is apparent, they
were Licensed, and by those who were as Chary of offending the Government, or
the Church of England as he could be. It were almost madness to think that
those Reverend Gentlemen who were entrusted with the Licensing of Books, at
Lambeth or London-House, should be so inconsiderate, or so unfaithful to let go
or connive at any thing prejudicial to the Church and State. Unless there be
any that think the Art and Judgment of Licensing such a Mystery, that only Mr.
L'Estrange has obtained it by long Practice. But there may be something in the
Case indeed: For these wonderful Gentlemen, Dick and Tom, Ci^t and Bumpkin,
Zekiel and Ephraim, Philo-L'Estrange and Pragmatieus, may be the wisest men in
the World, and of Mr. L'Estranges Privy Council for ought I know, and he
himself may have the Spirit of Licensing, and a discerning Faculty above all
the World beside, for any thing I can contradict him. All that I have to say
is, that I stand still in my own Defense, and have only brought these
Circumstances to make it out, that if I did see a Man at Mass, there might be
probably some other Reason for it then Curiosity.

The next is the Information of Joseph Bennet, that Mr. L'strange importuned
him to Bayl Captain Eli at the Council Board. What harm in all this? None at
all that I know. 'Twas the part of a Gentleman and a Friend to take care of his
Friend in Adversity. But we are still to consider the circumstances. Captain
Eli it seems was in the same accusation with himself, but this argues that Mr.
L' strange knew the person well and was acquainted with his Crime. However
you will say, Mr. L' Estrange was happily acquitted, and I am exceedingly glad of
it. Nevertheless I say again, Mr. L' Estrange did know the person, and was
acquainted with his Offense, and perhaps he judged it slight and trivial, or
else he did ill to engage his Friend. But this Captain Eli was a Conspirator
with himself, deeply engaged; a person that he knew to be concerned with him, a
person that had paid Tongue several sums of money toward the carrying on the
Design, and therefore it became him as a Gentleman to procure Bail for his
fellow Conjurator: Let him make a Dialogue to clear himself of this, and then
for Papist or no Papist, when he pleases he shall have more of it; in the mean
time, the World is to consider upon what account this Affidavit is produced.

There is yet behind the Examination of Mr. Richard Fletcher, who swears, that
after some discourse, Mr. L'Estrange declared himself to him, to be a Catholic
of Rome, and to believe the Faith of that Church, and that being asked whether
the Pope were the head of that Church He answered he was; and he hoped ere
long, many others would turn to that Church, or to that effect.

As for the person that swears, he is well known both in City and Country, a
person that lives handsomely and gentielely, and a great lover of that noble
Science to which Mr. L'Estrange cannot be thought to bear any Spleen, though
for his excellency in performance he has been too unkindly reproached; so that
the world does hardly believe that Mr. Fletcher, a person by his Industry so
well guarded from Necessity, would make such a Discord in Human Society, as to
swear though it were for 500 l. to the prejudice of the least Hair of Mr.
L'Estrang's head. Now then the Question is, which the unbyassed are to believe?
Dick or Tom, Zekiel or Ephraim, Citt or Bumkin, Philo-L'Estrange, or
Pragmaticus, or Mr. L'Estrange himself, with his own Lips declaring himself to
be a Catholic of Rome, and to believe the Faith of that Church? If Mr.
L'Estrange has changed his mind since he made this Declaration, there is no more
to be said, I Will yield my Affidavit lost; if not, it is a Riddle to me, unless
he mean such a Church of England Man, as in the Reign of Henry the 7th or Queen
Mary. He declares one thing, and protests another. How to judge is a hard Case,
and yet me thinks there is but little Reason, that he who will not believe
himself, should be believed by others. What is it to me, when- Mr. L'Estrange be
a Papist or no? And yet I cannot conceive it to be such an irrefragable
Argument, that a man is no Papist because he rattles the Phanaticks, and
exclaims with so much bitterness against the outrageous Liberty of the Press.
He is the most improper person in the World to combat the freedom of Scribbling,
or at least to pursue that Subject with so much virulence and bitterness of
Spirit. For all the world will judge that to be Self-Interest in him, which
would be thought real Sentiment in another. On the other side nothing more
prevails with me to believe the Gentleman is no Papist, because I cannot
conceive that any person of true Learning and Ingenuity would be of such a Mock
show, Gewgaw, Joynted-Baby Religion, that puts Divine worship to hold de la
quenoville, and would enforce us to deifie the Distaff, with as many Titles of
Honor in her Liturgy, as ever the Queen of Spain had. But if self-Interest
happen to dazzle the Sight, or the Prospect of preferment better improve a man's
judgment, I have nothing more to say.

But what is it to me, whether Mr. L'Estrange be a Papist or no? My design is
only to maintain the Truth of my Information. I have sworn that I did see Mr.
L'Estrange at Mass in the Queens Chapel since his Majesty's happy
Restoration, 1660 And that I will justify, though he resume a Protestation as
long as from Charing Cross to Milend-Green. For if he will not believe his own
Lips, I must and will believe my own Eyes. He says indeed, I could not say I
saw him Receive. It Is very right; for I saw no such thing; and therefore
because I swore no more then I saw, it is the fairer Argument that what I swore
was the Truth. But what says Ephraim my Beloved? Why Ephraim says, that I
should say, that I would swear I had seen him forty times at Mass. But you see,
my Beloved, that Ephraim was unkind in his Report, He was a false Brother, and
strayed from the Truth.

But what if Ephraim had heard it? 'twas only a report, and no more than what
Mr. L'Estrange himself tells the world in his Appeal, only that the Number
differs; viz. That I should say in company, That I would swear I had seen Him
at Mass above a hundred times. By which, the world may see, that Mr. L'Estrange
was more Afraid than Hurt. But I would fain know what it is to the purpose, what
Ephraim reports, or what he by his Eeves-droppers is assured of, when the Oath
it self appears, and puts all Reports and Hear says out of doors. Why then to
unfold the Mystery, they were only Attaques of Disparagement; one of the most
prudent ways in the world to undermine and blow up a Testimony. To which
purpose Ephraim the Cunning lays another Train, and tells Zekiel the Subtle,
that he was rounded in the Ear, that I had Ten Witnesses in a readiness, to
make good my proof. A Reproach, which wherever it takes fast hold, spreads it
self, and eats into the Reputation of a Testimony, like Oil of Spike spilt upon
Deal Boards. This Ephraim I perceive, was like all the rest of the world;
nothing refined by his Baptism; easy to believe any thing that made for his
Advantage. But now who can blame Harris or Gay for writing and publishing
ridiculous Fables, when the person that finds fault, shall publish, upon
Ephraim's being barely Rounded in the Ear, such trivial stuff as this, which
only denotes the want of better Defense. For I would know, if Mr. L'Estrange
were to be tried upon the single Issue, seen at Mass, or not seen at Mass, and
I should come and swear, as I do, that I had seen him at Mass so many times,
whether Reports and Hear-sayes, and Roundings in the Ear, that I would swear
this or that which I did not hear, would acquit him? For if I thinks, and as I
remembers, and as I believes, will not be admitted into an Oath, which must be
absolute, as mine is, certainly Hear-sayes, and Reports, and Roundings in the
Ear, will be as little admitted in the Defense. So that in my Opinion Ephraim's
Intelligence was not at that time worth the Coffee he gave for it, though it
were but one Dish.

But now Ephraim comes to the particulars of the Report, and says, Ten in
number; pray Gentlemen give me leave to consider a little. Well, I have done
it, and I must faithfully declare to the world, that I do not know of any Store
Ponds that I have for any such sort of Fish. If Ephraim know of any, he should
do well to make the discovery. For I know it would be no small satisfaction to
him to see me incur the penalty of such a breach of the Law. Truly there is no
great probability of the Truth of the Report, because the Story it self does
not hold water. For, for me to have so many Witnesses in a readiness, and not
to make use of one, was a strange piece of remisness, to be so careless of a
certain Victory. Upon the whole, whether Mr. L'Estrange be a Papist or no, I
will not determine; but these are excellent Hints for the Papists to lay hold
on; and then to quote a Churchman of England for their Author. But it is well,
all is not Gospel that Zekiel and Ephraim say. I do find they suffer under the
frailty of Fallibility, as well as others. For, as for Mr. Mowbray, he came in
voluntarily, and gave in his Information without my knowledge, and consequently
could be none of my number; and there was no more that appeared in the
business, especially wherein I was concerned. So that the Ten being hitherto
invisible, unless Mr. Ephraim can bring them to light, the Report and the Use
made of it must be both equally insignificant.

But there are other Observations to be made; For if a Writer do positively
aver that for Truth, which carries another face, it is shrewdly suspicious he
may make the same forfeiture in more circumstances than one.

Thus Mr. L'Estrange in his Discovery upon Discovery, p. 13. Now, Doctor, says
He, I do positively aver, that there was not one Church of England-man in the
Parliament Army, as they called it. When it is a thing yet fresh in memory,
that the Archbishop of York, that very Metropolitan, upon whom Cleveland begins
his Satirical Elegy, Here York's great Metropolitan is laid,
Who God's Anointed, and his Church betrayed.
Served in the Parliament Army, as it was then called, with a Command of Horse.
Now whether an Archbishop of York, and one of the Metropolitans of the Kingdom,
would have been advanced at that Time, to that Dignity, unless he had been a
Church of England-man; that is the scruple. However, we may say thus much, that
he ceased no more to be Archbishop of York, by siding with the Parliament, than
Julius the Second ceased Pope by Joining with the Turks. And therefore
Cleveland allows him his Dignity after his Death, though he embalm it indeed
with Assafaetida instead of Olibanum.

Now for any man to be so positive in the assertion of a thing, so notoriously
subject to contradiction, will give a shrewd shog to the former value that was
put upon the Writings of the same Person.

Thus Mr. L' Estrange was pleased to disown at the Council Board that ever he
knew me: And yet before that, at a certain Coffee-House in Ludgate Street, he
presently vanished up stairs with great disdain, upon my first appearance in
the lower Room, murmuring out these words, The Devil sets his Imps at work.

These things I should have been far from taking notice of, had it not been to
support my own justification, verily believing that the world would blame me
much, and that the public Enemy would get no small advantage thereby, should I
have suffered my self to be so passively negligent, as to see my self run down
with the quips and taunts of a quaint and fluent Pen, without a just
vindication. In a word, I have only Sworn that I saw him at Mass; here are
other Informations, by which you must judge upon what account. I have no more
to say to that particular.

Now after all this, and a long silence, he is risen again, and as I suppose,
forgetting what he declared at the Half Moon, renews the Old Lurrey of no
Papist, nor Jesuit in a Dialogue between Philo L'Estrange and Pragmaticus. And
Heaven, I say, prolong his Life, and may L'Estrange no Papist nor Jesuit be the
perpetual Theme, that he may satisfy his Humor, and write as many Dialogues as
ever Lucian did. But I am very much afraid that a volume of Dialogues as big as
the Book of Martyrs will do him but little good. For he goes about to bury the
Subject itself under the heaps of his own Quires, it being most certain that
men at length will grow tired with reading his needless Apologies. For they
that think him a Churchman of England, will believe him still so to be,
notwithstanding all the Rumors of Accusation. And as for those that believe
him a Papist, he may perhaps in time wash a Blackamore white, but will never by
that sort of Rhetoric which he uses be persuaded to change their opinions. He
has so be plotted the Generality of dissenters under the odious Name of
Fanatics, that he must not expect any mercy of belief from them. They not
being a sort of people to be gained by Similes and bare Flourishes of
Elocution, it being then to be presumed, as he may easily perceive it himself,
if he pleases, that they believe not one tittle of what he says, it follows
that he only writes to them that believe him already, which is a labor
altogether needless. And then again, whatever belief he may pretend to have of
the Plot, yet in all his discourses he speaks so ambiguously of it, gives such
Complemental Reproaches to the Kings Evidence; that even blindness it self may
discover his aim; and that whatever his public pretense may be, the ruin of
the Discovery and private Encouragement set the Wheels of his Invention a
going. Worse than the Blind Mill-Horse, not understanding that he is laboring
and grinding all the while for the grand Enemies of his King, and Country: Or
else worse than all these, who, knowing what he is about, pursues the Tracks of
secret Treason and Conspiracy; rather than Coleman shall want a Successor to
his Secretariship, Mr. L'Estrange will be the Person, so bewitching a Charm it
is to some men to be the Instruments of Greatness; though in Evil Enterprises:
But Mr. L'Estrange is old, and believing he has not long to live; what cares he
what becomes of his Country after he is gone, so he may enjoy the Sweets of
this World, during his time. But men of these brave desires, and Hunters after
ill obtained Prosperity, forget those wise sayings of the very Heathens
themselves, That they who will not give credit to them that swear the truth, to
the stifling of which so much labor has been used in vain, are themselves the
Contemners of Heaven, and guilty of those Perjuries, which they would fasten
upon others. And let the subtilty of the Devil pretend what it will, it is not
to be imagined, that any but Papists, or their well-wishers, could be so
stupidly obstinate, as to run Counter to all those signal Acts of Providence,
that daily brings to light the busy Contrivances of the Kingdoms Enemies. This
however is our Comfort, that we seldom see the end of them, who by such
Instincts of private Interest oppose Heaven, and the peace of settled
Government; but that in the Conclusion Divine Vengeance finds them out, and
brings them to shame and punishment. It being generally observed, that they who
are most active to serve and assist a Conspiracy, are the first laid aside,
upon the success of the Design. A motive that should induce the vain Aspirer to
a more considerate Conduct of his Actions.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will in few days be Published an Answer to Mr. L'Estranges last
ridiculous Pamphlet, Entitled, L'Estrange no Papist: In further Justification
of those Informations Sworn against him, before the Lords of the Private
Committee.


