AN ADMONITION To the Reader of Sir Peter Leicester's Books.

Written by Sir T. M.

Printed in the Year 1676.

An Admonition to the Reader of Sir Peter Leicester's Books.
Courteous Reader,
THat you may know Hercules by his Foot, and not, with some few persons,
confidently believe every thing which Sir Peter Leicester does write, I here
give you an account of the Partiality, Omissions, Uncertainties, and Mistakes
of the said Sir Peter, in those two Sheets of his Historical Antiquities, in
which he writes of the Township of Over Peover. And I cannot but wonder that
they are so numerous, considering he always had liberty to peruse any Deeds or
Copies of Records which I had in my custody; and that I also was ever willing
to give him any other assistance concerning my Family, which did lie in my
power.

First, in his 330 page, he calls Ranulphus (who, as he confesses, in the
Conqueror's time held this Township of Peover, or the greatest part thereof)
the supposed Ancestor of the Mainwarings, as he also usually does in other
Townships where he has occasion to name the said Randle; and yet, as you may
see, page 208. he calls Odard the undoubted Ancestor of the Duttons. Now what
reason he can have to call Odard the undoubted Ancestor of the Duttons, and
Ranulphus but the supposed Ancestor of the Mainwarings, (except his partiality)
I cannot imagine: For, first, the Surname of Mainwaring was a fixed name,
whereas the Surname of Dutton was taken from that place; and if another Family
had bought it of the Posterity of Odard within few Generations after the
Conquest, they possibly might have styled themselves after that place, that
being the manner of those Ages, as Sir Peter tells us in his 250 page; and
accordingly he not only gives us examples there of three Branches of the
Duttons, viz. Warburton, Chedill, and Ashley, who did all call themselves after
the Places where they lived, but he gives us many other like instances in many
other places of his said Book. Secondly, Sir Peter does not add the Surname of
de Dutton in his said 250 page, to the said Odard, or Hugh Son of the said
Odard, but only to Hugh de Dutton, Son of Hugh, who was the Third of that
Family. Whereas the Surname of Mesnilwaren, or Mainwaring, was used, as you may
see in the 111 page of the said Book, in King William Rufus his days, by
Richard Mesnilwaren, which (except the said Ranulphus) is the first Mainwaring
that we do find. Thirdly, the principal reason (as I conceive) why Sir Peter
says, Odard was the undoubted Ancestor of the Duttons, is, because the Duttons
enjoyed those Lands, which the said Odard held in the Conqueror's time, which
were, if I mistake not, part of Dutton, which the said Odard held of the Earl
of Chester; and Aston, and part of Weston, and part of Halton, which the said
Odard held under William Fitz-Nigel, Baron of Halton. But as the aforesaid
Lands of the aforesaid Odard were enjoyed by the Duttons; so the Lands of the
said Ranulphus in Blaken, Wenitone, Tatton, Pever, Warford, Little-Pever,
Cepmundewiche, Ollerton, Senelestune, Cocheshalle, Hoiloch, Tadetune, (which is
the same with Warmincham) Norwardine, Sundreland, and Bageley in Cheshire, and
the Lordship of Waburne in Norfolk, (being all the Lands which the said
Ranulphus held in the Conqueror's time) were certainly enjoyed by the
Mainwarings. But this I say not to take off any thing from the Family of
Duttons, (for I am fully satisfied that Odard was their Ancestor) but to show
the Partiality of Sir Peter, in doubting of Ranulphus more than of the said
Odard.

2. He tells us in his said 330 page, That by ancient Deeds there were
anciently two Places or Hamlets in Over-Peover, one called Cepmundewich, the
other Fodon; whereas there were Seven such Places there, viz. Cepmundewich,
Fodon, Hongrill, Hethalis, Brydenbrugge, Twyford, and Radbroc. And it is very
strange, how Sir Peter could omit the last of these, seeing in the very same
page he speaks of Radbrook-house in Over-Peover; and mentions a Deed by which
William Mainwaring, then Lord of Over-Peover, gave illam terram quae vocatur
Radbroc integram, unto Thomas Mainwaring his younger Son.

3. In the Pedigree of the Mainwarings ( page 331) he leaves out Ranulphus, who
is nominated in Doomsday-Book, Richard de Mesnilwarin, mentioned in his Hist.
Antiq. ( page 111.) Roger de Mesnilgarin, or Mainwaring, and William and Randal
his Sons, spoken of by him ( page 341.) Roger de Menilgarin, or Mainwaring,
named by him, ( page 362.) Sir Ralph Mainwaring, and Sir Roger Mainwaring his
Son, both taken notice of by him, ( page 330.) and this upon a pretense, that
they were Lords of Warmincham: Whereas I am confident he will not deny, but
that the Mainwarings of Warmincham were also Owners of Over-Peover, or the most
part thereof, until Sir Roger Mainwaring gave Peover to his younger Son Sir
William Mainwaring; presently after which time, the Line of the Mainwarings of
Warmincham failing, the Mainwarings of Peover became Heirs male to those
Mainwarings of Warmincham, Sir Warine Mainwaring, Son of Sir Thomas Mainwaring,
Son of the said Sir Roger, dying without Issue Male. And though he may pretend,
that he did not mention those Mainwarings of Warmincham, who also were Owners
of Peover, because they (as he supposes) then lived at Warmincham, in another
Hundred; yet in his said Book he gives an account of the Descents of some, who
had Estates in Bucklow Hundred, though he then looks upon them as living in
other Hundreds.

4. He tells us ( page 332) that Margery Praers, one of the Coheirs of William
Praers of Baddeley, (and Sister to Joan the other Coheir, who was Wife to
William Mainwaring) married John Honford of Honford, and afterward that she
married Hugh Holt, 33 Edw. 3. but had no Issue by Holt, and that she had Issue
by John Honford a Son named John Honford, who was a Bastard: But he is mistaken
in saying that Holt was her second Husband; for Margery had her Bastard John
Honford, before she had any Husband, and she was Wife to Hugh Holt, 33 Edw. 3.
and she was Wife to John Honford 46, 47, and 50 of Edw. 3.

5. In the 332 page, he takes no notice, that William Leigh of Baggeleigh, who
married Joan, the Daughter of William Mainwaring of Peover, in the 33 of Edw.
3. was a Knight; and yet, as you may see in his 217 page, he knew the said
William to be a Knight.

6. He says in his said 332 page, That William Mainwaring the Elder, who lived
33 Edw. 3. sealed with three Bars, with a Lion passant in Chief; whereas the
Coat of Arms was Argent, two Bars Gules, on a Chief of the Second, a Lion
passant, gardant Or; and so it is cut in his own Book, page 331.

7. He takes notice ( page 332.) that William, younger Son of William, Son of
William Mainwaring, had a Daughter named Ellen, who was married to Adam
Glasebroke: But he omits John and Margery, Brother and Sister to the said Ellen.

8. He says ( page 332.) that William Son of Roger Mainwaring died about 12 or
13 of Edw. 3. whereas I find him Party to a Deed made on the Eve of S. John
Baptist, 14 Edw. 3. and how long he lived after, I believe no man can tell.

9. He says ( page 332.) that William Mainwaring, Son of William Mainwaring and
Joan Praers, did divide the Lands of Baddeley between John Mainwaring his
Half-brother, and John Honford; whereas he gave several thousand Acres of Land,
which came by his Mother, and of the which the Demesne of Baddeley was part,
solely to his said Brother John, and only divided the remainder of the said
Lands; and the Will which directs that Division, does also direct the disposal
of the other Lands.

10. He takes notice ( page 333.) that William Mainwaring's Seal, 17 Rich. 2.
had the Impression of his Coat and Crest, to wit, in an Escocheon, two Bars
only; and corner-ways, on the Dexter Angle, on an Helmet, an Ass-head cooped,
etc. which (he says) his Heirs have ever since continued, to wit, Argent two
Bars Gules; the Crest, An Ass-head cooped, proper: And tells you, that the said
William died 1399, 22 Rich. 2. Whereas all the Mainwarings that I can find, who
have lived since the said William, have either given the Ass-head on a Torce
and Halter'd, or else the Ass-head Erased, or else the Ass-head unhalter'd, and
within a Crown.

11. He says ( page 333.) that William Mainwaring (the Husband of Katherine
Belgrave and Clementia Cotton) settled his Estate, upon his departure out of
England toward Guien, 17 R. 2. 1393. and afterward made his Will, 1394.
Whereas the said settlement made 17 R. 2. was also a Will, and was but of part
of the Estate which he had by his Mother; and besides that and the other Will,
dated 1394. he made a third Will, 1399, by which last Will he gave directions
to his Feoffees how to dispose of all his Mothers Lands; but he disposed not of
those Lands he had as Heir to his Father, by any of the said Wills.

12. He says ( page 333.) that John Mainwaring of Over-Peover, married
Margaret, the Widow of Sir John Warren of Poynton in Cheshire, and Daughter and
Heir of Sir John Stafford of Wigham, about 13 Rich. 2. For Sir John Warren died
the Tenth of Rich. 2. But how Sir John Warren's dying in the Tenth of Rich. 2.
does prove, that the said John Mainwaring married his Widow, about the
Thirteenth of Rich. 2. I confess I do not understand.

13. He says ( page 333.) that John Mainwaring was made Sheriff of Cheshire, 4
Hen. 4. and continued Sheriff 5 H. 4. and 6 H. 4. but he omits his being
Sheriff 7 H. 4.

14. He says, ( page 333.) that John Mainwaring died 11 H. 4. 1410. whereas he
was certainly dead in the year 1409.

15. He says ( page 334.) that Margery survived her Husband Randle Mainwaring,
and erected a Stone-Chappel on the South Side of Over-Peover Church, with the
two Monuments therein for her self and her Husband, 1456. Whereas the said
Margery was certainly dead in the year 1449. and died several years before her
said Husband, as you may see in the 75, 76, 77, and 78 pages of my Defense of
Amicia, printed in the year 1673.

16. He says ( page 334.) that Sir John Mainwaring of Over-Peover died about
the very end of Edw. 4. Reign; but the said King Edward died in the Twenty
third year of his Reign, and the said Sir John Mainwaring was certainly dead on
the 14 day of April, in the Twentieth year of the said Kings Reign, as appears
by a Precept to the Escheator of Cheshire, bearing the said date.

17. He omits in the 335 page, Agnes the Daughter of John Mainwaring of Peover,
Esquire and Wife of Sir Robert Nedham Knight; and this, although he had been
informed of a twofold undoubted proof thereof, as you may see in the 79 and 80
pages of my Defense of Amicia, before mentioned.

18. He positively says ( page 335) that Katherine the Daughter of Sir John
Mainwaring, was married to William, Son of Humphrey Newton of Pownall, 13 H. 8.
1521. But the Deeds concerning those Lands which she was to have in Jointure
(at which time she was certainly unmarried) were dated the first and second of
March, in 13 H. 8. which was in the year 1521. according to the account of the
Church of England, but in the year 1522. according to the Julian account. Now
the Dominical Letter being that year E. and the Golden Number 3. the second of
March would be Shrove-Sunday, and Easter Day on the twentieth of April; and
Lent being a time not usual for Marriage, and especially in the time of King
Henry the Eighth, in all probability the Marriage was not till after Easter;
and if so, it was not until the year 1522. However there is no certainty of
what Sir Peter there says.

19. He also (in the said 335 page) tells us, how Sir John Mainwaring was
Sheriff of Flintshire. 6 H. 8. 1514. but takes no notice of his being Sheriff
there in the 23 and 24 years of King Hen. 7. and 1 Hen. 8. and 2 Hen. 8. and
probably ever from then till the end of 6 Hen. 8.

20. He says ( page 335.) that Sir John Mainwaring died 8 H. 8. 1515. Whereas
no part of the eighth year of King Hen. 8. was in any part of the year 1515.
neither did the said Sir John die in the eighth year of the said King.

21. He says ( page 335.) that Sir Randle Mainwaring, after the death of his
first Wife, married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir Ralph Leicester of Toft, 6
Edw. 6. 1551. but he cannot prove that they were married until the year 1552.

22. He says ( page 336.) that Philip Mainwaring of Over-Peover, Esquire fifth Son
of Sir John Mainwaring, and Brother and next Heir-male to Sir Randle, married
Anne, Daughter of Sir Raufe Leicester of Toft; and tells us from his Monument
the time of the said Philip's death. But though the rest of them died young,
yet Philip was born the seventh, and not the fifth Son of the said Sir John, as
appears by the Monument of the said Sir John, which is in the same Chapel that
the Monument of the said Philip is in.

23. He says (in the same page) that the Herald in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, made for the Coat of the said Sir Randle the elder, Barry of twelve
pieces, Argent and Gules. But the Coat which the said Sir Randle did then
usually bear, was, Argent six Barulets Gules, which the said Sir Randle did
give, because the most ancient of the Deeds of the Mainwarings were sealed with
six Barulets; but the Mainwarings since then have again given two Bars only,
according to what they had done of a long time before, the two Bars having been
also used to Deeds without date: Also in the 330 page, you may read, that Sir
Peter knew the ancient Coat to be six Barulets, and not to be Barry of twelve
pieces Argent and Gules.

24. He also says (in that same page) that Sir Randle Mainwaring the elder,
built the Hall of Over-Peover a new, 1586. the Fabric being now of Brick; but
one part of the said House was built 1585. and another part was built 1586.

25. He says ( page 336.) that Sir Philip Mainwaring, youngest Son of Sir
Randle Mainwaring the elder, of Peover, Knight, was Secretary of Ireland to the
Earl of Strafford, 1638. Whereas the said Sir Philip was his Majesty's
Secretary of State there.

26. He says ( page 336.) that Sir Philip Mainwaring died, 20 die Augusti,
1661. at London; But he died at Westminster, at Sir Philip Warwick's House,
which is in or near to St. James's Park.

27. He also says (in the same page) that Anne, third Daughter of Sir Randle
Mainwairing, of Peover, the younger, (which Anne was Cousin-Germain to the said
Sir Peter) married Robert Brierwood of Chester, Counselor at Law, after, Sir
Robert Brierwood, Knighted 1643. and Judge of three Shires in Wales: But he
takes no notice that he was made Sergeant at Law 1640. nor that he was made one
of the Judges of the Kings Bench 1643. Indeed amongst the Recorders of Chester,
(page 187.) he tells us, that the said Sir Robert was made Judge of the
Common Pleas, and Knighted at Oxford 1643. But the said Sir Robert was never
any Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, but the King did constitute him, unum
Justiciariorum ad placita coram Rege, in the year 1643. that is, he then made
him one of the Judges of the King's Bench, or Upper Bench: But it seems Sir
Peter did not know the meaning of the aforesaid words. He also (in the 334
page) says, That Sir John Nedham, who married Margaret, the Daughter of Randle
Mainwaring, was Justiciarius de Banco, and Judge of Chester, 1 Edw. 4. that is,
he was then one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, and Judge of
Chester; for he was Justiciarius de Banco, in the year 1457. 35 Hen. 6. and he
was Judge of Chester 1 Edw. 4. But as Sir Peter did mistake Justiciarius ad
placita coram Rege, to be a Judge of the Common Pleas; so I suppose he did
there erroneously take Justiciarius de Banco to be a Judge of the King's Bench,
or else I believe he would have told us, that the said John Needham was
afterward made a Judge of the King's Bench; for he had a Patent to be one of
the Judges of that Court 1472. 11 Edw. 4. as you may see in the Chronica
Series, at the end of Mr. Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, printed in the year
1666.

28. He says ( page 336.) That Philip Mainwaring Esquire Son and Heir of Sir Randle
the younger, married Ellen, Daughter of Edward Mynshul of Stoke, Esquire 20 Jac.
1622. But the said Philip and Ellen were married 1617. and their eldest Son
Randle was born the 25 of July, 1619. and their second Son Philip was born the
25 of May, 1621.

29. He says ( page 337.) that Mrs. Ellen Mainwaring built a stately Stable and
Dove-house at Peover, in the year 1654. But the said Stable was built in the
year 1653. and finished within 1654. and the said Dove-house was not built till
the year 1656.

29. He says ( page 336.) That Margaret Daughter of Sir Randle Mainwairing the
younger, and Wife of Henry Birkenhead, died at Chester 25 July 1661. but she
died on Saturday the 20 of July, 1661. and was buried at Backford on Tuesday
the 23 day of the said month.

I also think good (having this opportunity) to remind the Reader, how in the
63 page of my Answer to Sir Peter's two Books, I did declare, That since it did
appear, that he was resolved to have the last word, although he had nothing new
to say, that if what he did after that time write, did prove no more to the
purpose, than what he had said in his said two Books, that I would not appear
in Print against him any more, but would choose to vindicate my Grandmother and
my self by word of mouth, whenever I should have an opportunity so to do. And
for this reason, when Sir Peter did, within a few days after, print his
Advertisement to the Reader, because it did contain little, but a mistake of
his, of a Record concerning Lhewellin Prince of North Wales, I did thereupon
forbear to publish that Answer which I did write to the same. Since that time,
Sir Peter has put out at once no less than three Books concerning the same
Subject, viz. His Second Reply, his Peroratio ad Lectorem, and a Third, which
he calls, The Case of Amicia truly stated; which certainly was a great deal of
lost labor, if his former Books had made the Case so clear, as he all along
has pretended they did.

In all those Books which Sir Peter has written upon this occasion, the same
things are said over and over again, so very often, as I believe the like will
not be found elsewhere; so that it would be pleasant, if some person, who has
little else to do, would take an account how many times he has repeated the
same things. Since he did declare in his first Reply, that he had taken his
leave for ever of this Controversy; he has printed no less than seven several
things, and four of them since I did appear publicly against him; and in the
end of his Peroratio ad Lectorem, he says he has done, if I have done, which
is as much as to say, That so long as I print any thing concerning Amicia, he
will never have done: For this cause, though I intend speedily to write an
Answer to that part of the Record, which is mentioned in the 76 page, and the
first part of the 77 page in his said Peroratio, yet I do not design it at
present for the public Press; however, I shall willingly show both it, and my
Answer to his Advertisement to the Reader, to all knowing persons, who shall
come to me, and desire to see the same; and I do not doubt but to give them
full satisfaction of Sir Peter's mistakes, concerning both those Records, and
that they do not prove those things which he does conceit they do.

As for that Letter of mine, which Sir Peter does speak of in the 63, 80, 82,
and 84 pages in his Peroratio ad Lectorem, it is possible I might write to a
Kinsman of his and mine, to acquaint him how Mr. Dugdale had delivered his
Opinion in Print on my side; as also what I had received from a very good hand,
concerning several of our Judges; but I know nothing at all of my Letter being
left with Mr. Throp, the Stationer in Chester, to be divulged and made known to
every man in Town. And I am sure I did not write, that Mr. Dugdale had moved
the Judges in the case; for Mr. Dugdale was not in London when that Meeting
was, neither did he or I know of it, till that Meeting was past, and it was
occasioned by Sir Peter's Appeal to them: But though he once thought the Judges
of this Land fit persons to determine this Controversy, yet he now says in the
81 page in his Peroratio ad Lectorem, That this Question has nothing of any
Law in the case, and therefore unfit to be put to our Reverend Judges for their
Opinions, unless all the Records and Histories touching the same, together with
the Reasons alleged on both sides, were produced before them: It is more
proper for them to judge only upon the point of Law. Now how they can judge
upon the point of Law, if there be nothing of any Law in the case, may be
perhaps very difficult for any but Sir Peter to tell.

He also in the 66 and 67 pages of his said Book, says, That Mr. Dugdale, some
years ago, did draw up my Pedigree, wherein he put Amicia without the
distinction of a Bastard, and is therefore the more concerned to stickle for
me, in this contest: But though he deal not well with me, in charging me
unjustly with many things in his former, and also in these his last Books,
(which those that are Learned will easily discover) yet Mr. Dugdale is a person
of that knowledge and integrity, that I believe he cannot persuade any one man,
that Mr. Dugdale does stickle for me herein upon that account. And Sir Peter
himself very well knows, that long before that Pedigree of mine was drawn, Mr.
Dugdale was of the same judgment concerning Amicia, of which he is now.

I do also expect, that Sir Peter will write several Books against what I have
here published, about his Mistakes concerning my Family; which if he do, I
shall not go about publicly to answer any of them, because I know I should
then undertake a work which would never have an end: But if any one will come
to me, I will show proof of all the Uncertainties, Omissions, and Mistakes,
which I have charged Sir Peter withal, and they are not any of them to be
imputed to the Printers negligence; for Sir Peter rectifies some Omissions and
Errors in his Historical Antiquities, at the end of his Answer to my Defense of
Amicia, and tells the Reader, That those Amendments will set him straight,
together with the Correction of the Errata's of Printing, committed by the
great negligence of the Printer, which are now mentioned and rectified by a
distinct page, at the end of the said Book. And there are none of those which I
charge him with, mentioned in either of the said places, except that about the
Chapel at Peover, which he said Margery, the Wife of Randle Mainwaring, did
erect; and that about Agnes Mainwaring, Wife of Sir Robert Nedham; both which
he did not rectify, until I told him of those Errors, in the latter end of the
first Book, which I did write.

Baddeley, August 4. 1676. T. M.

FINIS.

