A Collection of some Attempts made to the North-East, and North-West, For the
finding a Passage to Iapan, China, etc.
As also somewhat relating to the satisfaction of all Inquirers into Captain
John Wood's present Voyage in search of a Passage by the North Pole, etc.
By JOSEPH MOXON, Hydrographer to the King's most Excellent Majesty.
I Formerly set forth a small Pamphlet entitled, A brief Discourse of a
Passage by the North Pole to Japan, China, etc. with a small Map of the
Countries about the Pole: Which Pamphlet of mine, when it came to the sight of
that worthy and ingenious Commander, my good friend, Capt. John Wood, had the
luck to be so acceptable to him, that upon the Consideration of my Arguments,
he resolved to use his interest with the King, to set him forth in a Ship upon
this Discovery: And now he is, Ihope, happily upon it, if by this time he has
not found it. But that Draft being adjudged by some Gentlemen, of my
acquaintance, too small for their more nice inquiries into the Attempts that
have formerly been made to find a Passage both by the North-East, and also by
the North-West, they solicited me to set forth one so large as conveniently I
could upon a Royal sheet of Paper, with some brief Notes and Observations upon
the proceedings of such English Commanders that have attempted to find a
Passage either way: and also because they knew I used to keep frequent
Conferences and Consultations with Capt. Wood, to describe the Track of his
intended Voyage: To gratify whom, and to satisfy others that daily enquire of
me concerning his Voyage, I have herein complied with their requests, and set
forth this Draft, and the Relations of former Voyages to the North-East and
North-west, with two Passages taken out of Dutch Journals relating to a farther
confirmation of a Passage, and also the Track he intended to sail before he set
forth.

The First therefore we find recorded in Hackluit, fol. 265. was Sir Hugh
Willoughby to the North-East, who set forth from Deptford, May 10. 1553. with
three Ships, viz. the Bona Esperanza, the Edward Bonadventure, and the Bona
Confidentia, and sailed as far as Sir Hugh Willoughby's Land in the Latitude of
72; from whence he returned Southward into Lapland, where in the Haven of
Arzina he intended to winter; but he and all his company perished there with
extremity of cold.

The Second was Capt. Stephen Borough, in a Pinace called the Searchthrift, to
the North-East, who set forth from Radclif, April 23. 1556, and sailed almost
to Novae Zembla, where finding bad wind and weather, and the Winter drawing on,
he returned home.

The Third was Sir Martin Frobrisher to the North-west, who set forth from
Blackwall with two small Barques of 25 Tuns apiece, and a Pinace of 10 Tuns,
June 15. 1577, and sailed 60 leagues up Frobrisher-Straits, where he lost his
Boat and five of his men by the Salvages, which were never heard of since; but
the abundance of Ice and extremity of Cold forced him to return home.

The Fourth was Sir Martin Frobrisher's second Voyage to the North-West, who
set forth from Blackwall, May 26. 1577. with three Ships, viz. the Aid, the
Michael, and the Gabriel, and sailed into Iackman's Sound in Frobrisher's
Straits, laded their Ships with supposed Gold-Oar, and so returned home again.

The Fifth was Sir Martin Frobrisher's third Voyage to the North-West, who set
forth from Harwich, May 31. 1578, with fifteen Ships, and sailed to Liecester's
Point in Frobrisher's Straits: Here they intended to inhabit with 120 men, and
to leave them three Ships for their use; yet they did not, but only laded
their Ships as before with supposed Oar, and so returned home to England again.

The Sixth was Capt. Arthur Pet, and Capt. Charles Iackman to the North-East,
who set forth from Harwich with two Barques, viz. the George, and the William,
May 30. 1580, and sailed about five or six leagues beyond the Weygats; but by
extremity of cold and frost about the 25th of July they were forced to return.
The 22 of August in their return, being off Colgoyeve, the George, of which
Capt. Pet was Commander, lost the sight of the William, in which Capt. Iackman
was Commander, who never returned, but doubtless there perished.

The Seventh was Capt. John Davis to the North-West, who set forth from
Dartmouth with two Barques, viz. the Sunshine of 50 Tuns, and the Moonshine of
35 Tuns, June 7. 1585, and sailed into Davis Strait, and then returned home.

The Eighth was Capt. John Davis's second Voyage to the North-west, who set
forth from Dartmouth with four Ships, viz. the Mermaid 100 Tuns, the Sunshine
60 Tuns, the Moonshine 35 Tuns, and the North-star 10 Tuns, May 7. 1578, and
sailed as far as the Latitude of 66. 17. Long. from London 70 degrees.

The Ninth was Capt. John Davis's third Voyage to the North-West, who set forth
from Dartmouth with three Ships, viz. the Elizabeth, the Sunshine, and a
Clinker called the Hellen of London, May 19. 1587, and sailed into the Latitude
of 73 degrees. on the West Side of Groynland, which he named London-Coast, and then
returned home.

The Tenth was Capt. George Waymouth to the North-West, who set forth with two
Flyboats, one of 70 Tuns, the other of 60 Tuns, Victualled for 18 months by the
Muscovia and Turkey Companies, May 2. 1602, and sailed into the Latitude of 63
d. 55 m. toward London-Coast, where his men began to mutiny, and so he
returned home.

The Eleventh was Capt. John Knight to the North-West, at the cost and charge
of the Muscovia Company and the East India Merchants, who set forth from
Gravesend, April 18. 1606, and sailed no farther than the Latitude of 56 degrees.
48 min. for there a violent storm took him, so as his Ship bulged, and he going
on shore to endeavor to mend his Ship, was never heard of more; but with much
ado the Ship returned home.

The Twelfth was Capt. Henry Hudson to the North-West, who set forth of the
River of Thames, April 22. 1610, and sailed into Hudson's Bay, (which in this
Draft is called James his Bay) but having spent too much time in search of the
Passage here, so as the Winter came upon him, he was forced to winter here: And
as he was about his return home, some of his men conspired against him and
eight more of the Ships company, and A POLAR DRAFT
Of all the Discovered Lands about the North Pole* Wherein is noted the
Discovery of such Englishmen that have endeavored to find a Passage to Japan*
China etc. by ye North East And North West.

As also a Track of the present A^tended Voyage of that Noble minded Commander
Capt. John Wood upon the Discovery aforesaid.

By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

turned them into a Shalop to shift for themselves: but they were never heard
of since; yet the Ship and some of the other men that remained in her, after a
miserable Voyage for want of Provision, got safe home into England.

The Thirteenth was Sir Thomas Button to the North-West, who set forth with two
Ships, the Resolution, and the Discovery, Victualled for 18 months, about the
beginning of May 1612, and sailed into Button's Bay, where he wintered in a
small River called Port Nelson, in Lat. 57. 10. But the next year he continued
his search of a Passage in the same Bay, and Coasted to and fro till he came
into the Latitude of 62 degrees. 57 min. and then the year being spent, he returned
home.

The Fourteenth was Capt. Gibbons to the North-West, who set forth with a Ship
called the Discovery, in the year 1614; but sailed no farther than the mouth of
Hudson's Straits, where he was frozen in for 20 weeks in Lat. 57, in a little
Bay which his men called Gibbons his Hole; and the season being thus spent, he
was forced to return.

The Fifteenth was Capt. Bilot to the North-West, in the Discovery, Burden 55
Tuns, in the year 1615; who sailed as far as Cape Comfort in the Lat. of 65
degrees. 25. min. being to the Northwards of Button's Bay, and so returned home.

The Sixteenth was Mr. Will. Baffin to the North-West, set forth at the charge
of Sir Dudley Diggs, Sir Tho. Smith, Mr. John Wolstenholme Esquire and Alderman
Jones, in the Discovery, 1616; he sailed round that great Bay called Baffin's
Bay, into the Latitude of 79 degrees. and finding no Passage, returned home.

The Seventeenth and Eighteenth were Capt. Luke Fox, and Capt. Thomas James,
who set forth 1631, who searched round Hudson's Bay, and Button's Bay: But
their Voyages being the last that have been made to the North-West upon a
Discovery, I have with prick^lines, traced down in the Draft it self, therefore
I refer you to it.

Capt. James was forced to winter in James his Bay, where he suffered great
hardships, and the loss of some of his men by extremities of cold and frosts;
but the next year returned with his Ship home.

Here you may perceive, that all the Attempts made to the North-West, were made
in several Bays; and indeed the whole Sea it self, where the Passage was
expected to be found, is but one great Bay, which receives great quantities of
Ice out of many fresh water Rivers that empty themselves into it, and so this
Sea or great Bay delivers it into Hudson's Straits, which makes that so
unpassable. And the attempted Passage by the North-East is found but a great
fresh water Bay, which also receives the Ice of many fresh water Rivers into
it, and so makes that unpassable: as appears by the Copy of that Letter sent
from Muscovy to Amsterdam, and from Amsterdam to Mr. Oldenburgh, Secretary to
the Royal Society, which he published in Transact. 101* which I also set forth
in my Brief Discourse of the Passage by the North Pole to Japan, China, etc. to
either of which I refer you.

Besides these performed by English men, there have been other attempts made
for the finding of a Passage to Iapan, China, etc. both by the Danes, and
Dutch; but the Dutch have made the fairest Progress therein: For one William
Barents being satisfied that no Passage was between Nova Zembla and the Main,
steered his Course to the Northwards of Nova Zembla, and sailed into the
Tartarian Sea about 2 or 300 leagues beyond Nova Zembla; and had doubtless
sailed through, had not the Dutch East India Company (against whose interest it
was) corrupted him, and taken him off the prosecution.

They have also made such other Navigations from the East Indies, as may in my
opinion satisfy any considerate understanding person of a Passage; and more
especially the Navigations of two Ships, whose Journals have come to my hands.
One was a Ship sent from Batavia, to discover beyond Iapan to the Northwards,
because of reports they had in Batavia of Gold and Silver-mines to be in Yedso,
or some Countries or Islands about it; which ship having sailed somewhat beyond
Yedso, in their Journal they write, that to their great amazement they found
themselves in the Tartarian Ocean. This Sentence I did perceive, by the scope
of the whole Journal, was writ without design, nay, not so much as reflection
upon a Passage; and therefore I think it may be accepted for truth.

The other Navigation was of a Ship sent from Batavia, and intended for Iapan
to trade; but by contrary winds was driven to Corea, a little to the Westward
of Iapan, where a violent storm arising, the Ship was broken to pieces, and of
64 men in her, only 36 escaped shipwreck, and were made Slaves of by the
Coreans: but after 13 years slavery there was no more than 16 of these men left
alive, and 8 of them escaped in a Boat, and got to Iapan among their
Countrymen. Hendrick Hamel of Gorcum was the Book-keeper to the Ship, and kept
the Journal of their Voyage, and Passages that happened to them in their
Slavery; which Journal and Passages was afterward printed at Rotterdam,
together with A brief Description of the Kingdom of Corea; with its Laws,
Maxims, and Policies both Civil and Military: And in this Description of Corea,
he relates as follows: That on the West- side trends the Coast of China, or the
Bay of Nankin; and that its North- end is fastened to China with a mighty huge
Mountain, which makes Corea no Island but a Peninsula, because that on the
North-East- side is nothing but an open Sea, in which is found every year many
Whales with French and Holland Harping-irons in their bodies. There is also in
the months of December, January, February, and March, great quantities of
Herrings caught, which in the two first months are very like the Hollands
Herrings, and in the two other months are much less, like the Pan-herrings in
Holland; so that of necessity it must follow, that between Japan and Corea
there must be a Passage to the Wey-gats. [Note, this Writer should have said, A
Passage to Nova Zembla, or Greenland: For a Passage through the Weygats is
since contradicted by the Discovery made by the express order of the Czar of
Muscovy, as appears by the Letter aforesaid sent to Mr. Oldenburg.] And we
have, says he, often enquired of the Coreans that inhabited on the North-East-
side of Corea, if there were any more Land on the North-East- side: but they
answered us, No, there is nothing but an open Sea.

London: Printed for Joseph Moxon, and sold at his shop on Ludgate Hill at the
sign of Atlas; and by James Moxon, in the Strand near Charing Cross, right
against King Henry the Eighths-Inne. 1676.


