Regulae Trium Ordinum LITERARUM TYPOGRAPHICARUM: OR THE RULES OF THE THREE
ORDERS OF Print Letters: viz. The ROMAN CAPITALS and Small. The ITALICK
CAPITALS and Small. The ENGLISH CAPITALS and Small.


Showing how they are compounded of GEOMETRICK FIGVRES, and mostly made by Rule
and Compass.

Useful for Writing Masters, Painters, Carvers, Masons, and others that are
Lovers of Curiosity.

By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Moxon, on Ludgate Hill at the Sign of Atlas. 1676.

To the Worshipful Sir Christopher Wren, Knight, Surveyor of His Majesty's
Buildings.
SIR,
TO You as to a Lover of Rule and Proportion I humbly Dedicate these my
Observations upon Letters: If they prove Acceptable to you I have my whole
Wish, and shall be careless of the Sleightings or Censures of the Ignorant
Contemners of Order and Symmetry.

Sir, I am Your most Humble Servant. Joseph Moxon.

THE RULES OF THE THREE ORDERS OF Print Letters.
AMong the many curious Inventions of Humane Wit, the communicating Conceptions
by the Complication of Characters is worthily accounted the most Ingenious,
most Necessary, and most Admirable, that an High-flown Fancy in its greatest
Sublimity could have produced into the World.

But who those lucky persons were that first invented it, themselves and all
other Authentic Authors have left Succession in ignorance of; and consequently
their Memories have lost those due Celebrations that their Merits have justly
deserved.

Nor are we only ignorant of the Persons that first invented Letters, but of
the Time wherein they were first invented. And though smaller matters of great
Antiquity stand recorded for the Information of Posterity, yet no other
certainty have we of the Time, than that they were invented before any History
was writ.

All the light we have of its Original is among Fabulous Authors, who attribute
it to several persons, and some of them no less than Gods; but their Authority
being denied, their Say-so stands for no Proof.

I might amplify this Discourse by saying somewhat of the Hieroglyphics of
the Egyptians, and the several Characters of other Nations; but they are
largely handled by others, and are alien to my purpose: for my Intentions are
only to insist upon three sorts of Characters, which are commonly used in
Print among us, viz. the Roman, the Italick, and the English Letters.

Nor are the Originals of these three sorts of Letters certainly known, but
that we received the Roman Letters from the Romans, the Italick from the
Italians, and the English is that Character which is handed down to us from our
Forefathers in their Records and other Manuscripts.

How much Printing has improved the Regularity and Beauty of these Letters is
visible by comparing Printed with Written Letters; but especially the curious
Printing of Holland, which does indeed of all others merit the greatest
Applause, it being from the cutting of the Steel Punches to the pulling off at
the Press managed with greater rCuiosity than hitherto any Nation has
performed it. Neither is it strange it should be so: For, if I may be pardoned
for the Excursion, I will say, There is one general Cause why they must, and
several particular Reasons why they may, outdo all other Nations in this and
other Handicrafts which will yield them a Profit. The general Cause is the
Necessity of their Country, which forces them to deal by Wholesale in all
Manufactures. And this Cause draws in the particular Reason; for by this means
Manufactures are so improved, that most rare Artists flock thither as to a
Market, where they are likely to find Trading. And it must necessarily follow,
that where so many Curious Artists meet, each, for his Profit, or Credit, or
both, strives to outdo the other. And by this means Art must needs be more
improved there, than in those Countries where the Emulation of a Competitor is
no Spur to Perfection.

I finding therefore that the Holland Letters in general are in most esteem,
and particularly those that have been cut by the Hand of that Curious Artist
Christofel van Dijck, and some very few others, have elected them for a Pattern
in Romans and Italicks, and have given you those Proportions and Dimensions
they observed. Even as Vitruvius did by his Columns; for he finding, that among
the many sorts of Columns that were standing in his time, Five only were most
acceptable, viz. the Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and Composite,
surveyed their exact Dimensions, and called that Survey, The Rules of the Five
Orders of Arthitecture: which Rules are followed to this day; but had else
doubtless ere now been lost or at least corrupted.

The Roman Capitals have already been treated of by Albert Durer; but he meddled
neither with the Small Letters nor Italicks. Nor were these Proportions in mode
in his time; for he makes his Stem one tenth of the length, when as now the
Stem is made much fatter, for it is one sixth part of the length, which does
not only add a great Grace to the Letter, but renders it more easy to the
Eyes in Reading, and more durable either for Inscriptions or Records.

It is possible my Pains and Endeavors may lie under the Censure of Detracting
Momes, who neither know, or are capable to learn the Excellency of Rule and
Proportion; and account those Fantasticks that either prescribe or follow them:
For, say they, what needs all this ado about Letters, when every Painter or
Mason can make them well enough without these Directions? And if they are not
so exact Print Hand, yet they may very well be read, and are as significant as
if they were made by these Rules.

In answer I may say, that every Carpenter can build a great Fabric; but if he
have not consulted the Rules of Architecture, it is very likely his Building
may be preposterous, his several Offices unapt, and his whole Structure
deficient, ungraceful, and ridiculous. But since we all strive to make Columns
and other Ornaments in Architecture by Rules, because they should be strong,
beautiful, and graceful to the Eye, it is surely necessary that the Inscriptions
(which are commonly placed in the Architrave or some other eminent place)
should be likewise regular and beautiful, lest they disgrace both Builder and
Building too.

When the Stadhouse at Amsterdam was finishing, such was the Curiosity of the
Lords that were the Overseers of the Building, that they offered C. van Dijck
aforesaid 80 Pounds Sterling (as himself told me) only for drawing in Paper
the Names of the several Offices that were to be painted over the Doors, for
the Painter to paint by. Now had these Rules been published in that time, every
Painter might indeed have done them as well as van Dijck himself. For where
many Figures are made by the same Rules, every one shall be like every one,
although they are made by several Hands. So that I hope no Artists will grudge
either at the Rules or Price of the Book, since by it they may easily arrive to
the same Perfection of Letters, as he did who was worthily accounted the best.

But this I will say too, that though these Letters were doubtless first
invented and contrived to be made with Rule and Compass, (and now doubtless
somewhat debaucht from their original Invention) yet after an Artificer has
implanted these general Rules in his Memory, and used his Hand to the making of
these Letters, he may be able to perform this Work very well without running
over all these Prescriptions. Besides, the very Draughts of the Letters will
show him what parts of a Letter must be fat or lean, straight or circular.

Now before I begin with the particular Rules of each Letter, I think it fit to
explain the Meaning of some Terms that will be convenient to be used in this
Practice; and also to give you an account of the Method to be observed in the
Making of Letters. As,

1. Among Letters some are Capitals, some are Small. The Capitals are the Great
Letters, therefore called Capitals: as A, B, C, etc. are Capitals.

2. Small are those Letters that in long Discourses follow the Capitals: as a,
b, c, d, etc. are Small Letters.

3. Among the Small Letters some are Long, and some are Short.

4. The Long are the Ascendents and Descendents.

5. The Short are those that stand between the Head and Foot-line, such are a,
c, e, m, etc.

6. All the Capitals are Ascendents, so called because they stand higher than
the Head-line of the Short. And among the Small Letters some are Ascendents, as
b, d, h, i, k, l; these reach up to the Top-line.

7. Descendents are those that stand lower than the Foot-line: such as are g,
p, q, y; these reach down to the Bottom-line.

8. Long are those that stand as high as the Ascendents, and as low as the
Descendents; viz. reach up to the Top and down to the Bottom-line: such as are
J, Q, f, j, s.

9. The Length is the Distance between the Top and Bottom-lines: as the
Distance 0, 42 in Letter A is the Length.

10. The Head-line is the upper line that bounds the Short Letter: as Parallel
30 in Romans and Italicks, and Parallel 33 in the English, is the Head-line.

11. The Foot-line is the lower line that bounds the Letter: as Parallel 12 in
the Romans and Italicks, and Parallel 9 in the English, is the Foot-line.

12. The Top-line is the line that bounds the top of the Ascending Letters: as
Parallel 42 is the Top-line.

13. The Bottom-line is the line that bounds the bottom of the Descending
Letters: as Parallel 0 is the Bottom-line.

14. The Stem is the straight fat* stroke of the Letter: as in B the upright
stroke on the left hand is the Stem, and Capital I is all Stem, except the Base
and Topping.

15. Fat strokes. The Stem or Broad stroke in a Letter is called the Fat
stroke, as the Right Hand stroke in Letter A, and the great Arches in Letter B,
are Fat strokes.

16. Lean strokes are the narrow strokes in a Letter, as the Left Hand stroke
in a Letter A, and the Right Hand stroke in V, are Lean.

17. The Footing is the small Arches the Letter stands on, as the Arches upon
the feet of Letter A is the Footing of that Letter.

18. The Topping is the small Arch above the Letter, as the Arches in the Tops
of the Letter V are the Toppings of that Letter.

19. The Divisions that are imagined to be made between the Top and Bottom-line
are called Parallels, and numbered upwards with 1, 2, 3, to 42 in Letter A at
the Left Hand, and so of all other Letters.

20. The Divisions that are imagined to be made between the Left Hand and the
Right are called Erects, and numbered from the Left Hand to the Right with 1,
2, 3, 4, etc.

21. These Divisions are all along throughout this Book called Parts: as when I
say, Set off 1, 2, 3, etc. Parts, I mean set off so many of these Divisions or
Parts, either in the imagined Parallel or Erect.

22. The Distance between one word and another is called a Space.

23. A Space is 7 parts of the whole Length of the Letter: as the whole Length
is 42, so a Space is 7 of 42, which is the sixth part of the Length.

Some Rules to be followed in the Making of Letters.
1. The Length is divided into 42 Equal parts; from the Bottom to the Foot is
12 of them in Romans and Italicks, and in English 9, as aforesaid.

2. From the Bottom to the Head-line, as in Letter a, is 30 of them, and in
Letter a 33. From the Bottom to the Top is all the 42. So that a Short Letter
of Romans and Italicks stands between Parallel 12 and Parallel 30, and in
English between Parallel 9 and 33.

3. The Stem and other Fat strokes of Capitals Roman is 5 parts.

4. The Stem and other Fat strokes of Capitals Italick is 4 parts.

5. The Stem and other Fat strokes of Small Roman is 3 parts.

6. The Stem and other Fat strokes of Small Italick is 3 parts.

7. Of English the Short stand between 9 parts at the Bottom, and 9 parts from
the Top, as aforesaid.

8. The Stem of English Capitals is 6 parts.

9. The Stem of English Small Letters is 4 parts.

10. If these Letters are made with a Pen, this general Rule is to be observed,
That in making them you begin where the Letter may be quickest made. As for
Example, If you would make M, you must begin at the bottom on the Left Hand;
for then without moving the Pen off the Paper you make the whole Letter at
once, all but the Footings and Toppings, and then you will find the course and
progress of the Pen will make those strokes Lean which should be Lean, and
those strokes Fat which should be Fat. For as the Pen goes upwards, its Nib
strikes a Lean stroke; but as it comes down its Nib opens wider, and strikes a
Fatter stroke. So that whatever Tool a Letter is made with, you are to consider
it as made with a Pen, and to allow it its Fat and Lean strokes accordingly.
But in this the Copies of the Letters themselves will more fully instruct you.

11. You must take special care that you allow the Letter its full length: for
because none of the Capitals but the Consonant J and Q are Descendents, you may
be apt to think that in some cases, where the Inscription is all Capitals, you
may drive up the top of the under-line above the bottom of the line above it;
yet if a Consonant J or Q should come in the matter, you must be forced to
shorten it, and so lose its grace. But besides, the whole Inscription will not
show so fair and beautiful, as if this convenient Space be allowed it. And if
any Ascending Letters should happen under the J or Q, there would be no room
for their Heads.

12. When I direct you to set off 1, 2, or 3 parts, etc. you are to understand
it for 1, 2, or 3 parts of the Erect line or the Parallel line.

Some Considerations to be had in the ordering of Inscriptions, etc.
If your Inscription be very short, and you have more room to draw it in than
you need, you were best make your Letters in Roman or Italick Capitals, because
you may allow to leave two Spaces between every Letter in the same word. But
then you must remember to leave four Spaces at least between each word; for
else there will not be distinction enough between Word and Word proportionable
to the distinction between Letter and Letter. And you may allow 12 parts void
between Line and Line, besides the 12 parts that are in all Capital Letters
(except Q and J) void between the Foot and Bottom-lines.

But if you have not too much room, you may leave but one Space between every
Letter in a Word, and two or three Spaces between every Word.

If your Inscription must be Capitals, and you are pinched for room, you may
(but it is not so graceful) leave no Space between Letter and Letter; and then
one or two Spaces between a Word will serve. This by Printers is called Getting
in, or Setting close. But by no means you must put Spaces between Small Letters
in the same Word; but you must put one or sometimes two between each Word.

If your Inscription belong, you were best use the Small Roman Letters, because
they are much thinner, and are indeed more easily read, and more familiar than
Capitals. But you must be sure to use a Capital Letter in the beginning, and in
all Proper Names either of Persons or Places, and many times of things if they
bear emphasis.

Remember also, if your Inscription be Roman, and the Names of Persons or
Places fall in, you must make the Names Italick Letters, beginning them with a
Capital Letter, and sometimes as you would dignifie a Person or Place make the
whole Name in Capital Letters.

If your Inscription be Italick, the Proper Names must be Roman.

If your Inscription be Latin, the small Roman is the proper Letter for it;
but the Proper Names must be Italick, and sometimes Italick Capitals, as
aforesaid; unless it be the Name of some Vulgar place or thing, for which there
is no Latin Name, then that Name or Word is to be in English Letters; but the
first Letter a Capital, or (for the Reason aforesaid) all English Capitals.

Be sure to forecast, that in a large Inscription of a continued series of
Discourse, each Line be exactly of the same length; unless it be where a Break
is proper to be made, for then you may end either in the middle or any where
else of the Line. Or unless your Inscription be in Verse, for then also you may
end at any length. Yet take notice, that it is not graceful to end a Break with
a short word only in a line, because it seems too like a White-line. But to
remedy that inconvenience you may allow more Spaces between the words in the
former two or three Lines, that so you may have a Word or two the more in your
Break-line.

When you begin new matter after a Break, you must indent your Line four Spaces
at least, and make the first Letter a Capital.

When you draw a Title over an Inscription, you must consider the words of
emphasis, and make those words to vary from the Letter your Discourse is in, as
either Roman, Italick, or English, according as the words may properly require.
But of this and several other Observations of this nature I have written more
at large in a Book I intend to publish of the whole Art of Printing. Yet for
your present Instructions I shall give you some Examples of Monuments, etc.

Therefore it will be very necessary you design and draw your Inscription first
on Paper, and then either pounce or draw it through by Redding or Blacking the
Backside of your Paper, and drawing pretty hard upon the Out-strokes of your
Letter with the point of a Needle, made blunt, smooth, and round, for then the
Red or Black on the backside of the Paper will deliver it self upon the Wood or
Stone that it is to be engraven or painted on. But if the Stone be so smooth
and hard that it will not receive and take off the Red or Black, you may rub
your Stone over with a little Bees Wax gently, and it will take off the
Tracings very exactly.

JOANNES SELDENUS Heic juxta situs. Natus est 16 December. MDLXXXIV.
Salvintoniae, Qui viculus est Terring Occidentalis in Sussexiae Maritimis,
Parentibus honestis, JOANNE SELDENO THOMAE Filio e quinis secundo, Anno MDXLI.
nato; and MARGARETA Filia and Haerede unica THOMAE BAKERI de Rushington, ex
Equestri BAKERORUM in Cantio Familia, Filius e cunis superstitum unicus,
Aetatis fere LXX. Annorum. Denatus est ultimo die November. Anno Salutis
reparatae MDCLIV. Per quam expectat RESURRECTIONEM Felicem.

ROWLANDUS JEWKES Executorum Testamenti MAGNI SELDENI e quatuor unus, Spe certa
Resurrectionis futurae per CHRISTUM ad gloriam, Exuvias Carnis suae prope
Cineres ejusdem SELDENI Heic juxta reponi, vivens, curavit, excessit,

Anno Aerae Christianae MDCLXV.

Anno Aetatis suae LXXVII.

Cum Christus, qui est vita nostra, apparebit, nos etiam apparebimus cum eo in
^^^ia. IF these following Precepts do not exactly agree with all present
Practice, yet will I not determine whether Practice ought or no to give way and
comply with these Precepts and Paterns; since it is plain that these Letters
were originally contrived under these or some such Rules. And though some of
these Letters may with greater study be reduced to shorter Rules, yet because
my leisure will not permit me to do it, I Will leave it to those that have more
Time and better Invention, and deliver these according to my Observations on
them.

A
DIvide the whole Erect Depth 0 42 into 42 equal parts, and set off the same
Divisions in the bottom-line; then in the Parallel of 12, viz. the Foot-line,
set off 16 from the left hand toward the right, and from thence erect a
Perpendicular unto the Top-line. From either side this Perpendicular set off 10
in the Foot-line: then in this Perpendicular at Parallel 38 make a Prick, (as
at Fig. 1.) then by the side of a Ruler laid to this Prick, and the two Tens
set off in the Foot-line on either side the Perpendicular draw two straight
lines for the insides of A, but continue the right hand straight line to
Parallel 39, (as at Fig. 2.) Then set your Com^^^^es to 1, and set off that
distance from the left hand the Perpendicular in Parallel 39, and set off the
same distance in the Foot-line from the left hand inside stroke of A toward
the left hand, and draw a straight line through these two points to be the
outer bounds of the breadth of the left hand stroke of A. The breadth of the
right hand stroke is 5 parts. Therefore in the Point where the two inside
strokes of A meet, (as at Fig. 1.) place one foot of your Compasses (being set
to 5) and with the other describe the occult Arch 3, 4. Then place one foot of
your Compasses at the right hand stroke of the inside of A in the Foot-line,
and with the other describe the occult Arch 5, 6. Then lay your Ruler to the
outer Unequal points of these two occult Arches, and by the side of it draw a
straight line from the Top-line to the Foot-line, for the outward bounds of the
right hand stroke of A. Set off 1 in the Top-line from the outer bounds of this
right hand stroke toward the left, (as at 3) and draw a straight line in the
Top-line to that point; set your Compasses to 3, and placing one foot in this
point, with the other describe an occult Arch toward the left hand; then place
one foot of your Compasses in the Point where the inside of the right hand
stroke meets with the outside of the left hand stroke of A, and with the other
foot describe another occult Arch toward the right hand, to cut the former
occult Arch, and the Point where they cut each other shall be the Center, (as
at Fig. 7.) whereon you may describe the hollow Arch in the head of A. Draw two
straight lines in Parallel 24 and 24 between the two insides of A. Lastly, from
both sides each side of A set off 5 in the foot-line or Parallel of 12, then
set your Compasses to 15, and in the Erects of those Fives pla^^ one foot of
your Compasses, and with the other d^^^ribe four Arches to the out and insides
of A for the footing.

Here you may see the Fat stroke is 5 parts broad, and the Lean strokes are 1
part broad, and each footing is 5 parts in the Foot-line from its respective
side.

The same rule and order is to be observed in all the Roman Capitals.

a
Draw a Parallel at 12 for the Foot, and at 30 for the Head. Erect 0 is the
bounds of the Head and belly of a. Set your Compasses to two Stems, viz. 7
parts; and placing one foot of them in Parallel 23, and Erect 6 (as at Fig. 1.)
describe with the other foot the Arch for the outmost bounds of the Head of a.
Then set your Compasses to one Stem, viz. 3, and placing one foot in Parallel
26, and Erect 5, (as at Fig 2.) describe with the other foot the inner Arch of
the head of a. Remove one foot of your Compasses to Parallel 15, erect 3 (as at
Fig. 3.) and with the other describe the Arch for the outer belly of a. Remove
one foot of your Compasses in the same Parallel to Erect 7, (as at Fig. 4.) and
with the other foot describe the Arch for the inner belly of a. Remove one foot
of your Compasses in the same Parallel to Erect* 12, (as at Fig. 5.) and with
the other describe a Semicircle for the outer bounds of the tail of a. Join
this Semicircle by a straight Erect line to the Arch which makes the inside the
head of a. Then set your Compasses to half the Stem, viz. 1, and placing one
foot in the same Parallel, viz. 15, Erect 13, (as at Fig. 6.) with the other
foot describe the Arch for the inside the Tail of a. Join this Semicircle by a
straight Erect line to the Arch, which makes the outside the Head of a, your
Compasses being set as before to 1, place one foot in Parallel 25, Erect 1, (as
at Fig. 7.) Describe the Arch for the Dot in the Head of a. Make a Prick in
Parallel 20, and in the Erect of the inside of the Stem, and from that Prick
draw a straight line to the Convexity of the outer belly of a. Work in the
inner belly to this straight line; join the lower part of the belly by a
straight line drawn to the inside the Stem in Parallel 15: so is a finished.
Here you may perceive, that the several Arches whereof this Letter is made,
have their Radius, Stems, and parts of a Stem: As the Radius of the first Arch
is 2 Stems, the Radius of the second, third, fourth, fifth Arches are 1 Stem,
the Radius of the sixth and seventh, is half a Stem.

B
Divide the whole Depth into 42, as before in A. The Topping and Footing is 5
Erects, and the Stem 5 more. Set your Compasses to 7, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 34 on the right hand side of the Stem, (as at Fig. 1.) describe with
the other the inner Arch of the upper belly of B. Remove one Foot of your
Compasses to Erect 15 in the same Parallel, (as at Fig. 2.) and with the other
describe an Arch for the outer bounds of the upper belly of B: Set your
Compasses to 7, and placing one Foot in Parallel 20, Erect 12, (as at Fig. 3.)
describe with the other Foot the Arch for the inner bounds of the lower belly
of B. Remove one Foot of your Compasses in the same Parallel to Erect 17, (as
at Fig. 4.) and with the other describe the outer Arch of the lower belly of B.
Set your Compasses to 15, and placing one Foot in Parallel 27, erect 0, with
the other describe the Arches for Topping and Footing. Join the Arches of the
Bellies Arches to the Stem at the Top, Middle, and Foot, by hand, (as you see
in the Projection) by strokes of half a part broad, but so as the lower belly
have nothing of the stroke fall in it, because it must be half a part bigger
than the upper belly.

b
The Beak projects 1 Stem on the left hand, viz. 3 parts, as do all other
Projecting Letters in the Small Roman. Therefore in Parallel 40 erect 0, make a
Prick for the Angle of Projecture. Then in Parallel 38 erect 3; make another
Prick for the left hand bounds of the Stem; between which 2 Pricks draw a
straight line. Make another Prick in Parallel 42. Erect 7 for the right hand
bounds of the Stem, and draw another straight line between the first Prick and
this last; so is the Beak made. Then in Parallel 12 Erect 0, set off 3 and 7,
and from Erect 3 at the under side of Projecture draw a straight line to 3 set
off in Parallel 12, and another straight line from Erect 7 at the upper side of
Projecture to Erect 7 in Parallel 14; so is the Stem made. Then set your
Compasses to 9, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 12, (as at Fig. 1.)
Describe with the other Foot the outer Arch of the Belly. Then set your
Compasses to 8, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21, erect 10, (as at Fig. 2.)
with the other Foot describe the inner Arch of the Belly. Set then your
Compasses to 4, and placing one Foot in Parallel 10 erect 7, (as at Fig. 3.)
with the other describe a small Arch under the Stem; so is b finished.

C
Set your Compasses to 15, and placing one Foot in Parallel 27 Erect 15, (as at
Fig. 1.) with the other describe a Circle: Cut off half a Stem, viz. 2, of this
Circle on the right hand with a Perpendicular line, which Perpendicular must
reach from the Top-line the breadth of a Stem below the Circle, and from the
Foot-line the breadth of a Stem above the Circle, viz. 5 parts. Remove your
Compasses 5 Erects further, viz. the breadth of the Stem in the same Parallel
to Erect 20, (as at Fig. 2.) and describe so much of a Circle as will be
comprehended between your left hand and the two Perpendiculars, which cut off a
part of the former Circle. To describe the great Arches of the Buttings set
your Compasses to 15, and placing one Foot in the Parallels of the extreme
inner points of the Buttings at 15 distance toward the left hand, (as at Fig.
3, 4.) with the other point describe the Arches of Buttings. Then set your
Compasses to half the breadth of a Stem, viz. 2, and one Foot placed
successively in the Top and Foot-lines at the Buttings of C, with the other
describe the small Arches at the Top and Foot of the outside of C; so is C
finished. Only you must take care to work in the Intersections of these
Circles by hand at the Top and Foot; so must you also the small Circles in the
Top and Foot.

c
Set your Compasses to 9, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 9, (as at
Fig. 1.) with the other Foot describe a Circle. Cut off a whole Stem, viz. 3 of
this Circle on the right hand with a Perpendicular line. Set off 3 from the
left side this Circle toward the right in the Parallel of 21. Then set your
Compasses to 8, and placing one Foot in Parallel 22, erect 11, (as at Fig. 2.)
Describe with the other Foot an Arch within the former Circle and the
Perpendicular; then set your Compasses to half the Stem, viz. 1, and placing
one Foot where the Perpendicular intersects the Circle in the Head, (as at Fig.
3.) Describe with the other Foot so much of a small Circle downwards, as will
be between Parallel 26 /2, and 28, to make the Dot. And the breakings of these
Circles you must by Hand work into the Head.

D
Topping and Footing is 5 Erects, the Stem five more, both made as so much of
Letter B. Set your Compasses to 15, and placing one Foot on the right hand line
of the Stem in Parallel 27, with the other describe a Semicircle toward your
right hand. Remove your Compasses the breadth of the Stem, viz. 5 toward the
right hand in the same Parallel, and describe another Arch toward the right
hand; work these Arches by hand up to the Stem, leaving the Lean strokes at the
Top and Bottom 1 part; so is D finished.

d
The Belly of d is made like c, all but the Dot in the head, which d has not.
The Projecture or Beak of the Stem is made like b, but the bottom of the Stem
differs; for d has a Tail which is as long as the Stem is broad, viz. 3, from
the right hand line of the Stem of d. This Tail is a straight line proceeding
from the bottom of the left hand line of the Stem, whose end is raised two
parts above the Foot-line. The line of the Tail that proceeds from the right
hand line of the Stem, is a straight line parallel to the Foot-line.

E
Topping and Footing is 5 Erects, the Stem 5 more; both made as Letter B. The
Top-stroke is from the right hand line of the Stem half the length of the Stem,
viz. 15; the middle stroke is of the length of the Stem, viz. 10. The
Bottom-stroke is 1/3, viz. 18 parts. The breadth of the Head and Foot-stroke is
thus made; set off the breadth of the Stem, viz. 5, from the end of each stroke
toward the left hand in the Parallel of each stroke, and in the Erect line of
these settings off set off 1 between the Topping and Footing, and draw a
straight line from the lower point of the Arch of Topping on the left hand the
Stem, and from the upper point of the Arch of Topping on the left hand the Stem
to the 1 set off as aforesaid. Then at the right hand ends of these lines set
off by occult Arches 5 in their respective Erects. And set off 5 in the Erects
of the Perpendicular ends of the Top and Foot-stroke, and placing one Foot of
your Compasses successively at these 5, with the other Foot describe occult
Arches to cut the former occult Arches, and the point where these occult Arches
cut each other (as in Fig. 1, 2.) shall be a Center, whereon you may describe
Arches for the Buttings of the Top and Bottom-stroke of E. For the thickness of
the middle stroke set off half a part upwards, and half a part downwards from
the middle Parallel at the right hand line of the Stem; and from thence draw
Parallel lines 5 parts long, then set off 5 upwards and 5 downwards from the
end of the middle stroke; from these two 5 and the ends of the Parallels of
thickness describe occult Arches of Circles to intersect each other, and the
Intersections (as Fig. 3, 4.) shall be the Centres whereon (the Compasses set
to 5) the Arches of Butting shall be drawn.

e
Set your Compasses to 9, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 9.
Describe with the other the outer Arch; then in the Parallel of 9 set off 3 for
the Fat stroke. Set your Compasses to 8, and place one Foot in this 3, and
pitch the other Foot where it will leight, in the Parallel of 21 toward the
right hand, (as at Fig. 2.) On this point describe the inner Arch of e; then in
the Parallel of 23 draw a line for the Eye, from the inside of e to the outside
on the right hand. But the Fatness of the Eye must be half a part at the right
hand side of e; therefore in 23 from the outward right hand Arch draw a line to
the point where the former line touches the inside of e. Then measure the
Fatness of the left hand Arch of e in the Parallel of 24, and set off that
Fatness from the right hand Arch of e inwards, and setting your Compasses to 8,
place one Foot in the measure of Fatness so set off, and pitch the other Foot
where it will fall in the Parallel of 21 toward the left hand; on this point
describe the inner Arch of the right side of e. The Angles of the Intersections
of these Arches make you must smoothen by hand.

F
Is made like E, only instead of the Foot-stroke here is only a Footing, made
as has been taught in A, B, D.

f
The Stem is 3, and runs on the left hand straight upwards to Parallel 36, and
on the right hand it runs straight upwards to Parallel 40. Set your Compasses
to 7, and placing one Foot in Parallel 35, Erect 10, (as at Fig. 1.) With the
other Foot describe an Arch, for the Top of f. The Top of f must be half a part
thick; therefore set your Compasses to 4, and placing one Foot in Parallel 37,
Erect 11, (as at Fig. 2.) With the other describe the under Arch of the Head of
f; then set your Compasses to 1, viz. the thickness of half a Stem, and placing
one Foot in Parallel 38, Erect 14, (as at Fig. 3.) With the other describe the
Arch for the Dot of f. The stroke is half a part thick, the upper line of it
lies in the Head-line, viz. Parallel 30. It projects on the left hand half a
Stem, viz. 1, and on the right hand a whole Stem, viz. 3. The Footing is made
by setting your Compasses to 9, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 0,
and in Parallel 21 Erect 10. With the other Foot describe the Arches of
Footing. The Breakings and Wants in the Arches you must work in by hand.

G
Is made like C till you come to the short Stem whose right hand line lies in
the Erect Butting, and its left hand line is made by setting off 5 to the left
hand. The Foot of G is wrought in by setting your Compasses to 18, and placing
one Foot in Parallel 15 in the Erect of Butting, with the other describe an
occult Arch toward your left hand upwards in G, then remove one point of your
Compasses in the same Parallel toward the right hand, where that Parallel cuts
the inner Circle of G, and with the other point describe an occult Arch to cut
the former, (as at Fig. 3.) and that point of Intersection shall be the Center
whereon you may describe an Arch to work in the inner Circle of the Foot of G.
To work in the outer Circle place one Foot of your Compasses again in the
Parallel of 15, in the Erect of Butting, and with the other describe an occult
Arch as before. Then remove one point of your Compasses in the same Parallel
toward the right hand, where that Parallel cuts the outer Circle of G, and
with the other describe an occult Arch to cut the former, (as at 4) and that
point of Intersection shall be the Center, whereon you may describe an Arch to
work in the outer Circle of the Foot of G. The Topping of the short Stem lies
in Parallel 22, 5 being set off from both sides the Stem, as has been taught
in B, D, etc.

g
Set your Compasses to twice the Stem, viz. 7 parts, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 23, Erect 8, (as at Fig. 1.) with the other describe a Circle for the
outer bounds of the Head. Remove your Compasses in the same Parallel to 3 on
the right hand, and 3 on the left hand this Center, (as at Fig. 2, 3.) and
describe the Arches for the inner bounds of the Head. Set your Compasses to 4,
and placing one Foot in Parallel 14, Erect 6, (as at Fig. 4.) describe the
outer Arch between the Head and Belly of g; set your Compasses to 1, and
placing one Foot in the point where this Arch touches the Head, turn the other
Foot into Parallel 16, (as at Fig. 5.) and on that point as on a Center
describe the inner Arch between Head and Belly of g. Then from Parallel 14
Erect 5, and Parallel 13 Erect 14, draw a straight line, and from Parallel 11
Erect 3, and Parallel 10 Erect 14; draw another straight line, which two
straight lines shall be the Waste of g. Then set your Compasses to 7, and
placing one Foot in Parallel 7, Erect 10, (as at Fig. 6.) Describe the right
hand outer Arch of the Belly. Set your Compasses to 5, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 6, Erect 11, (as at Fig. 7.) describe the right hand inner Arch of the
Belly; set your Compasses to 7, and in placing one Foot in Parallel 7, Erect
10, (as at Fig. 6.) describe part of the left hand inner Arch of the Belly of
g. Set your Compasses to 8, and placing one Foot in Parallel 8, Erect 8, (as at
Fig. 8.) Describe another outer Arch on the left hand side of the Belly; set
your Compasses to 6, and placing one Foot in Parallel 5. Erect 6, (as at 9.)
With the other describe the outer Arch under the Waste of g on the left hand.
Remove your Compasses to Parallel 24, Erect 18, (as at Fig. 10.) and describe
an Arch for the upper bounds of the Nose of g. Remove your Compasses to
Parallel 22, Erect 16, (as at Fig. 11.) and describe the under Arch of the
Nose. Set your Compasses to half the Stem, viz. 1, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 27, Erect 16, (as at Fig. 12.) Describe the small Arch for a Dot on
the Nose. The Intersections and Breakings of the several Arches you must work
in by hand, as you may see by the Letter it self.

H
Has two upright Stems with Toppings and Footings, which are made like the
Stems of other Capitals. These two Stems must stand the breadth of four Stems
asunder, viz. 20 parts. They are joined just in the middle between Head and
Foot, with a straight Parallel line half a part broad.

h
The Stem of h is made like the Stem of b, only it has Footing on both sides.
The Footing has the breadth of the Stem on either hand, viz. 3 1/^ parts, and
is made like the Footing of Capitals. The width between the inside the two
Stems* is 2 Stems, viz. 8 parts. To make the Arches that join these two Stems
together, divide the distance between the inner stroke of the left hand Stem
and the outer stroke of the right hand Stem into two equal parts, and set off
that distance in the Erect in the middle between them from the Head-line, viz.
Parallel 30 downwards; and placing one point of your Compasses there, ( viz. at
1) with the other describe an Arch to reach from the left hand Stem to the
right hand Stem. Then divide the distance between the two inner sides of the
Stem into two equal parts, and placing one Foot of your Compasses in the middle
between the two Stems and in the same Parallel the former Arch was struck, (as
at 2.) with the other Foot describe the under Arch of h. The right hand side of
the Stem of h and its Footing are made as before.

I
Set off 3 Stems in the Foot-line in Parallel 12, one for the left hand
Footing, another for the Stem, another for the right hand Footing. Do the like
in the Top-line, and between the Topping and Footing draw the Stem.

i
The Stem of i is made like the Stem of h, but is not so long, for it stands
between Parallel 12 and 30. The Tittle stands right over the Stem, half a Stem
lower than the Top-line, and its Diameter is one Stem, viz 3 parts.

J
The Stem and Topping of this J is made like I, but halfway between the Foot
and Bottom-lines the right hand stroke begins to fall away into an Arch of a
Circle, which we call a Tail in Letters, whose Semidiameter is two Stems;
therefore your Compasses being set to two Stems, viz. 10. place one Foot in
Parallel 10 in the Erect of the Topping, which is two Stems from the right hand
stroke of J, (as at 1) and with the other Foot describe an Arch for the Bottom
of J. Then set your Compasses to one Stem, viz. 5, and in Parallel 5, and the
same Erects, (as at 2.) describe another Arch for the inner Arch of the Bottom
of J; then set your Compasses to 2, viz. half a Stem, and place one Foot in
Parallel 3, Erect 2, (as at 3) and with the other describe the Dot of J.

j
The Stem and Tittle of this j is made like i. The Semidiameter of the lower
Arch of its Tail is two of its Stems, viz. 7. whose Center lies two Stems from
the Bottom-line, viz. in Parallel 7 in the Erect of its Beak, (as at 1.) The
Semidiameter of its inner Arch is one Stem, viz. 3, and its Center lies in 3 in
the same Erect, (as at 2.) The Diameter of the Dot is one Stem, and its Center
lies in Parallel 2, Erect 1 3/4.

K
The Stem of K is made like I. It branches upwards from the middle of the Stem
into Parallel 42, viz. the Top-line. The outside of the Top of its Branch is
distant in the Top-line from the inside of the Top of the Stem 15 Erects, viz.
3 Stems, and the inside the Branch is 14 Erects from the Top of the Stem; so
that a straight Ruler laid to these two points successively, and to the middle
length of the Stem, describes this upper Branch. The lower Branch is as broad
as the Stem, viz. 5 parts, and has its inner Footing one Stem, viz. 5 parts,
distant from the Footing of the Stem. Therefore set your Compasses to 5, and
placing one Foot in the middle of the inside the Stem, with the other Foot
describe an occult Arch, (as at 1.) Then remove your Compasses to the point in
the Foot-line where the inside of the lower Branch cuts it, and describe
another occult Arch, (as at 2.) Then lay a straight Ruler to the Unequal points
of these two Arches from the upper Branch to the Foot-line; then set off on
either side these two Branches 5 for the Topping and Footing, and in the Erects
of these several settings off describe the Topping and Footing.

k
The Stem of k is made like the Stem of h; its upper Branch proceeds from the
right hand line of the Stem in Parallel 21, which is equally between the Head
and Foot-line. The outside the Head of the Branch is distant in the Head-line 8
from the Stem, viz. two Stems and an half; and the inside of the Head of the
Branch is distant 8 from the Stem in the Head-line; so that a straight Ruler
laid successively to these two distances, and to the point in the Stem from
whence this Branch proceeds, gives the upper Branch. The inside the lower
Branch is distant from the Stem 8 in the Foot-line, and the outside the lower
Branch is distant 12 from the Stem in the Foot-line. Therefore draw a straight
line from the point where the upper Branch joins to the Stem 8 in the
Foot-line, and that shall be the inside lower Branch. Draw another straight
line Parallel to this straight line at 3 distance, (as the occult Arches (1,
2.) show, and that shall be the outer bounds of the lower Branch. The Heading
and Footings are made as K aforesaid, only instead of 5 Erects from the in and
outside the Branches you must now make but 3 ^^^/2.

L
Is made like the Stem and Foot-stroke of E.

l
Is made like the Stem of h.

M
The left hand stroke is 1 broad, and the right hand stroke is a Stem, viz. 5.
The insides of these Shanks stand 25 asunder, viz. 5 Stems. The rest is V all
but the inside Toppings, which are left out. And you must note, that the left
hand line of the outer bounds stands at the Top in the Erect of the left hand
line of the left hand Shank. Topping and Footing has been taught before.

m
The first Stem is made like i. The second and third Stem and their Arches are
made like the second Stem and Arch of h.

N
The two upright strokes are each 1 broad, and their insides are 20 asunder.
The Diagonal is made by setting off from the outer stroke on the left hand
toward the left hand 1 in the Top-line, from whence a straight line drawn to
the outer bounds of the right hand stroke in the Foot-line gives the lower
bounds of the Diagonal. The upper bounds are made by setting your Compasses to
5, and placing one Foot successively in the lower line, (as at Fig. 1.) with
the other Foot describe occult Arches, to the Unequal points of which a straight
Ruler laid, and a line drawn by the side of it, shall be the upper bounds of
the Diagonal. The Toppings are made as before.

n
Is the two first Stems of m.

O
The outer bounds of O is an exact Circle. The Fatning is made by setting off 5
on either side the Center in the same Parallel, for these settings off shall be
the Centres, on which you must describe Arches for the inner bounds of O; only
you must work in the Intersections of the Arches by hand.

o
Is an exact Circle, and has its Fatnings as O, only the Fatnings must be but
3, because it is a small Letter.

P
The Stem is made like I, all but the right hand Topping is left out. Its Head
is made by setting your Compasses to 7, viz. one Stem and an half, and placing
one Foot in Parallel 34, which is 1 Stem from the Top-line; Erect 16, (as at
Fig. 1.) with the other Foot describe an Arch from the Top-line for the outer
bounds of the Head. To describe the inner bounds set off 5 in the Parallel of
34 toward the left hand for the Fatning. Then set your Compasses to 7, and
placing one Foot in the part set off for the Fatning; pitch the other Foot in
the Parallel the former Center lies in, (as at 2.) and describe the inner Arch.
But because these Arches reach not home to the Stem, you must make up the Top
and Underneath with straight lines drawn to the Stem.

p
The Stem of p is made like the Stem of h. But h is an Ascending Letter, and
therefore has its Stem reaching up to the Top-line; and p is a Descending
Letter, and has its Stem reaching down to the Bottom-line. The Belly of p is
made upon three Centres. The Arches of the Belly of p are Arches of a Circle;
the Center of the outer Arch lies in Parallel 21, Erect 12, (as at 1.) The
inner Arch is made by the setting off a Stem from the outer Arch inwards in the
Parallel 21, and bringing this setting off and the two points where the outer
Arch joins to the Stem into an Arch of a Circle, as you were taught. For first
the Compasses set to 9, place one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 12, (as at 1.) and
with the other describe a Circle for the outmost bounds of the Belly of p. Then
set your Compasses to 8, and place one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 10, (as at
2.) and with the other describe an Arch that shall reach from the Stem at the
Head to Erect 12; then remove your Compasses to Parallel 21, Erect 9, (as at
3.) and describe an Arch for the remainder of the inner bounds of the Belly of
p.

Q
Has its Body made like O. The Rump of the Tail is made by drawing a straight
line from Parallel 12 Erect 13, to Parallel 4 Erect 27, and another straight
line parallel to it, as you were taught in the lower Branch of K, at the breadth
of a Stem from the Body of Q to Erect 30. From this straight Rump the Tail
arches and diminishes to the end. It is arched and diminished thus: In Parallel
5 Erect 66, make a mark for the end of the Tail; then set your Compasses to 52,
and placing one Foot in Parallel 4, Erect 27, describe an occult Arch; then
remove your Compasses to Parallel 8, Erect 30, and describe another occult
Arch; then remove your Compasses to the point made for the end of the Tail, and
describe an occult Arch that shall intersect the two former occult Arches, and
those two Intersections (as at Fig. 4, 5.) shall be the Center whereon you may
describe Arches to finish the Tail of Q.

q
The Belly of q is a Circle to the Stem. The fatning of the left hand side is
made by setting off one Stem in the Parallel, that the Center of the outer Arch
lies in, (as at 2;) then describe an Arch to comprehend the part of Fatning set
off, and the two points where the outer Arch joins to the Stem, as was taught.
The rest of the Stem and Footing is made like several other Letters before.

R
The Stem, Head, and Footing of R is made like P. The inner side of the Branch
proceeding from the Head stands at the Head 2 distant from the Stem, where make
a Prick; and at the Foot 9 distant from the Stem, where make another Prick.
Between these two Pricks draw a straight line, and draw another straight line
Parallel to it the breadth of a Stem, as you were taught in the lower Branch of
K.

r
The Stem of r is made like the Stem of i. To make the small Branch proceeding
from the Stem set your Compasses to half the Stem, viz. 1, and placing one Foot
in Parallel 28, Erect 14, describe the small Circle for the Dot of the Branch.
Then divide the Parallel distance between the Center of the Dot and the left
hand stroke of the Stem into two equal parts, and placing one point of your
Compasses in the Head-line, direct the other point on the Erect of the Division
made before, between the Center of the Dot and the left hand stroke of the
Stem, (as at 1.) and on that Center describe the upper Arch to join the Dot and
Stem together. To describe the under Arch divide the distance between the Dot
and right hand side of the Stem into two equal parts, and set that off from the
Stem in the Parallel of the former Center, (as at 2.) and describe the under
Arch of the Branch. Footing is made as before.

S
Here are four Circles made to draw S, and the Centres of them all lie in the
same Erect. To describe the first Circle set your Compasses to 8, and placing
one Foot in Parallel 33, Erect 8, (as at 1.) with the other Foot describe a
Circle. Set your Compasses to 5, and placing one Foot in Parallel 35, (as at
2.) with the other Foot describe a second Circle. Set your Compasses to 9, and
placing one Foot in Parallel 21, Erect 8, (as at 3.) with the other Foot
describe a third Circle. Set your Compasses to 6, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 18, (as at 4.) with the other Foot describe a fourth Circle. I need
not teach you how these Circles are wrought into an S, because the Letter it
self shows you plainly. But the Buttings at Top and Foot are thus made: Set off
at the Intersection of the first Circle with the Erect of the third Circle 5
downwards, and from thence draw a straight line into the Top-line; from this
straight line set off in the Top-line 5 toward the left hand, and by two
occult Arches made on these two points in the Top-line you will find a Center,
(as at Fig. 5.) whereon (your Compasses set to 5) you may describe the Arch for
the Hollow of the Head of S. For the Butting and Hollow at the Foot draw a
straight line through the left hand verge of the first Circle into the
Foot-line, and in Parallel 21, (which is the Parallel wherein the Center of the
third Circle lies) make therein a Prick for the upper end of the Butting, from
thence draw a straight line in the same Erect into the Foot-line for the whole
Butting; from this point of Butting in the Foot-line (your Compasses set to 5)
measure into the third Circle, and on these two points describe two occult
Arches, whose Intersections shall be a Center, (as at Fig. 6.) whereon you may
describe the Hollow at the Foot of S. How the Tail of S falls off from a Circle
toward the Butting you may perceive by the Letter it self, and accordingly
work it in by hand.

s
Draw an Erect line, and on it set off half a part at the Head, and half a part
at the Foot, for the thickness of the Head and Foot of s. Then set your
Compasses to 3, and measuring in the same Erect from the point set off at the
Head, you have the Center of the inner Circle of the Head of s; from the bottom
of this inner Circle set off 3, viz. one Stem in the Erect. Then set your
Compasses to 3, and measure in the same Erect from the point set off for the
thickness of s, at the Foot you have the Center of the inner Circle of the
Foot. Set your Compasses to half the distance between the Top of this Circle
and the Head of s, and that half distance shall be the Center whereon you may
describe the outer Circle of the Head. Set your Compasses to half the distance
between the bottom of the inner Circle and the Foot-line, and that half
distance shall be the Center whereon you may describe the outer Circle of the
Foot. For the Dots at Head and Foot set off one Stem, viz. 3, from the Head and
Foot-line, that is, in the Parallels of 14 and 26; and where that setting off
the inner Circles of Head and Foot, shall be the Center whereon the Compasses
set to 1, you may describe Circles for the Dots.

s
Is made like f, only instead of a stroke quite through the Head-line, here is
only a Beak proceeding from the left hand to the Stem in the Head-line. This
Beak or Projecture is made like the Projecture of other Letters; only the line
of the Beak that runs into the Head-line is drawn on the left Head-line of the
Stem.

T
The Stem and right hand Top-stroke of T is made like the Stem and Top-stroke
of E, and the left hand Top-stroke of T is the same with the right hand
Top-stroke, only the Buttings must be made on the left hand.

t
Has the Top of the right hand stroke of its Stem reach 3, viz. one Stem above
the Head-line. The stroke through the Head is half a Stem broad, and Projects
on either side the Stem 1 Stem. From the left hand end of the stroke draw a
straight line to the Top of the right hand stroke of the Stem. Both sides the
Stem run straight down to Parallel 15. The Arches of the Tail are thus drawn:
Set your Compasses to 5, and placing one Foot in 17 Erect 8, (as at Fig. 1.)
Describe an Arch to reach from the left hand side of the Stem through the
Foot-line into the Parallel of 15, where the Tail shall end; then set your
Compasses to one Stem, viz. 3, and describe occult Arches from the Tail, and
the lower end of the right hand line of the Stem, and where these two occult
Arches intersect each other, (as here at Fig. 2.) shall be the Center whereon
you must describe the inner Arch of the Tail.

V
In Erect 17 Erect a Perpendicular from the Foot-line into the Top-line. Set
off from this Perpendicular in the Top-line 12 toward the left hand, and 12
toward the right hand; from these two points draw straight to the
Perpendicular in the Foot-line for the outer bounds of V. Set your Compasses to
5, viz. one Stem; describe an occult Arch upon some convenient point of the
left hand line near the Top, (as at Fig. 1.) Then remove your Compasses to some
convenient point near the Foot-line, (as at Fig. 2.) and describe another
occult Arch. From the outer verge of these two occult Arches draw a straight
line for the inner right hand stroke of V; then set your Compasses to 1, and on
the right hand stroke describe two other occult Arches, and draw a straight
line by their verges for the inner line of the right side stroke of V. The
Toppings are made like the Footings of A, and several other Letters.

v
In Erect, 10 Erect a Perpendicular into the Head-line, and from it set off 7
toward the left hand in the Head-line, and 7 toward the right hand; from
these two points draw straight lines into the Foot-line. For the outer bounds
set off from the left hand line one Stem, viz. 3 toward the right hand in the
Head-line, and describe two occult Arches upon some convenient points of the
left hand line, (as at Fig. 1, 2.) From the verges of these two occult Arches
draw a straight line for the inner line of the left side; then set off 2/3 from
the right hand line in the Head-line toward the left hand, and describe other
occult Arches upon some convenient points of the right hand line, (as at Fig.
3, 4.) and from the outer verges of these occult Arches draw the inner line of
the right side of v. The Heading is made like the Heading of k.

U
U is 26 wide in the Top between the outer bounds. The left hand side is 5
broad, and runs straight down to Parallel 25. The right hand side is 1 broad at
the Top, and 1 at the Parallel of 25. Set your Compasses to 13, and placing one
Foot in Parallel 25, Erect 23. Describe the outer Arch: Set your Compasses to
10, and placing one Foot in Parallel 25, Erect 23, describe the inner Arch. The
Topping make as you have been taught before.

u
The first Stem is made like i, but it rounds at the Foot as h, m, n, do at the
Head. The second Stem is sometimes made straight without a Beak, as it is here;
sometimes with one made like the former. Its Tail is made like the Tail of d.

W
Is VV, only the left side of the second V lies over the right side of the
first in the Top-line.

w
The same with W, only you must observe the Dimensions of v.

X
Set off 5 in the Top-line, and 20 in the Foot-line, and draw a straight line
between these two points. Draw another line toward the right hand Parallel to
it by occult Arches the breadth of a Stem. Then set off 25 in the Top-line, and
6 in the Foot-line, and draw a straight line between these two points, draw
another line parallel to it toward the right hand, by occult Arches the breadth
of 1. The Toppings and Footings are made as before.

x
Set off 3 in the Hend-line, and 14, viz. four Stems, in the Foot-line, and
draw a straight line between these two points; draw another line parallel to it
toward your right hand, by occult Arches the breadth of a Stem, viz. 3; then
set off 16 in the Head-line, and 3 in the Foot-line, and draw a straight line
between these two points; draw another line Parallel to it toward the right
hand, by occult Arches the breadth of half. The Toppings and Footings are made
as before.

Y
Erect a Perpendicular from the Foot-line into the Top-line, and set off in the
Top-line on either side 8. Then in Parallel 27 make a Prick in the
Perpendicular from these two settings off in the Top-line draw straight lines
to the Prick in the Perpendicular for the inner bounds of Y. Set your Compasses
to 5, and on the ends of the left hand line describe two occult Arches, through
whose Unequal points draw a straight line from the Perpendicular into the
Top-line for the outer bounds of the left hand side. Then set your Compasses to
1, and on the ends of the right hand line describe two other occult Arches,
through whose Unequal points draw another straight line into the Top-line, for
the outer bounds of the right side. Then set off in the Foot-line and Top-line
1 on the right hand the Perpendicular, and 4 on the left hand the
Perpendicular, and by a Ruler laid to the settings off on either side the
Perpendicular draw straight lines from the Body of Y into the Foot-line. The
Footing and Topping is made as before.

y
Erect a Perpendicular from the Foot-line into the Head-line, and set off on
the left hand 3, and on the right hand 7 in the Head-line, from the setting off
on the left hand describe an occult Arch of 1 Stem, draw a straight line from
the Foot-line at the Perpendicular through the Unequal point into the Head-line,
for the bounds of the left side of y; draw another line Parallel to this line,
the breadth of 1 Stem for the inner bounds of the left side, from 7 set off on
the right hand the Perpendicular in the Head-line set off half, and from thence
draw a straight line into the Foot-line at the Perpendicular for the outer
bounds of the right side of y. Draw another straight line Parallel to it part
toward the left hand for the inner bounds of y.

The Tail is an Arch which you may thus make: Under the outer left side Heading
in the same Erect on the Bottom-line describe a Circle for the Dot of the Tail,
whose Diameter shall be 1 Stem; then set your Compasses to 42, (the whole depth
of a Letter) and placing one point almost at the Bottom of the right side the
Dot, describe with the other Foot an occult Arch; then place one Foot of your
Compasses at the lower Angle of the Body of Y, and with the other Foot describe
another Arch to cut the former Arch, and where these two Arches cut each other
shall be the Center whereon an Arch described from the Dot to the Angle
aforesaid shall be the outer bounds of the Tail. The inner bounds are made by
describing an Arch Concentrick to the former. The Headings have been taught
before.

Z
Set off 20 in the Top-line; from thence draw a straight line into Erect 0 in
the Foot-line; then by occult Arches 1, 2, made toward the right hand, draw a
line 1 Stem, viz. 5 parts, between the Top and Foot-line for the right hand
line of Z. The Top and Foot-line are each 1 part thick. The Butting at the Top
is made by setting your Compasses to 5, and drawing a straight line in Erect 0
from the Top to this setting off; then set your Compasses to 15, and placing
one Foot in this setting off, with the other Foot describe toward the right
hand an occult Arch, (as at 3.) The remove your Compasses to Parallel 41, Erect
1, and with the other Foot describe another occult Arch to cut the former, and
where these two occult Arches cut each other is the Center, whereon you may
describe the hollow of the Buttings. The Buttings of the Foot-line is made by
setting your Compasses to 5, and placing one Foot in Prallel 13 Erect 26; with
the other Foot describe an occult Arch, (as at 5.) in that occult Arch in Erect
28 make a Prick, and laying a straight Ruler to this Prick and the right hand
end of the Foot of Z, draw a straight line for the Butting. Then set your
Compasses to 15 and 14; at the end of this straight line place one Foot of your
Compasses, and with the other describe an occult Arch toward the Stem, (as at
5.) then remove your Compasses, and place one Foot in Parallel 13, 1 part from
the end toward the left hand line of Butting, and with the other Foot describe
another occult Arch to cut the former, and where these two occult Arches cut
each other shall be the Center, whereon you shall describe the hollow of the
Butting of the Foot.

z
Set off in the Head and Foot-lines 17. Set your Compasses to 3, viz. 1 Stem,
and toward your right hand describe in the Foot-line an occult Arch, (as at
1.) Lay your Ruler to 17; set off in the Head-line and to the Unequal point of
this Arch, and draw the right hand line of the Stem; then remove your Compasses
to 17 /2; in the Head-line, and toward the left hand describe another occult
Arch, (as at 2.) Lay your Ruler to Erect 0 in the Foot-line, and the Unequal
point of this Arch, and draw the left hand line of the Stem. The Head and
Foot-lines are half thick. The Butting at the Head is half above the Head-line;
therefore set off half in the Erect 0, and hollow it to the Head-line, as you
were taught before by two occult Arches, (as at 3.) The other Buttings are made
as the Head Butting of Z; but only the Butting of the Foot is straight upright
in this Letter, and in that it runs up aslope toward the right hand, as you
may see by the Letters themselves.

and
Of all the Characters yet made this is the most troublesome, it having no less
than 10 Centres in it, and consequently as many Arches. But thus it is made:
Set your Compasses to 9, and placing one Foot in Parallel 21 Erect 9, (as at
1.) with the other Foot describe the under part of the arching Belly from
Parallel 17 to Parallel 22; then set your Compasses to 8, and placing one Foot
in Parallel 20 Erect 8, (as at 2.) with the other Foot describe the upper part
of the arching Belly. Then set your Compasses to 8, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 22 Erect 12, (as at 3.) with the other Foot describe an Arch for the
inside of the Belly. Then set your Compasses to 5, and placing one Foot in
Parallel 34 Erect 8, (as at Fig. 4.) with the other Foot describe almost a
Circle for the outside of the Head; through this Circle draw a Perpendicular
Diametral line, (as a, b) and from the point a set off in the Circle toward
the left hand 2 parts, (as at c) and set off 2 parts toward the right hand
from b to d through the Diametral c, d, draw another Diametral line at right
angles, as e, f. Then in the point where this Diametral line cuts the Circle of
the Head, as at the point e, set off on the Diametral line 3, viz. one Stem,
and with your Compasses set to 5, (as before) place one Foot in the Point set
off, and extend the other on the Diametral line, and placing it there, with
your first Foot describe the inner Arch of the Head on the left hand. Then set
off also 3, viz. 1 Stem on the right hand from the Intersection of the
Diametral and the Circle, and place one Foot of your Compasses (being set to 5)
there, extending the other on the Diametral toward the left hand, and on that
point with the other Foot describe the other inner Arch of the Head, which
meeting of the two Arches at the Top and Bottom you must work into an Oval.
Then set your Compasses to 32, and placing one Foot in the point where Erect 6
cuts the under part of the outer Circle of the Head, with the other Foot
describe toward the Bottom-line on your left hand an occult Arch. And removing
one point of your Compasses to Erect 17 Parallel 15, with the other Foot
describe another occult Arch to intersect the former, (as at 5.) and on this
point as on a Center describe an Arch for the inside the Diagonal Stem. Then
draw a straight line from the middle part of this Diagonal Stem, and set off on
it from the Center 5, 3, viz. 1 Stem, and placing one Foot of your Compasses as
before, (as at Fig. 6.) with the other describe the outer Arch of the Diagonal
Stem. The Tail of the Diagonal Stem is made by setting your Compasses to 6, and
placing one Foot in Parallel 18, Erect 22, (as at Fig. 7.) with the other
describe the under Arch of the Tail as far as Parallel 15 Erect 27. The upper
Arch of the Tail is made by setting your Compasses to 4, and placing one Foot
in Parallel 17 Erect 24, (as at Fig. 8.) with the other describe it; only the
end of the Tail must be wrought into a sharp point. The Arch above the Diagonal
Stem is made by setting your Compasses to 24, and placing one Foot in Parallel
33 Erect 1, (as at 9.) with the other describe the outer Arch. Then remove your
Compasses to Parallel 32 Erect half less than 0, (as at Fig. 10.) with the
other describe the inner Arch.

ae oe ct st sh
And other double Letters, I need not discourse on, because by these Paterns
you may see how they are joined together.

Having given you such full Instructions upon the Roman Capitals and Small
Letters, I think it needless to give you Copious Rules upon the Italick or
English Letters, the Paterns being so large that every Member in them are
distinct and intelligent, and the Manual Operations so much the same in all,
that the Scales down the side and in the Bottom-line serve for an ample
Discourse upon every one of them.

Of Italick Letters.
ITalick Letters seem to be derived from the Roman, because its shape is so
like the Roman, that its Members differ in very few Letters from it; only the
Stems of the Roman are perpendicularly upright, and the Bellies are circular,
but in the Italick the Stems are aslope, and the Bellies are oval. The slope of
the Stems are of the whole depth of the Letter, viz. 10 parts set off from a
Perpendicular on the left hand in the Top-line, and a line drawn from the same
Perpendicular in the Foot-line to the 10 in the Top-line, as in Letter A, F
From 1 to 2 is the slope of the Letter.

Those Letters that have Bellies, as a, b, c, d, e, q, have the inside of their
Bellies Ovals, whose greatest Diameter is 18 parts, viz. the whole length of a
Small Letter, and its least Diameter 6 parts; which Oval is so set aslope, that
half a part lies below the Head-line, and parts above the Foot-line; so that
working above the Oval into the Head-line, and below the Oval into the
Foot-line, you may make the Fatness of the Head and Foot of the Belly; but how
the Belly fattens downwards, you may best see by the Paterns themselves.

The Beaks of Letters project 3 parts, viz. 1 Stem from the Stem toward the
left hand, and lie at the point of the Beak 1 part below the Top-line; so that
a straight line drawn from the Top of the right hand line of the Stem to the
point of the Beak is the upper bounds of the Beak; and 1 set off in the left
hand line of the Stem under the lower bounds of the Beak is the thickness of
the Beak, so that a straight line drawn from that point to the end of the Beak
is the lower bounds of the Beak.

The Nose of Small Letters project also 3 parts, viz. one Stem from the Stem of
the Letter, and the point of it lies three parts below the Head-line.

The Tails are made just like the Beaks, if you imagine the Foot were turned
into the Head-line.

Of the English Letters.
THis sort of Letters by the Fatness of the Stems seems to be first invented
for durable Records: For from these Letters seems to proceed the several
Court-hands of Law, Chancery, etc.

Although the most parts of these Letters, but especially the Small, are
straight lines, which are to be drawn by the side of a Ruler, yet are few of
the Arches of the Capital Letters Arches of Circles, and therefore cannot well
be described with Compasses, but are made without Geometrical Considerations,
only by Judgment and good Command of Hand; because the Inventers contented
themselves to be directed rather by the Humors of the Pen (which often differs
according to the temper of the Quill and shape of the Nib, and a Traditional
Observance, which cannot be equal in all Hands or Wits) than those nice
Symmetrical Proportions which would have preserved them in all Ages in the same
Youth and Beauty they were in at the first; whenas now not only Manuscripts,
but many printed Books differ in the shape of their Letters among themselves.

Therefore it is that these Paterns cannot be exactly agreeable with all
English Letters; yet have I elected them which are now most in mode, and in my
Judgment the best. Only I have in some few parts (where I think all Ingenious
Contrivers would acknowledge Error) corrected them.

The Fatnings, Returnings of Angles, Distances of Joynings, and other niceties,
are better seen by the Paterns, than learnt by many words of Descriptions on
them. And therefore I have divided (like the Roman) the Plain they stand on
into 42 equal Parallel parts of the Depth, and through every sixth part you may
draw a small straight line; and also divided the breadth or thickness of the
Letter into so many equal parts called Erects, Parallel to each other, as is
requisite; for each Letter you may also draw a small straight-line downwards,
so that the Parallel lines and these Erects may cut each other at right Angles,
which will divide the Plain into so many Squares as each Letter is made on. And
by these Squares you may observe how every Member and part of a Member in a
Letter passes from the Top to to the Bottom-line, and from the right hand to
the left, and by making a Plain with the same number of Squares, you may carry
on the several strokes from Square to Square, as you find them in your Paterns.

But as I have given you full Instructions for the making the Roman Letters, so
shall I give you some few Directions, which may serve to inform you in all the
Rules that belong to these Letters, but especially of the Small, because they
consist almost wholly of straight lines.

The Stem of the Capitals (as was said before) is 6 parts, the Stem of the
Small Letters 4 parts. The Foot-line lies in Parallel 9, the Head-line lies in
Parallel 33. The Return Angles of those straight lines that proceed from the
Head-line and from the Foot-line are 4 parts, viz. one Stem below the
Head-line, and 4 parts above the Foot-line.

The Fatness of the Stem is made by occult Arches placing one Foot of your
Compasses on the Return Angles, as in A at 1 and 2, and with the other Foot
describing the Arches 3 and 4; so that a straight line drawn through the Unequal
points of these two Arches shall give the Fatness of the Return Angle. The like
in all other Letters, as you have been taught in Roman Letters.

The Beaks of the Small Letters, as v, h, k, l, s, are 1 part broad and long,
and end in a point. The upper stroke of these Beaks proceed from the Head-line.

The Cloven Tops of v, h, k, l, project on the left hand 1 part over the Stem,
and the point where it divides in the Stem lies in 1 below the Top-line, at 1
distance from the right hand side of the Stem, as you may see in the Paterns.

The strokes of f, t, and, lie in the Head-line and 1 part below it, projecting
over the Stem 1 part on the left hand, and 2 parts on the right hand.

More Observations I think needless, because the Letters themselves are so
demonstratively laid down on the Plain. Only some have made all these Small
Letters with little Beaks on the Angle of every Return, because the Humor of
the Pen may be made to give them; but I account them Needless, Troublesome, and
Affectatious. Therefore I deliver them plain as they lie in the Squares,
whereby they will stand more close, become more regular, be quicker made, and
more distinct and intelligent to the Eye; yet such as affect them so may make
them at their own discretion, by projecting on the Angles 1 part, as you are
taught to do the Beaks.

FINIS.













































































