THE SPEECH Of His GRACE ALEXANDER EARL OF MORRAY, His Majesty's HIGH
COMMISSIONER;

At the Opening of the Second Session of the First Parliament of His Majesty's
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland. The 29th of April, 1686.

Published by Authority.



Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1686.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE great Sense which His Sacred Majesty retains of your Loyalty, Duty and
Zeal for His Service, and of your signal Affection to His Person and Interest,
so kindly expressed in your Proceedings of the last Session, has determined
Him to Meet you again so soon in this; To the end, that as you did then by very
seasonable Proofs of your dutiful Obedience, even during the raging insolence
of an unnatural Rebellion, demonstrat your Loyalty and firm Adherence to the
Crown; so His Majesty would not be wanting on His Part, to show His Paternal
and Royal Care of you His Ancient and Loving People, by giving you fresh
Opportunities, of doing such things as may tend to the universal Good of the
Nation, as a generous Return to your Affections.

As all the States and Ranks of men in this Kingdom have been most eminent in
their Loyalty, Love and Deference to His Majesty in their several Degrees and
Capacities, both when he Honored you with His Royal Presence, and since; So
His Majesty is Graciously Resolved, that you shall in your several stations,
share of the Effects and Influences of His Royal Care, Tenderness and
Protection, by Marks of His Royal Favor, which He intends shall be as
Comprehensive and General, for the Security and Happiness of you all, as your
Duty and Kindness toward Him have been remarkable.

Pursuant to this, I am to assure you that His Majesty does endeavor with all
imaginable Care to open a free intercourse of Trade with His Kingdom of
England, as one of the surest ways to save His Royal Burrows from the Ruin
Threatened by the decay of Commerce, and will leave nothing unessayed that may
Promot a Work so beneficial to this Kingdom.

And for your further Encouragement, the King has fully Instructed His Envoy
at the Court of France, to use his utmost Endeavors for having the fifty Solz
per Tunn discharged, and for recovering the Possession of the other Privileges
of the Scots Merchants Trading with that Kingdom, which have been now a long
time suffered to run into Desuetude.

And His Majesty conceiving that the Burghs of Regality and Barony, enjoy more
of that Trade, for which the Burrows Royal bear the sixth part of the Cess of
the Nation than does justly fall to their share; Has therefore been Graciously
Pleased to Instruct Me to give His Royal Consent to such Regulations therein as
you shall think just and equitable.

And there having been several Complaints made to His Majesty, of the trouble
which Merchants of this Kingdom meet with in the matter of the Staple and Trade
with the Netherlands, I am fully instructed to Give His Consent to what you
shall Advise as Reasonable, for the Redress thereof for the future.

And whereas His Majesty is Informed of the great Prejudice which this Kingdom
suffers by the Importation of Irish Cattle, Horses and Victual: I am also fully
Instructed, not only to give His Royal Assent to whatever may free you from
that Abuse in time-coming: But likewise to enquire into the Connivanees and
Malversations of those who in times past have been entrusted to hinder and
discover all such illegal Importations, to the end that they may be punished
according to Law.

I am also to acquaint you that the King being Informed, that the want of an
open Mint is a sensible prejudice to the Traffic of the Kingdom; I am
therefore Empowered to give His Royal Assent to what the Wisdom of this
Parliament shall think Just and Reasonable in that Point.

As His Majesty in His Royal Prudence and Goodness intends to Promot the Trade
of this Nation, by all possible and fit Methods, So He has Commanded Me to
tell you, that He is not at this time to Demand any more Supplies or
Impositions of any kind, notwithstanding of the great and necessary Charge,
which the Suppressing of the late horrid Rebellion has put Him to; Being fully
convinced that your Affection and Alacrity have already prompted you to give
all that was convenient for you to spare. In Requital of which, He is Resolved
to Do all that He can for the Advancement of the Good and Interest, and
Increasing the Wealth of this Kingdom; A thing which His Majesty is very
sensible has been a long time too much neglected: Conceiving His Royal State,
inseparable from the Happiness and Floorishing Prosperity of His People. And
the King well knowing how heavy the Cess lies upon the Land-rents, if it were
not indispensably necessary, as well for your own safety, as the Support of His
Government, would willingly discharge some part thereof: But this being
impossible, I am fully Instructed to pass any Law with your Advice and Consent,
that may give ease in that Matter, not diminishing the former Quota.

I am further to Acquaint you, That His Majesty has taken special Care to
Instruct me fully for giving his Royal Consent to all such Law, and
Regulations, as may secure exact Payment to the Country from all His Officers
and Soldiers in their Quarters, both Local and Transient, for the future; and
to see exemplary Punishment Inflicted upon all Persons who heretofore have
oppressed any of His loving People, by denying or detaining their just Dues
from them.

And for Easing the Commons of many Oppressions, Alleged to be Committed by
Commissars, I am likewise Empowered to pass an Act, with Your Advice and
Consent, for Regulating the same.

That which will Surprise You much, is, That as the King is Solicitous to
Provide for the Security of this Kingdom, and to Encourage and Cherish his
Dutiful and Loyal Subjects as His Obedient Children, so as a Tender hearted and
Compassionate Father is willing and ready to Forgive, and Mercifully to Pardon
the unexcusable Faults and Crimes of such as have behaved themselves
Undutifully, and even Rebelliously against Him. And therefore to settle and
quiet the Minds of His People, and once more to drive away the Fears of the
Guilty, by delivering them from their Apprehensions of that Punishment which
they have so justly Deserved, He has Graciously been pleased to Instruct Me,
to pass His full and ample Indemnity, with some few necessary and reasonable
Exceptions, for all past Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever; which may Convince
the World that His Majesty delights by sweet and gentle methods of Mercy and
Lenity to reduce all to Duty and Obedience, and that nothing but their own
Perverseness and Incurable Obstinacy in Evil, can force from Him that just
Severity which sometimes becomes necessary for the Safety of His People and
Government; though contrary to His Princely and Merciful Temper.

And now, My Lords and Gentlemen, After so great and excellent Designs for
promoting the Honor, the Ease and Wealth of this Kingdom, after His Resolution
to pardon so many Enemies, and to free so many of the Guilty from further
severe, but just Prosecutions, His Majesty believes that none will wonder, if
He defire by the Advice and Content of this His Great Council, to give Ease and
Security to some of His good Subjects of the Roman Catholic Religion, who have
in all times been firm to the Monarchy, and ready to Sacrifice their Lives and
Fortunes for the Service and Security of the Crown: So that His Majesty, who so
perfectly understands the Loyal and Dutiful Temper and Genius of Scotland,
rests fully persuaded of Your ready and cheerful Compliance with His Royal
Desire and Inclinations, tending so much to Your own Security and His
Satisfaction; And that You will send me back to my Great and Royal Master with
the good Tidings of the continued and dutiful Loyalty of this His Ancient
Kingdom. By which you will show your Selves the best and most affectionate
Subjects, to the best, the incomparable and most Heroic Prince in the World.

FINIS.

