The Humble PROPOSAL of GILBERT MALKIN and P. B. For making England Flourishing
and Happy.
THe Poor's Rates, as now Established, may be Computed to be Three hundred
thousand Pounds per Annum, which may be Settled for One hundred Years as a Fund,
to be under the Regulation and Government of whom the Parliament think fit, and
the Governors may have certain Salaries, and issue out Bills of Credit (none
to be under 5 s. or above 20 l.) to the value of Thirty Millions, which Bills
of Credit, may by the Sanction of a Law, be Current in all Payments, etc. and
may be Disposed of, as follows; l. Nine Millions to Purchase a Real Estate in
Land, for the Use of the Poor 9000000 Four Millions to be Laid out in Building
so many Houses, as shall be thought Sufficient and Necessary for Employing the
Poor of all Cities, Counties, Towns, and Parishes; and Laying in a Stock of
Wool, Hemp, Flax, and other English Manufactures, to set the Poor to work
4000000 Twelve hundred thousand Pounds to Pay the Royal-Bank, and Set the Fund
for that Interest at Liberty 1200000 Eight hundred thousand Pounds for
Maintenance of the Poor, and Paying Salaries until the Workhouses can be
fitted; and Stock provided, and the Land Bought, which may all be done in two
Years 800000 Fifteen Millions for the Use of the Government, which may be paid
by so much a Year, as shall be thought fit 15000000 Total in Bills 30000000 The
Governors every Year to Pay and Cancel Bills, to the Value of 300000l. whereby
at the Hundred Years end all the Bills will be Cancelled.

The Advantages to the Nation by this, are; Fifteen Millions to the Government,
to Ease the Nation of Taxes 15000000 For Land to be purchased, which will
Maintain the Poor, and Ease the Parishes ever after 9000000 In Houses and
Stock, Four Millions 4000000 The Annual Rents, Issues, and Profits of Land, and
Stock, besides a Hundred thousand Pounds a Year, to Maintain the Poor, that
cannot work; and Sixty thousand Pounds a Year, to Pay the Charge, and Salaries
of the Undertaking, will be at least Four hundred thousand Pounds a Year, which
in a hundred Years, amounts to Forty Millions 40000000 And if the Four hundred
thousand Pounds, be Laid out as it Comes in Yearly, the Product of it at but
Two in the Hundred, will, in a Hundred Years, amount to Forty Millions 40000000
To Pay the Royal Bank, Twelve hundred thousand Pounds 1200000 The Advantage to
the Nation; will be more than 109200000

Bills of Credit may be so Contrived, to be Renewed and made Durable, and be
Less subject to Counterfeiting than Money.

The Poor by this will be well Provided for; Youth Virtuously Educated, and
kept out of Idleness; and there will be neither Beggar, nor any Complaint in
our Streets, and all done without any Additional Tax in the space of One
hundred Years; and there will be an abatement of all the present Tax, at the
End of the said Term.

Many other vast Benefits will accrue to the Nation, which for brevity sake are
omitted, as the Proposer can make appear; and they doubt not but they can give
Satisfactory Answers to all the Objections can be made against their PROPOSALS.


