A Treatise OF NATURE AND GRACE.

To which is Added, The AUTHOR's Idaea of Providence; AND His Answers to
several Objections against the foregoing Discourse.

By the Author of, The Search after Truth.

Translated from the Last Edition, Enlarged by many Explications.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by John Whitlock near Stationers - Hall,
1695.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIV^ D.G. MAN. BR^^ET HI^ (...) F.D.

bookplate

Advertisement.
I Entreat those, into whose hands this writing shall fall, to believe that I
chiefly undertook it to satisfy the difficulties of some Philosophers, who had
not, as I thought, all those Sentiments, which Religion teaches to have of Gods
goodness; and were not sufficiently acquainted with the obligations which we
have to Jesus Christ. I desire, it may be looked upon only as an Essay; that
none will judge of it, before they have examined it without prejudice, and that
they will not suffer themselves to be surprised by those motions of fear and
suspicion, which every thing which seems to be new, is apt naturally to excite
in us. Seeing I wrote for such Philosophers, as pretend to be very just and
exact in their Reasonings, I was obliged to avoid those general terms which are
ordinarily used: for I could not content them but by using such terms as raise
in their minds distinct and particular Ideas, as far as the subject will permit
it. I presume that all Candid Readers will judge, that I have no other design,
but to prove (all ways possible) those truths which Faith teaches; and that I
am not so rash as to doubt of that which is looked upon as certain in the
Church, and which Religion obliges us to believe. But it has always been
allowed, to give new proofs of old truths, to represent God Amiable to Men, and
to make it plain that there is nothing hard or unjust, in the order which he
observes for the establishment of his Church.

This Work is divided into Three Discourses; In the First, I represent God, as
doing all the good to his Creatures, which his Wisdom permits. In the Second, I
show, how the Son of God, as incarnate Wisdom, and Head of the Church,
communicates to his Members those Graces, which he could not grant unto them,
as Eternal Wisdom: And thus I do endeavor, to represent the obligations and
relations which we have to Jesus Christ. Lastly, In the Third, I explain, what
is Liberty, and how Grace acts in us without hurting it. Seeing there are some
Persons, of so little Candor, as to draw invidious Consequences, even from
Principles, the most advantageous to Religion; I beg that I may not be
condemned upon their word, and that before I be Judged, Men will do me so much
Justice, as to understand me. Certainly I ought not to be necessitated to make
this request.

A TABLE OF The Treatise of Nature and Grace.
The First Discourse. OF the Necessity of the General Laws of Nature and Grace.
Part I. Of the Necessity of the General Laws of Nature. page 1. Part II. Of
the Necessity of the General Laws of Grace. p. 32.
The Second Discourse. Of the Laws of Grace in particular, and of the
occasional causes which govern and determine their efficacy.
Part I. Of the Grace of Jesus Christ. p. 63. Part II. Of the Grace of the
Creator. p. 101.
The Third Discourse. Of Grace, and the manner by which it acts in us.
Part I. Of Liberty. p. 123. Part II. Of Grace. p. 140.
The First Explication.
What it is to act by General Wills, and what by Particular. p. 160. Marks by
which it may be judged, whether an effect is produced by a General, or by a
Particular Will. p. 162, 163. Objection 1. and Answer. p. 173. Object. 2. and
Answer. p. 178, 179.
The Second Explication.
Where it is proved, that J. C. is figured every where in the Scriptures, and
that even by the events which were before the Sin of the first Man; to teach us
that the principal of God's Designs, is the Incarnation of his Son. p. 190.
The Third Explication,
Where it is proved, that the chief of Gods Designs is J. C. and his Church; and
that God truly loves Men; that he sincerely desires to save all; that his
Conduct is worthy of his Wisdom, Goodness, Immutability, and other Attributes:
What is the order of the decrees which contain the Predestination of Saints. p.
197. Object. and Answer. p. 206, 207.
The Last Explication.
The frequent Miracles of the Old Law, do by no means show, that God often
acted by particular Wills. p. 217.
The Author's Idea of Providence. p. 228.
Objections against the foregoing discourse, with the Author's Answers.
Objection 1. and Answer. p. 238. Object. 2. and Ans. p. 242. Object. 3. and
Ans. p. 246, 247. Object. 4. and Ans. p. 255, 256. Object. 5. and Ans. p. 263,
264. Object. 6. and Ans. p. 269, 270. Object. 7. and Ans. p. 275. Object. 8.
and Ans. p. 278, 279.
CORRECTIONS.
Page Line 5 4 AFter image, ad -- of. ib. 7 For there, Lege their. 10 13 For
creation, L. Incarnation. 14 12 After absit, add -- the Period stop. [.] 16 7
For capit, L. cupit. 17 28 For they, L. men. 23 17 For form, L. forms. 26 15
Dele not. 33 26 For principle, L. principal. 38 10 The Comma after -- it, [,]
43 3 D. to after obliges. 45 31 For, all those, L. any. ib. 18 After
proceedings, this Punctation. [;] 81 13 D. of, after think. 85 19 After wisdom,
a Comma. [,] 87 11 For real manner, L. sure way. 89 23 D. the, before order. 93
33 After God, add -- they. 95 4 L. men's, for men. ib. ult. L. efface, for
effuse. 97 4 L. motions, for motion. 104 32 L. speak, for speaking. 106 ult.
After and, add -- another. 108 16, 17 For God is just, and would by a
particular, etc. ib. L. this Man is just, and God would by a particular, etc.
131 ult. For whilst we love, L. when we enjoy, etc. 134 4 After carries, add --
him. 138 6 For unusual, L. unuseful. 143 20, 21 For pleasures, L. pleasures.
153 3, 4, After and, add -- it. After sweetness and desolation, this
Punctation. [:] ib. 5 158 10 After besides, add -- that. ib. 12 After infinite,
only a Comma. [,] 162 19 Only a Comma, [,] after others. For but L. that. ib.
20 This Punctation, [:] after them. 192 16 For but, L. that. 202 28 D. not. 215
6 For pravisiones, L. praevisione. ib. 16 After fidei, add -- regula. In the
Margin, instead of Cap. 23. L. c. 13. 223 22 For Manada, L. Mandata.

The First Discourse. Of the Necessity of the General Laws of Nature and Grace.
First Part. The Necessity of the General Laws of Nature.
Advertisement. I Think I ought to Advertise, That they who are well acquainted
with the Principle which I have proved, in the Search after Truth, and
elsewhere, need not to read the following Additions, nor even the Explications
which are at the end of this Treatise; without which my Meaning may be very
well understood: But they may perhaps be useful unto those whom I had chiefly
in my mind, when I wrote the Treatise of Nature and Grace, and whom I should
extremely desire to content, as well as others.

Additions.

The Will of God can be nothing else, but the Love which he bears to himself.
Now he cannot will and act but by his own Will: Therefore he cannot act but for
himself. But the World is not worthy of God: It has no Proportion to God; for
there is no relation betwixt finite and infinite: God therefore cannot form the
Design of producing it. God cannot act with a design of doing nothing for
himself, since he cannot act but for himself. Now the World with respect to
God, is nothing; for the relation of finite to infinite is a Cipher: God
therefore cannot resolve to make any thing, if a Divine Person does not join
himself to his Work to render it Divine, and thereby worthy of his Complacency,
or answerable to the infinite Action of his Will. Thus,

I.

Since God cannot act but for his own Glory, nor finding it but in himself, he
could have no other design in the Creation of the World, but the Establishment
of his Church.

Additions.

But what Divine Person shall sanctify the Work of God? It must be the Eternal
Word. For it is the Word, or the Wisdom of God, which ought to be, as I may so
say, first consulted to regulate the Divine Operation, and in some sort make
way for God's Action. A Profane World being unworthy of God, the Wisdom of God
rendered God impotent; or hindered him from acting. Thus, supposing that God
would procure to himself an Honor worthy of him, (which nevertheless is every
way indifferent to him, since he is altogether sufficient to himself) his
Wisdom would fail him in some sense, if it did not in the first place offer its
self to him to be united to his Work, since otherwise his Work would not be
worthy of him. The Word is universal Reason: It Is he therefore who was to come
and enlighten Men, who could not be reasonable, but by Reason. It Is according
to him, and by him that we are formed: It Is therefore by him, or according to
him, we must be perfected, or reformed. Thus, since a Divine Person must render
the Work of God Divine, make Gods of us, or the Adopted Children of the Eternal
Father; it was necessary that his only Son should be the Firstborn amongst
many Brethren, and that we all should receive of his Abundance, or of that
Fullness of Divinity which dwells in him. I might therefore say according to
these Principles, speaking of the Church, that it is the great Work which the
Son built to the Glory of the Father. Ephesians. 1.21.22, 23. c. 2.21, 22. c.
4.13.16. Col. 1.15.16, 17, 18, 19. Eccl. 24.14. 1 Pet. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.4. Joan.
17.5, 24. Apoc. 13.8. Psalm. 72.17. Ephesians. 2.10 Romans 8.29.


II.

Jesus Christ, who is the Head thereof, is the Beginning of the Ways of the
Lord; He is the Firstborn of all Creatures: And though he was born amongst men
in the fullness of time, yet he is their model in the Eternal designs of his
Father. It is according to his Image that all men were made, they who were
before his Temporal birth as well as we. In a word, it is in Him that all
things subsist; for it is he alone who could render the work of God perfectly
worthy of its Author.

Additions.

Jesus Christ, who is the Head of the Church, is the beginning of the Ways of
the Lord. I use these Expressions, because Scripture uses them. The Title of
Head plainly shows, that Jesus Christ as Man, is not only the Meritorious cause
of Grace, but also the Occasional, Physical, Distributive; since He gives his
Spirit to his Members which compose the Church, as I shall explain more largely
in the Second Discourse. And it may be said, That Jesus Christ is the Beginning
of the Ways of the Lord: Because God, by the Creation of the World, goes out,
as I may say, of himself, since the term of his Operation is not his own
substance, as in immanent Operations, by which the Son is continually begotten,
and the Holy Ghost proceeds. It is upon this account that the Wise man after
these words in the Eighth Chap. of the Proverbs; The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his Ways, adds for Explication Before his works of Old.
, Antequam quidquam faceret a principio. That Jesus Christ is the Head of the
Church is without dispute: But that he is the beginning of the Ways of the
Lord, in this sense, is that which may be doubted. I have followed the common
opinion of the Fathers upon the 22. ver. of the 8th. chapter of the Prove. for
almost all of them understand this passage, which the Arrians abused, Dominus
possedit; or ( as they then read according to the 70.) Creavit me in initio
viarum suarum, of the incarnate Wisdom. It is useless here to transcribe all
the Quotations of Salazar upon this place of the Proverbs. Jesus Christ is the
firstborn of every Creature, primogenitus omnis creaturae, Col. 1.15. He is
our model, since St. Paul exhorts us to put Him on, or to become like unto Him:
Therefore, as we have born the Image of the Earthly, let us also bear the Image
of the Heavenly. It is according to his Image, that all men were made in the
purpose of God. For the Word is universal Reason, and immutable Order; and God
has made us to conform us to Reason and Order. There are none but the Elect,
whom God has efficaciously predestined to become conformable to the Image his
Son: Quos praescivit and predestinavit conformes fieri imagini Filii sui, Romans
8.29. I confess it. But God would Save all men, He wills there Sanctification;
This is the will of God, your Sanctification, 1. These. 4.3. The Wisdom
incarnate is moreover our model after a sensible manner, and suitable to men
who only harken to their senses. God foreseeing sin, resolved to give unto
Jesus Christ a body that it might be a victim, which He might offer unto Him;
for every Priest must have something to offer. Necesse est and hunc habere
aliquid quod offerat, Heb. 8.3. Now God thought on the body of his Son when he
formed that of Adam, and has given unto us all a body, by which we may Merit,
or which we ought to sacrifice as Priests, and according to the Example of our
Sovereign Priest: Obsecra vos ut exhibeatis corpora vestra hostiam viventem,
sanctam, Deo placentem, Romans 12.1. To conclude, all things subsist in Jesus
Christ, Omnia in ipso constant, Col. 1.19. Every thing was created in J. C. and
by J. C. Omnia per ipsum and in ipso creata sunt, Col. 1.16. Omnia and in
omnibus Christus, Col. 3.11.

III.

There ought to be some relation betwixt the World and the Action by which it
is produced. Now the Action by which the World was drawn out of nothing is the
Action of God, which is of infinite value; and the World how perfect soeve^
(...) might be, is not infinitely amiable, and cann^^ (...) unto God an Honor
worthy of him. Thus, separate Jesus Christ from the rest of the creatures, and
see if he who cannot act but for his own glory, and whose Wisdom has no bounds,
could resolve to produce any thing from without. But if you join J. C. to his
Church, and the Church to the rest of the World, out of which it was taken;
then you will raise to the Glory of God a Temple so august and so holy, that
you will perhaps be surprised, that the foundations of it were laid so late.

Additions.

See then the order of things! All is for men, men for J. C. and J. C. for God;
Whether things present, or things to come, all are yours; and you are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods. 1. Cor. 3.22. God has Subjected all things to J. C. All
Power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth; St. Mat. 28.18. Heb. 2.9. That
J. C. might subject all things to God, and give up his Kingdom at the end of
the World, having destroyed all Principalities and all Powers, 1. Cor. 15.24.
That the Son himself may be for ever subject to him that put all things under
him, and that thus God may be all in all. Ver. 28. This is the Spiritual Temple
which must be altogether filled with the Majesty of God, and remain eternally,
because its immovable foundations are laid on J. C. before those of this world,
which must Perish: I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever
the earth was. Fundavit me, (...), apud Sept.
Ab aeterno ordinata sum, and ex antiquis antequam terra sieret, Prove. 8.23.
God has elected us in J. C. before the Creation of the World: Ephesians. 1.4. His
grace is given to us before the world began. 2. Tim. 1.9. And J. C. himself in
his Prayer after the celebration of the holy Supper, beggs of (...) Father,
that glory which he possessed in him before the world was, i. e. before he
resolved to form the World St. John 17.5. To conclude, J. C. being the first of
the predestined, since we are not predestined but in J. C. God who has made
the world only for the predistinated (Omnia propter electos) must, as I may so
say, have thought of J. C. before all things. For if these passages, and such
like, be interpreted only of the Eternal prescience, it also may be truly said,
that the motion of a straw is in God before all ages, as well as the
Incarnation of his beloved Son, who renders all the Work of God Amiable to him.
If the different manner after which the H. Spirit speaks of the works of God in
the H. Scripture be observed, it cannot be doubted, in my opinion, that J. C.
and his Church is truly the design of God. See wherefore it is evident by
reason, and certain by Faith, that God never repents, or changes his design.
God is not as the Son of man that he should repent, Numb 23.19. Yet
nevertheless the H. Scripture says, that God repented he had made man, Genesis
6.6. And that the Jewish Priesthood, their Ceremonies, their whole Burnt -
offerings were not at all pleasing to him. Isa. 1. Psalm 50. Why did God make a
World which he was obliged to destroy? Why has he established a worship which
he is bound to reject, he who is constant in all his purposes. It is because he
would thereby signify, that the present world is not properly his work, or his
true design; nor the Jewish worship a true worship, or worthy of him. But what
then is his immutable design? The Lord swear, and will not repent; thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. God will never repent of having
made J. C. Sovereign Priest: He thereby receives Divine Honors. His Priesthood
shall continue for ever, having been confirmed by an Oath, Heb. chapter 7. etc. God
repented that he had made Saul King over the people. Saul, I say, the figure of
Herod's, and the Image of Politic Kings, who only seek their own greatness. But
David the figure and Father of Jesus Christ, is after Gods own heart. God never
repented that he had made him King over his People. I have Sworn once by my
Holiness, that I will not fail David. His Seed shall endure for ever, and his
Seat is like as the Sun before me, Psalm. 89.34, 35. Behold thou shall conceive
and bear a Son -- and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

When Abraham by the sacrifice of his only Son, had represented Jesus Christ
raised from the Dead, God assures him, and that also with an Oath to render
this promise irrevocable, that in the Antitpye of Isaac delivered from the
Dead, ( that is to say in J. C. raised from the Dead, set at his right hand,
made a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec, and a King over his
People) all the Nations should be abundantly blessed. By my self have I Sworn
says the Lord -- in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed.
Thus we see, when God speaks of the Incarnation of his Son and of his
Priesthood, he thereunto adds an Oath, to show that this is his irrevocable
purpose, or rather his purpose; for since God never repents, all his designs
are irrevocable. But I think I ought to advise, that what I have hitherto said,
is not essential to my purpose, which is principally to justify the Wisdom and
Goodness of God, notwithstanding Monsters, Sinners, and all the irregularities
found in the World. If I place J. C. at the Head of all things, if I make him
the principal design of God; it is because I hope by this means to justify the
thought, or desire, which God had to go out of himself by communicating himself
to his Creatures; and by the regular order of Meditation, it seems to me I
ought to begin there.

IV.

In the mean time, if you observe that the glory which redounds to God from his
work, is not essential to him; if you grant that the World cannot be a
necessary Emanation of the Divinity; you will plainly see that it was not to have
been eternal, though it never should have an end. Eternity is the Character of
Independence; it must needs be therefore that the World had a beginning. The
annihilation of substances is a mark of inconstancy in him that made them; they
therefore shall never have an end.

Additions.

I mean that Eternity does not imply independence. But independence implys
Eternity; for nothing can be independent that is not Eternal. Eternal existence
therefore is the manner whereby that thing which is independent exists. GOD
could not give Eternal existence to Creatures. To consider only the Power of
God, he was able to have created the World from all Eternity; for he never was
without his Power. But if his Wisdom, which is his inviolable, be consulted, he
ought not to have done it; and consequently in one sense he could not; for it
is not in the power of God to belie himself, or to despise the Laws which his
wisdom prescribes to him. The same thing must be said concerning the
annihilation of substances. If you consider only the power of God, he may
annihilate them. But if you consult his wisdom, it appears that he will do no
such thing: for God acts always after the wisest manner that he can, or which
best comports with his divine attributes. He may choose whether he will act at
all, in this he is very indifferent, for he is altogether sufficient to
himself. But if he acts he cannot change. His conduct must always bear the
impression of his wisdom and his immutability. It seems to me that order, which
is his inviolable law, requires it should be thus. See the 2d. discourse,
Articles 50, 51, 52.

V.

If therefore it be true, that the World ought to have a beginning, and that
the creation of J. C. could not be so ancient as the eternal generation of his
divine Person; an eternity must needs have preceded time. Thus, do not think
that God delayed the production of his work, he too much loves the glory which
he receives thereby in J. C. It may be truly said in some sense, that he has
made it as soon as he could. For though in respect of us, he might have created
it ten Thousand years before the beginning of the World; yet ten Thousand years
having no relation to eternity, he could not have made it sooner or later;
since an eternity must needs have gone before.

VI.

It is plain, that soon and late are the properties of time. And if it should
be supposed that God had created the World sooner than he did, by so many
Millions of years, as there are grains of sand upon the Seashore, might it not
still have been asked, Why God who so much loves the glory which he receives by
the Establishment of his Church, had not begun many Ages before? Thus it is
sufficient to say, that an Eternity Ought to have gone.
went before the Incarnation of the World, to show that this great mystery was
accomplished neither too soon nor too late. It was therefore necessary that God
should have created the World for the Church, the Church for J. C. and J. C.
for to find in him a Sacrifice, and a Sovereign Priest worthy of the divine
Majesty. This order of the designs of God cannot be doubted of, if it be
observed, that he cannot have any other end of his actions but himself. And if
it be understood that eternity is not proper to creatures, it will be granted,
that they were made when they ought to have been. These truths being supposed,
let us endeavor to discover something in the conduct which God observes for
the execution of his great design.

Additions.

Read the Objection and Answer which is at the end of the third explication,
where I show, that St. Augustine did not pretend that the Judgments of God are
impenetrable in this sense; that the truths which Faith teaches us being
supposed, it is unlawful to justify his wisdom and goodness in the execution
of his intentions. It Is certain, that the Fathers, and all Divines have
endeavored to give a reason of their Faith, and we ought to meditate upon the
truths of Religion, to attain unto the understanding of that which we already
believe. But to remove all scruple concerning my way of proceeding, I shall now
show, that St. Augustine himself approves it by his Example and his Reasons.

Consentius had some difficulties concerning the Trinity, he had proposed them
to Alipius, that he might obtain the resolution of them from St. Augustine. But
having learnt that St. Augustine was in a place of retirement, and proper for
meditating and clearing up his doubts, he writ to him himself, (as unto a man
whose spirit Sensum altissima mysteria perscrutantem.
penetrated into the highest mysteries) that he would give him those
explications he desired, if he thought convenient. Nevertheless he openly
declares, that 'twas his opinion, the reasons of our mysteries ought not to be
sought after, but that men should depend upon Faith only. These are his words,
Epis. 221.

Ego igitur, cum apud memetipsum prorsus definierim, veritatem rei divinae ex
fide, magis quam ex ratione, percipi oportere, si enim fides Sanctae Ecclesiae
ex disputationis ratione, non ex credulitatis Pietate, apprehenderetur, nemo
praeter Philosophos atque Oratores, beatitudinem possederet. Sed quia placuit
Deo, qui infirma Mundi hujus elegit, ut confundat fortia, per stultitiam
Praedicationis salvare credentes; non tam ratio requirenda de Deo, quam
autoritas est sequenda Sanctorum. Nam profecto, neque Ariani, qui Filium, quem
genitum confitemur, minorem putant, in hac impietate persisterent, neque
Macedoniani Spiritum Sanctum, quem neque genitum neque ingenitum credimus,
quantum in ipsis est a Divinitatis arce detruderent, si Scripturis Sanctis,
magis quam suis ratiocinationibus, accomodare fidem mallent.

But see St. Augustin's Answer.

Quod autem petis, ut questionem Trinitatis hoc est de Unitate Divinitatis, and
discretione Personarum, caute, prudenterque discutiam, ut doctrinae meae, sicut
dicis, ingeniique serenitas, ita nebulam vestrae mentis abstergat, ut quod nunc
cogitare non potestis, intelligentiae a me lumine declaratum quodammodo videre
positis. Vide prius, utrum ista petitio cum tua superiori definitione
concordet, superius quippe in eadem ipsa Epistola, in qua hoc petis, apud
temetipsum definisse te dicis, ex fide veritatem magis quam ex ratione, percipi
oportere. Si enim fides, inquis, Sanctae Ecclesiae, ex disputationis ratione,
and non ex credulitatis pietate apprehenderetur, nemo praeter philosophos atque
Oratores beatitudinem possideret, sed quia placuit, inquis Deo, qui infirma
hujus Mundi elegit, ut confundat fortia, per stultitiam Praedicationis salvos
facere credentes, non tam ratio requirenda, quam autoritas est sequenda
Sanctorum. Vide ergo, secundum haec verba tua, ne potius debeas, maxim de hac
re, in qua fides nostra Consistit, solam Sanctorum autoritatem sequi, nec ejus
intelligentiae a me quaerere rationem. Neque enim cum caepero te in tanti hujus
secreti intelligentiam utcunque introducere (quod nisi Deus intus adjuverit
omnino non potero) aliud disserendo facturus sum, quam rationem, ut potero,
redditurus: quam si a me, vel quolibet doctore non irrationabiliter flagitas,
ut quod credis intelligas, Corrige definitionem tuam, non ut fidem respuas, sed
ut ea que fidei firmitate jam tenes, etiam rationis Luce conspicias. Absit
namque ut hoc in nobis Deus oderit, in quo nos reliquis animantibus
excellentiores creavit. Absit inquam, ut ideo credamus, ne rationem accipiamus,
sive queramus; cum enim credere non possemus, nisi rationales animas haberemus.
Ut ergo in quibusdam rebus, ad doctrinam salutarem pertinentibus, quas ratione
nondum percipere valemus, sed aliquando valebimus, fides precedat rationem, qua
cor mundatur, ut magnae rationis capiat, and perferat Lucem, hoc utique
rationis est. and ideo rationabiliter dictum est per Prophetam, Nisi
credideritis non intelligetis. Isa. 7.9. secund. 70. Ubi proculdubio discrevit
haec duo, deditque consilium, quo prius credamus, ut id quod credimus
intelligere valeamus. Proinde ut fides praecedat rationem rationabiliter visum
est. Nam si hoc praeceptum rationabile non est, ergo irrationabile est. Absit
si igitur rationabile est, ut ad magna quaedam, quae capi nondam possunt, fides
precedat rationem; proculdubio, quantulacunque ratio quae hoc persuadet, etiam
ipsa antecedit fidem. Propterea monet Apost. Petrus, paratos nos esse debere ad
responsionem omni poscenti nos rationem de fide, and spe nostra: quoniam si a
me infidelis rationem poscit fidei and spei meae, et video quod antequam
credat, capere non potest hanc ipsam ei reddo rationem, in qua, si fieri
potest, Videat, quam prepostere ante fidem poscat rationem earum rerum quas
capere non potest. Si autem jam fidelis rationem poscat, ut quod credit,
intelligat; capacitas ejus intuenda est, and Secundum rationem redditam sumat
fidei suae, quantum potest, intelligentiam, majorem, si plus capit; minorem si
minus: cum tamen quousque ad plenitudinem Cognitionis, perfectionemque
perveniat, ab itinere fidei non recedat. Hinc est quod dicit Apostolus, Phil.
3.15, 16. Et tamen si quid aliter scitis, id queque vobis Deus revelabit:
veruntamen in quod pervenimus, in eo ambulemus. Jam ergo, si fideles sumus, ad
fidei viam pervenimus, quam si non dimiserimus, non solam ad tantam
intelligentiam rerum incorporearum, and incommutabilium, quanta in hac vita
capi non ab omnibus potest, verumetiam ad summitatem Contemplationis, quam
dicit Apostolus, facie ad faciem sine dubitatione perveniemus. Nam quidam,
etiam minimi, and tamen in via fidei perseverantissime gradientes, ad illam
beatissimam Contemplationem pervenerunt. Quidam vero, quid sit natura
invisibilis, incommutabilis, incorporea utcunque jam scientes, and viam quae
ducit ad tantae beatitudinis mansionem, quoniam stulta illis videtur, quod est
Christus Crucifixus, tenere recusantes, ad quietis ipsius penetrale, cujus jam
Luce men's eorum, velut in longinqua radiante perstringitur, pervenire non
possunt. Sunt autem quaedam, quae cum audierimus, non eis accomodamus fidem,
and ratione nobis reddita, vera esse Cognoscimus quae credere non valemus. Et
universa Dei miracula ideo ab infidelibus non Creduntur, quia eorum ratio non
videtur. Et revera sunt, de quibus ratio reddi non potest, non tamen non est.
Quid enim est in rerum natura, quod irrationaliter fecerit Deus? Sed quorundam
mirabilium operum, ejus etiam expedit tantisper occultam esse rationem, ne apud
animos fastidio languidos, ejusdem rationis cognitione vilescant. Sunt enim,
and multi sunt, qui plus tenentur Admiratione rerum, quam Cognitione Causarum,
ubi miracula esse desistunt; and opus est, eos ad invisibilium fidem
visibilibus miraculis excitari, ut charitate purgati, eo perveniant, ubi
familiaritate veritates mirari desistant. Nam and theatris Homines funambulum
mirantur, musicis delectantur: in illo stupet difficultas, in his retinet,
pascitque jucunditas. Haec dixerim, ut fidem tuam, ad amorem intelligentiae
cohorter, ad quam ratio vera perducit, and cui fides animum praeparat. And
afterward -- Porro autem qui vera ratione jam quod tantummodo credebat
intelligit, profecto praeponendus est ei qui capit ad huc intelligere quod
credit. Si autem nec cupit, and ea quae intelligenda sunt credenda tantummodo
existimat, Cui rei fides prosit, ignorant, vid. de Lib. arbit. Lib. 11. c. 2.

We see then, by this Epistle of St. Augustine, that they who blame my way of
proceeding, are of Consentius's opinion, which St. Augustine Condemns. Corrige
definitionem tuam, non ut fidem respuas, sed ut ea quae fidei firmitate, jam
tenes, etiam rationis luce conspicias. Absit enim, ut hoc in nobis Deus oderit,
in quo nos reliquis Animantibus excellentiores creavit. -- Haec dixerim ut
fidem tuam ad amorem intelligentiae cohorter, ad quam Ratio vera perducit, and
cui fides animum praeparat. This is the Method, which I think I have hitherto
observed, according to St. Augustine; who did not believe that he had any wise
derogated from the Majesty of our Mysteries by the 15. Books which he Composed,
about the Trinity.

VII.

If I was not persuaded that all men are reasonable, only because they are
enlightened by the Eternal Wisdom; I should doubtless be very rash to speak of
the designs of God, and to endeavor to discover any of his ways in the
production of his Work. But since it is certain, that the Eternal Word is the
universal reason of minds, and by the light which he continually casts upon us,
we may all have some commerce with God; I ought not to be blamed for consulting
this reason, which although consubstantial with God himself, fails not to Answer
all those who know how to petition him by a serious attention.

Additions.

That which I say here, that it is the Eternal Wisdom which enlightens us, etc.
is all taken out of St. Augustine. I have sufficiently proved it, in the
preface to the Search after Truth, in the Chapter concerning the nature of
Ideas, and in the Explication of the same Chapter.

VIII.

I confess nevertheless, that Faith teaches many Truths, which cannot be
discovered by the natural union of the mind with Reason. The Eternal Truth does
not answer all our Prayers; for we sometimes ask for more than we can receive.
But we should not use this as a pretense to cover our Idleness and want of
application.

Additions.

We ask more than we can receive, when we attend but a little to subjects much
compounded; or when we do not reason upon clear Ideas.

IX.

The generality of men are soon tired by the natural prayer, which the mind
should make by its attention to inward truth, to the end it may receive
therefrom light and understanding. And tired by this troublesome exercise, they
speak of it with contempt, discourage one another, and hide their weakness and
their ignorance under the deceitful appearance of a false humility.

Additions.

Thus they do, who are of the opinion of Consentius condemned by St. Augustine.

X.

Their example should not teach us this agreeable virtue, which entertains in
men's minds sloth and negligence, and comforts them in the ignorance of those
truths, which are most necessary for them. We ought continually to beg of him
who enlightens all men, that he would communicate to us his light; that he
would reward our Faith with the gift of understanding; and above all, that he
would hinder us from taking probality and confused sentiments, (which
precipitate the minds of the proud into the darkness of error) for that
evidence which attends his Answers.

Additions.

To this end we should observe the rule which I think I have demonstrated in
the 2d. Chapter of the Search after Truth, and the necessity of which I have
shown in all the rest of that Book; for the Libertines are either the most
ignorant, or fullest of errors and prejudices.

XI.

He that pretends to speak of God with any exactness, ought not to consult
himself, or speak as the common sort of men. He should lift up his mind above
all creatures, and with a great deal of attention and respect, consult the vast
Idea of a Being infinitely perfect: And since this Idea represents to us the
true God, very different from him whom the greatest part of men do fancy to
themselves; we should not speak of him according to the popular Language. It is
permitted to all men to say with the Scripture, that God repented he had made
man; that he was angry at his people; that he delivered Israel from Captivity
with the Strength of his Arm. But these expressions, and the like, are not
permitted to Divines, when they should speak exactly: Thus, when it shall be
observed in what follows, that my expressions are not common; none ought to be
surprised thereat. It should rather be carefully considered, whether they are
clear, and whether they perfectly agree with the Idea which all men have of the
Being infinitely perfect.

Additions.

The reason of this is, because we ought not to judge of things, but by the
Idea we have of them; For to judge of God by ones self, is to make God like
unto himself: A man cannot judge even of other men by himself, without falling
into many errors.

XII.

This Idea of an Infinitely perfect Being, contains two Attributes absolutely
necessary for creating the World; a Wisdom which has no bounds, and a Power
which nothing is able to resist. The Wisdom of God discovers unto him an
infinite number of Ideas of different works, and all possible ways of
executing his designs; and his Power makes him so much Master of all things,
and so independent upon all assistance whatsoever, that it is sufficient for
him to will, to the end, that what he wills may be done. For it must especially
be observed, that God has no need of Instruments for acting; that his will is
necessarily efficacious: In a word, that as his Wisdom is his own
understanding, so his Power is not different from his Will. Of this infinite
number of ways whereby God might have executed his purpose, let us see which
is that which he was obliged to prefer before all others; let us begin with the
Creation of the Visible World, of which, and in which, he forms the Invisible
World, which is the Eternal Object of his Love.

Additions.

Of this infinite number of ways by which God might have executed his purpose,
let us see which is that he was obliged to prefer before all others. This
without doubt is that which agrees best with the character of the divine
attributes. Now this is the most simple, the most general, the most uniform.
But observe, I do not engage my self to enquire which is the most simple, this
is not necessary: It is sufficient for my purpose, that God acts by simple and
general ways, because these ways are more worthy of him, than those which are
particular; and that amongst these simple and general ways, he chooses that
which is most worthy of his Wisdom, in relation to his Work. It is not at all
necessary, that I should particularly explain, which is this most wise way, and
most worthy of God.

XIII.

An excellent Workman should proportion his Action to his Work; he does not
that by ways very much compounded, which he may perform by more simple; he
acts not without an end, and never labors in vain. Hence it must be concluded,
that God discovering in the infinite treasures of his Wisdom an infinity of
possible Worlds, as necessary consequences of the Laws of motion which he might
establish, determined to create that which might be produced and preserved, by
the most simple Laws; or which might be the most perfect in relation to the
simplicity of the means necessary to its production and preservation.

Additions.

This is a comparison which I use, to keep up attention of mind, and to
heighten it so as to conceive the way by which he acts, unto whom none can be
compared. For few men can comprehend that the designs of God are wise and
enlightened, and that God does not form them, but according to the relation
which they have with the ways or manners of acting which carry in them the
character of his Attributes. They think that God chooses the design most worthy
of him, without considering, or without regard to the ways of executing it. But
let them observe, that God wills that his ways be most wise, as well as his
designs. He wills not that his designs should honor him, and his ways
dishonor him. He compares the wisdom of his design, with the wisdom of his
ways, and chooses both the design and the ways which altogether best agree with
the character of his Attributes. This is my Principle, by which I shall
justify the wisdom and goodness of God, notwithstanding all the irregularities
of nature, monsters, sin, and the miseries to which we are now subject. I begin
with the faults of the Material World.

XIV.

God doubtless might have made a World more perfect, than that which we
Inhabit. He might, for example, have ordered that the rain which serves to make
the Earth Fruitful, should fall more regularly upon Lands that are cultivated,
than upon the Sea, where it is not so necessary. But to have this World more
Perfect, he must have changed the simplicity of his ways, and have multiplied
the Laws of the communication of motions, by which our World subsists: And then
there would no more have been that proportion betwixt the Action of God and his
Work, which is necessary to determine an infinitely wise Being to act: Or at
least, there would not have been the same proportion between the Action of God
and such a perfect World, as there is betwixt the Laws of Nature, and the World
which we Inhabit. For our World, how imperfect soever it may be imagined, is
founded upon Laws of motion so simple and so natural, that it is perfectly
worthy of the infinite Wisdom of its Author.

Additions.

I use the example of the irregularity of ordinary rain, to prepare the mind
for another rain, which is not given to the merits of men, no more than the
common rain which falls equally upon Lands that are Sown, as well as those that
lie Fallow. I suppose it to be easily comprehended, that it is because the rain
falls in consequence of natural Laws, that it is so ill distributed in relation
to the necessities of the Earth. But I think I ought to advise, that they who
don't distinctly remember the proofs which I have given in the Search after
Truth, that it is God who does all, that he does not communicate his power unto
Creatures, but by making them the occasional causes of determining the
efficacity of the general. Laws, by which he executes his designs in a way
worthy of him. I think, I say, I ought to advise these persons to read and
meditate upon at least the first explication, which is at the end of the third
discourse; for to do it well, recourse ought to be had to those places wherein
I demonstrate my Principles.

XV.

In truth, I am persuaded that the Laws of motion necessary to the production
and conservation of the EARTH, and of all the STARS in the HEAVENS are reduced
to these two. The first, that Bodies in motion endeavor to continue their
motion in a right Line: The second, that when two Bodies meet one another,
their motion is distributed from one to another proportionably to their bulk;
so that afterward they may be moved with an equal celerity. These two Laws are
the cause of all the motions which make that variety of form which we admire in
nature.

XVI.

I confess nevertheless, Search after Truth, in the last C. of Method.
that the second does not always seem to be observed in the experiments which
may be made upon this subject; but this is because we see only that which
happens to Bodies that are visible, and that we think not at all upon the
Invisible that surround them, which by the efficacy of the same Law make the
spring of visible Bodies, thereby obliging them to recoil, and not observe this
same Law. I must not in this place explain this any further.

XVII.

Now these two Laws are so simple, so natural, and at the same time so
fruitful, that tho there were no other reasons to judge that nature observes
them, yet we should have cause to believe, that they are appointed by him, who
always acts by the most simple ways, in whose Action there is nothing
irregular, and who proportions it so wisely with his Work, that he does
infinite marvels, by a very few [Practical] Resolutions.

Additions.

It would require a whole Book to prove that which I say here concerning the
fruitfulness of these two general laws of the communication of motion. It will
be easily seen that I speak not at all adventures by those who are exactly well
acquainted with the Physical principles of Mon. des Carts. But this is not
essential to my subject. It is sufficient that the Laws of Nature are general.
These three Articles may be looked upon as a kind of parenthesis.

XVIII.

We must not judge of the general cause as of particulars, of the Infinite
Wisdom, as of limited understandings. God foreseeing all that should follow the
natural Laws, even before their establishment, could not have established them
to overturn them. The Laws of Nature are constant and Immutable, they are
general for all times and all places. Two Bodies of such a magnitude and such a
swiftness striking upon one another, will be reflected after the same manner
now as heretofore. If the rain falls upon certain grounds, and the Sun burns up
others; if a season favorable to the Fruits of the Earth, be succeeded by a
Prost which destroys them; if a Child comes into the world with a monstrous and
useless head which grows out of his breast and makes him miserable; it is not
because God intended to produce these effects by particular wills, but because
he has established the Laws of the communication of motions, of which these
effects are necessary consequences: Laws otherwise so simple, and withal so
fruitful, that they produce all that we see beautiful in the world, and in a
little time repair the greatest Mortality and Dearth.

XIX.

He that having built an house, and then undermines the Foundation, discovers
his ignorance; he that plants a Vineyard, and immediately pulls up that which
had taken root, shows his folly: Because he that wills and wills not, wants
either understanding, or constancy of mind. But it cannot be said that God acts
either by caprice or through Ignorance; when an Infant comes into the world with
superfluous members, which hinder him from living, or when an Hail-Storm
destroys the Fruit almost ripe. Thus if God makes the Fruit to fall by a Storm
before it is ripe, it is not because he wills and wills not: For God acts not
by particular wills, as particular causes do. He has not established the Laws
of communication of motions with a design to produce Monsters, or to make the
Fruits Fall before they be ripe; he appointed these Laws by reason of their
Foecundity, and not their Barrenness. Thus that which once he willed, he wills
still; and in general, the world for which he made these Laws, shall subsist
eternally.

Additions.

I have not here proved a Posteriori, or by the effects, that the general
cause, acts by general Wills or Laws, whose efficacy is determined, by the
action of occasional or particular causes, though these sorts of proofs are very
many and undeniable. (1.) Because I supposed in the Advertisement to the
Reader, that he had read what I have written against the pretended efficacy of
second causes. (2.) Because none can want these sort of proofs; for every one
knows, that a body is never moved before it be struck, and that it is never
stricken without being moved: Every one knows it is day when the Sun is risen,
and that it is night when it is set; and that thus God produces the motion, and
the light in consequence of the general laws of nature. (3.) To conclude,
because the proofs a priorit, taken from the nature of the cause, tho more
abstracted, appear to me clearer, stronger, and more proper to the subject I
Treat of. For if I had not proved only by the effects, that God does all that
we see in nature, by simple, general, uniform and constant ways, it might be
answered: It Is true, but in grace he does quite otherwise; he there does all by
particular wills. Whereas having proved by the Idea of a Being infinitely
perfect, that he does all that we see by simple ways; since God does not belly
himself, this proves that he does by the like ways all that we do not see.
Thus men begin to reflect, that God must act after such a manner as comports
with his Divine Attributes. Nevertheless at the end of this first Discourse,
The last Article.
I have proved the same principle by Arguments a posteriori, that I might touch
the minds even of those who reflect upon nothing.

XX.

Here it must be observed, that the essential rule of the will of God, is
Order; and that if man, for example, had not sinned, (a supposition which would
much have changed his designs) then order, not permitting he should have been
punished, the natural Laws of the communication of motion, could never have
been able to have made him unhappy: For the Law of order, which requires that
the Just do suffer nothing, whether he will or no, being essential to God; the
Arbitrary Law of the communication of motions ought necessarily to be submitted
thereunto.

Additions.

God has but two Laws; Order, which is his inviolable Law, his natural Law, his
Word, or his Wisdom, which he loves invincibly; and the divine Decrees, the
Arbitrary Laws, with which he sometimes dispences; but he never dispences with
them, but when order requires: For it is against order, that a wise and
immutable Being should change his conduct without reason. It is a weakness to
have a changeable mind, it argues want of knowledge, or of constancy. Man, though
subject to error, is offended when he is reproached with his change. We must
therefore take care not to ask miracles of God, or to attribute them every
moment unto him: This is to tempt God, and to have sentiments unworthy of him.
See the fourth Explication, in which I show, that all that is done now, or
which was done under the Jewish Law, against those natural laws which are known
to us, is not always a miracle, or an effect produced by God, by particular
wills; because the Angels, for example, have power over the present world in
consequence of some general laws which are unknown to us; as I have proved by
Gods way of proceeding in the old Testament.

XXI.

There are indeed some sew occasions, where these general Laws of motion must
cease to produce their effect. But this is not because God changes these Laws,
or corrects himself; it is because by the order of grace, to which that of
Nature must be subservient, Miracles are wrought upon certain occasions.
Besides, it is convenient that men should know, that God is so much Master of
Nature, that if he submit himself to the laws which he has established, it is
because he chooses to do so, rather than that he is absolutely necessitated.

Additions.

Since the greatest part of men imagine, that besides God, there is a certain
Nature that does all: It Is convenient that God to make himself the better
known, should act against the custom of this pretended Nature. God makes
himself admired by the wise, or true Philosophers in his ordinary works; but
all the world are not Philosophers. There must be effects, which surprise and
strike the mind of those who make no reflection upon any thing that is
ordinary. See St. Augustine upon St. Joh, Tract. VIII. and XXVIII. Christian
Meditations. 8. Medit.

XXII.

If then it be true, that the general cause ought not to work by particular
wills, and that God was obliged to establish certain, constant and invariable
Laws of the communication of Motions, by the efficacy of which he foresaw that
the world might subsist such as we now see it; it may be truly said in some
sense, that God desires that all his creatures should be perfect; that he wills
not that Infants should perish in the womb of their Mothers, that he loves not
Monsters, that he has made no laws of nature to beget them; and that if he
could have made and preserved a World more perfect by as simple means, he would
not have established Laws, whereof so many Monsters are the necessary
consequences: But that it would have been unworthy of his Wisdom to multiply
wills to hinder certain particular disorders, which in the Universe make a kind
of Beauty.

Additions.

That if he could have made and preserved a World more perfect by as simple
means, he would not have established laws whereof so many Monsters are the
necessary consequences. This is evident at least in the order of grace, in
relation to which I say this. For God wills that all men should be saved, 1 Timothy II. 4. This is the will of God, our Sanctification, 1 These. IV. 3. God has
no need of the wicked, Eccles. XV. 12. On the contrary, He hates the ungodly
and his ungodliness. Wisdom XIV. 9. Certainly the design of God in the CREATION
is to make a Beautiful work. Now all irregularity disfigures the WORK. God
truly deserves to be admired, but much more in the simplicity of his ways, than
in the Beauty of the Universe. If God has made the world for man, why so much
barren ground? why more Sea than habitable Earth? It is because all this is a
consequence of the simplicity of his ways. This is not because God particularly
wills that such a ground should want water, for 'twou'd be a formal
disobedience if it was so; 'twould be to find fault with Gods conduct, and to
insult over his wisdom, to make new water courses. Can any thing be more
disorderly and less regular, than the distribution of Rivers, than the
disposition of Land and Sea? The Philosophers looked upon the Universe as the
work of blind nature; the reason is, because they thought not on the simplicity
of the ways by which it is preserved. But if there had been as simple ways, or
as worthy of God, capable to form and preserve a more beautiful work than the
world we now inhabit; it must be said, things being as they are, that either
the Author of Nature wanted understanding, or that his intention was to make an
imperfect work. See the 3d. Explication, Christian Meditat. 7, 8.

Monsters make in the Universe a kind of Beauty. Not that Monsters are
Beautiful in themselves, for all things being equal, it would be better there
were none at all; but it is because men often judge of the beauty of certain
things, by the deformity of others. Certainly the Church of Jesus Christ, the
future world shall be more perfect than the present world, and have no
Deformity, no Monsters, no Injustice, no Sin. Ephesians. V. 27. Apoc. XXII.

XXIII.

God gave to every Seed its own bud [ germe,] which contains in little, the
plant and the fruit, another bud which is fastened to this, and contains the
root of the plant, which root has a new root, whose imperceptible branches
spread themselves in two Lobes, or into the Pulp of this Seed. Does not he
sufficiently show by this, that he truly wills in some sense, that all those
seeds should produce their like? For why should he have given to those grains
of Corn which he intended should be barren, all the parts proper to make them
fruitful. Nevertheless, since rain is necessary to make them increase, and
since it falls not upon the Earth, but by general Laws which do not shower it
down upon improved grounds only, and precisely at proper seasons, all these
grains are not increased thereby: Or if they be, the Hail, or some other
unlucky accident, which is a necessary consequence of the same Laws of Nature,
hinders them from nourishing their Ear. Now because it is God who has
established these Laws, it might be said, that he would that some certain seeds
should be fruitful rather than others; if we did not know otherwise, that the
general cause ought not to act by particular wills, nor an infinitely wise
Being by compounded ways; God ought not to take other Measures than those which
he has taken to govern the rains according to the seasons, and places, and
desires of the Husbandmen. We need to say no more of the order of Nature: Let
us explain a little more largely that of Grace; and above all things, let us
observe that it is the same wisdom, and the same will; in a word, the same God,
who has established both the one and the other of these Orders.

Additions.

Above all, let us observe, that it is the same wisdom and the same will; in a
word, the same God who has established both the one and the other of these
orders; that is to say, that of Grace, and that of Nature, This is of the
greatest consequence. For God cannot be false to himself, or not follow his
wisdom in the establishment of the order of Grace. It is therefore necessary,
to the end that Gods conduct may bear the Character of his divine attributes,
that his ways be simple, general, uniform and constant. Thus we may already
see, that it will not be impossible to justify the wisdom and goodness of God,
tho Grace often falls without effect, and tho there be more men who are damned,
than those who are saved: God will appear wise, tho Grace should not be always
proportioned to our weakness: He will be good, and love men, tho all be not
saved; because we cannot take it ill, that God has greater love for his wisdom,
which is consubstantial to him, than for his work, which is only an imperfect
Image of his substance.

THE SECOND PART. Of the Necessity of the general Laws of Grace.
XXIV.

GOD loving himself by the necessity of his Being, and resolving to procure an
infinite glory to himself, and honor perfectly worthy of him, consulted his
wisdom about the accomplishment of his desires. This divine wisdom, filled with
love for him from whom he received a Being by an Eternal and ineffable
generation, seeing nothing in all possible creatures (the intelligible Ideas of
which he contains) that might be worthy of the Majesty of his Father, offered
himself that he might establish to his Honor an Eternal Worship, and as
Sovereign Priest; offer unto him a victim, which by the dignity of his Person
might be capable to please him. He rerepresented unto him an infinite number of
designs, for the Temple which he intended to raise to his glory, and at the
same time, all possible ways of performing them. That design which at first
sight seems Greatest and most Magnificent, the justest and most easily
understood, is that which has most relation to the Person unto whom all the
Glory and Holiness thereof must refer; and the wisest manner of performing this
design, is to Establish certain very simple and fruitful Laws to bring it to
its perfection. This is that which Reason seems to answer, to all those who
consult it with attention, and according to the principles which Faith teaches
us: Let us examine the circumstances of this Great design, and afterward
endeavor to find out the ways of performing it.

Additions.

The proof of all this is; because God does nothing without his Wisdom, or
without his Son, which Scripture teaches us, as well as Reason, Joh. I. 3. Heb.
I. 2. etc. That Jesus Christ is the principle design of God, see the first
Article, and the following. That he is the Model of the Elect, Romans VIII. 29.
And above all, that his ways do more than any other bear the Character of the
divine Attributes; that which I have already proved, and which you may see
further manifested in the third explication. I shall not hereafter stop, in the
Explication of what is clear enough in its self, and of little consequence.

XXV.

The Holy Scripture teaches us, that it is Jesus Christ who makes all the
Beauty, the Holiness, the Greatness and Magnificence of this Great Work. For if
it be compared therein to a City, it is Jesus Christ who makes all the Splendour
thereof: The Sun and the Moon does not enlighten it, Apocal. XXI. 23.
but the Brightness of God and the Light of the Lamb. If it be represented as a
living body, all whose parts have a marvelous relation to one another; Col. I.
18. II. 19. Ephesians. I. 22, 23.
it is Jesus Christ who is the head thereof; it is from him that Spirit and
Life is communicated to all the Members that compose it. If it be spoken of as
a Temple, it is Jesus Christ who is the Cornerstone, Ephesians. II. 20, etc.
upon which all the building is founded; it is he who is the Sovereign Priest:
It is he who is the Sacrifice thereof. Heb. IV. V, etc. X, etc.
None of the Faithful are Priests, but because they partake of his Priesthood:
They are not Sacrifices, but because they partake of his Holiness. It is only
in him and by him that they continually offer themselves to the Majesty of God.
To conclude, it is only by the Relation which they have to him, Phil. III. 9,
10, 11, etc.
that they contribute to the beauty of this august Temple, which always has
been, and for ever will be, the delightful Object of God himself.

XXVI.

Reason also teaches us these Truths: For what relation is there betwixt
creatures how perfect so ever they are supposed to be, and the Action by which
they are made? Every Creature being limited, how can it be worth the Action of
a God whose price is infinite? Can God receive any thing from a pure Creature,
which may incline him to act? But let it be, that God has made man in hopes of
being honored by him: Whence is it that the number of those who dishonor him
is much the greater? Does not God hereby sufficiently declare, that he very
much neglects the glory pretended to be received by his work, if separated from
his well beloved Son; that it is only in Jesus Christ that he resolved to
produce it, and that without him it should not subsist a moment?

XXVII.

A man resolves to do something, because he has need thereof, or because he
would see what would be the effect of his work, or lastly because he learns by
trying his strength what he is able to do: But God has no need of his
creatures. He is not like men, who receive new impression from the presence of
objects: His Ideas are eternal and immutable, he saw the world before it was
formed, as he sees it at present. In short, being conscious that his will is
efficacious, he perfectly knows, without making any trial of his strength,
whatsoever he is able to do. Thus Scripture and Reason teach us, that it is by
Jesus Christ that the world subsists, and that it is by the dignity of this
divine person, that it receives a beauty, which renders it agreeable in the
sight of God.

XXVIII.

It follows, in my opinion, from this principle, that Jesus Christ is the Model
or Pattern by which we are made, that we are formed according to his Image and
likeness, and that we have nothing beautiful, but so far as we are his
representations, and figures; that he is the end of the Law, and the finishing
of the Jewish Ceremonies and Sacrifices; that till this succession of
generations which preceded his birth had an end, it was necessary they should
have had certain relations to him by which they were made more agreeable to God
than any others. That since Jesus Christ was to be the Head and Spouse of the
Church, to represent him, all men were to proceed from one, and their
propagation to begin after that manner which Moses relates, and St. Paul
explains. In a word, it follows from this principle, that the present world
ought to be the figure of the future, and that as far as the simplicity of the
general Laws will permit it, all they who have or shall dwell therein, have
been or shall be figures and resemblances of Gods only Son, from Abel in whom
he was sacrificed, to the last Member that shall be of his Church.

XXIX.

We may judge of the perfection of a Work by the conformity there is betwixt
this work, and the Idea which the eternal wisdom gives us of it: For there is
nothing Beautiful, nothing Amiable, but by relation to the essential, necessary
and independent beauty. Now this intelligible beauty being made sensible,
became also in this estate the rule of beauty and perfection: Thus all
Corporeal Creatures must still receive from him their Beauty and Splendour. All
minds must have the same thoughts and the same inclinations with the soul of
Jesus, if they would be agreeable to those who see nothing Beautiful, nothing
Amiable, but that which is conformable to Wisdom and Truth. Since then we are
obliged to believe that the work of God has a perfect conformity with the
eternal Wisdom; we have all reason to believe, that the same work has infinite
relations to him who is the Head, the principle, the model and the end thereof.
But who can explain all these relations?

XXX.

That which makes the Beauty of a Temple, is the order and variety of the
Ornaments which are there to be seen. Thus, to render the living Temple of the
Majesty of God worthy of him who is to inhabit it, and proportioned to the
infinite wisdom and love of its Author; all Beauties ought to be found therein.
But it is not with the Glory and Magnificence of this Spiritual Temple, as it
is with the gross and sensible Ornaments of Material Temples. That which makes
the Beauty of the Spiritual Edifice of the Church, is the infinite diversity of
the Graces, which he who is the Head thereof, communnicates to all the parts
that compose it; it is the order, and the admirable relations they have by him
to one another; it is the diverse degrees of Glory which shine on all sides.

XXXI.

It follows from this principle, that to establish this variety of rewards
which compose the beauty of the Heavenly Jerusalem, it is necessary that men
upon Earth should be subject, not only to afflictions which purisie them, but
also to the motions of Concupiscence, which gives them opportunity of gaining
so many Victories by engaging them in so great a number of different Combats.

XXXII.

The Blessed in Heaven will doubtless have an Holiness and variety of gifts,
which will perfectly answer the diversity of their good works. These continual
sacrifices, by which the Old Man is destroyed and annihelated, will Adorn and
Beautify the Spiritual substance of the New Man. Luke XXIV. 26.
And if it became Jesus Christ himself to suffer all sorts of afflictions,
before he entered into his glory; the sin of the first Man, which brought the
evils into the World which accompany Life, and Death which follows, it was
necessary, that men having been tried upon Earth, might justly be rewarded with
that Glory, the variety and order of which will make the beauty of the future
World.

Additions.

The sin of the first Man was not necessary in it self. God might without this
sin, have found a Thousand means to make the future Church as Beautiful as it
shall be; but since God acts always as wisely as is possible, and according to
the character of the divine attributes, since he invincibly loves his Wisdom:
There could be no such means for Men to Merit the Glory which one day they
shall possess, as that which suffers them to be ingulf'd in sin, that mercy
might be shown to them all in Jesus Christ. For the Glory which the Elect shall
obtain, by the Grace of Jesus Christ, in resisting their Concupiscence, will be
greater, and also more worthy of God than any other. See the 34, and 35.
Articles. St. Aug. de cor. and great. and C. 10.

XXXIII.

If I had a clear Idea of the Blessed Spirits which have no body, perhaps I
might clearly answer a difficulty which arises in respect of them. For it may
be objected, either that there is little variety in the merits and recompenses
of Angels, or else that it was advisable that God should unite Spirits to
bodies, on which they do at present so much depend. I confess that I do not see
any great diversity of rewards which ought to answer the merits of substances
purely intelligible, especially if they have merited their reward by one single
act of Love. They not being united to a body which might occasion God to give
them, according to certain most simple and general Laws a succession of
different sentiments or thoughts; I can see no diversity in their combats, nor
in their victories. But perhaps there may be an order established which to me
is unknown: And upon this account, I ought not to speak of it. It is enough for
me to have settled a principle, whence we may conclude that it became God to
create Bodies, and to unite Spirits unto them, that by the most simple Laws of
the Union of these two substances, he might in a general, constant, and uniform
way give us, that great variety of sentiments and motions, which is the
principle of our different Merits and Rewards.

XXXIV.

To conclude, God ought to have all the Glory of the Beauty and Perfection of
the future World. This Work which infinitely surpasses all others, must be a
work of pure mercy: The Creatures ought not to boast of having any other part
therein but that which the grace of Jesus Christ has given them. In a word,
Romans XI. 32. Gal. III. 22.
it was advisable that God should suffer all men to be engaged in Sin, that he
might have mercy upon them all in Jesus Christ.

XXXV.

Thus since the first man was able by the strength of his Love to persevere in
original righteousness, it was not necessary that God should keep him to his
duty by preventing pleasures, he having no concupiscence to overcome; it was
not fit that God should prevent his free will by the delectation of his grace.
In short, having all that was necessary for meriting his reward, God who does
nothing that is useless, ought to have left him to himself, tho he foresaw his
fall; since he intended to raise him up in Jesus Christ, to confound free will,
and to make his mercy Illustrious. Let us endeavor at present to find out the
ways by which God executes his eternal purpose of Sanctifying his Church.

XXXVI.

For tho in the establishment of the future World, God acts by ways very
different from those by which he preserves the present; nevertheless we ought
not to imagine, that this difference is such, as that the Laws of grace do not
carry in them the character of the cause which has established them. Since God
himself is the Author of the Order of Grace, and of that of Nature; it is
necessary that these two Orders agree with one another, in respect of all that
which they have in them relating to the Wisdom, and other Attributes of their
Author. Thus, since God is a general cause whose wisdom has no limits, it is
necessary for reasons which I have already mentioned, that in the Order of
Grace, as well as in that of Nature, he should act as a general cause; that
having for his end his own glory, by the raising of his Church, he should
establish the most simple and general Laws; and which compared with their
effect have the greatest proportion of Wisdom and Fruitfulness.

XXXVII.

The more any Agent has of knowledge, the more extensive is his will. A mind
much limited, every moment takes up new resolutions; and when he undertakes to
execute any one of them, he uses several means, some of which are always
useless. In a word, a stinted mind does not sufficiently compare the means with
the end, the strength and the Action with the effect which they should produce.
On the contrary, anextensive and penetrating spirit compares and weighs all
things: He does not take up his resolutions but by the knowledge which he has
of the means of executing them; and when he sees that these means wisely relate
to their effect, he employs them. The more simple any Machines are, and the
more different their effects, the more Spiritual they are, and more worthy of
Esteem. The great number of the Laws of any State, often shows the want of
penetration, and comprehension of mind in the Lawmakers: It being rather
experience of the want of 'em, than a wise foreknowledge which has ordained
them. God whose Wisdom has no bounds, must make use of the most simple and most
fruitful ways in the formation of the future World, as well as for the
conservation of the present. He ought not to multiply his wills, which are the
executing laws of his purposes, but so far as necessity obliges him thereunto:
He must act by general wills, and thus establish a constant and regular order,
according to which he foresaw by the infinite comprehension of his Wisdom, that
such an admirable work as his is might be formed. Let us see the consequences
of this principle, and the application which may be made thereof, for the
explaining those difficulties which may appear sufficiently entangled.

Additions.

I don't think that any one can read this Article, and those which go before
with attention, without granting, that seeing God cannot be false to himself,
nor act by those ways which do not agree with his Attributes, he is obliged to
perform his designs by the most simple means, the most general, uniform, and
constant ways. Therefore I shall net spend time to prove this in particular by
the Idea of a being infinitely perfect, and by all the natural effects of
causes which we know. Besides all that I am to say, I have proved this
principle several ways in the Search after Truth, by overthrowing the pretended
efficacy of second causes; in the Med. Christ. from the fourth to the eighth
inclusively; and also in the Explications which are at the end of this
Treatise. But let us see if the use which I am about to make of this principle,
for explaining the truth which faith teaches us, does not at once demonstrate
both this principle and these truths.

XXXVIII.

The H. Scripture teaches us on the one side, that God wills that all men
should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; and on the other, that
he does all that he wills; and yet nevertheless Faith is not given to all the
World, and that the number of those who Perish, is even greater than of the
Predestined, how shall we make this agree with his Power?

Additions.

It is because his Wisdom renders him unable. For since it is that which
obliges to him to act by the most simple ways, it is not possible that all men
should be saved, by reason of this simplicity of his ways.

XXXIX.

God from all eternity foresaw Original Sin, and the infinite number of Persons
whom this sin would carry down to Hell. Nevertheless he created the first Man
in an Estate from which he knew he would fall; and also made such a relation
between this Man and his Posterity, as must communicate to them his sin, and
render them all worthy of his Aversion, and his Anger. How does this agree with
his goodness?

Additions.

It is because God more loves his Wisdom, than his work. For since his Wisdom
prescribes unto him the ways which best suit with his Attributes, and since his
ways require that Adam being otherwise able to persevere, should not have had
preventing Grace; that which did happen, ought to have happened to him.

XL

God often communicates his Graces, tho they have not the effect for which his
goodness obliges us to think they were given. He makes some persons to increase
in Piety till toward the end of their life, and then sin reigns over them to
their death; and throws them into Hell: He makes the dew of grace to fall upon
hardn'd hearts, as well as upon prepared Souls; men resist it and render it
useless for their Salvation. In a word, God unmakes and renews continually, it
seems as if he willed and willed not the same thing. How can this agree with
his Wisdom?

Additions.

It is because since God ought not to Sanctify men by particular wills, he does
not give Grace to such an one upon such an occasion, to the end that it should
have such a certain effect and nothing more. It becomes limited Understandings
to act after this manner. But God having an infinite understanding, it became
him to establish general Laws for the executing of his designs: This is what I
have already so often said, and shall further say in the following Articles.

XLI.

Behold, as I think, the great difficulties; all the Economy of Religion, the
Idea which we have of a good, wise, and powerful God; constant in his designs,
regular in his actions; a thousand places of Scripture supplying us with many
more against that which we see come to pass every day in the order of Grace:
and tho very able men have answered them, yet it seems to me they cannot be so
easily resolved by their principles, as by that I shall lay down.

XLII.

As for my self, I have always believed that God in truth wills in general,
that all men should be saved. Both Reason and Scripture has always hindered me
from doubting thereof. And tho some Authors, for whom I have a great respect,
have in the foregoing Ages published diverse explications of this Truth, I never
could easily admit of those which seemed without any necessity to set bounds to
the infinite goodness and mercy of God. Thus consulting the Idea which all men
have of God, I entertained the Sentiment, which I at present expose to the
censure of all those, who examine it with Attention, and judge of it with
Equity.

Additions.

We tempt God, when we desire him to do that which he ought not to do; that is
to say, that he should act after a particular manner, and not in consequence of
general Laws; otherwise, what harm would it be for one to cast himself
headlong, as Satan desired J. G. to do? If it be as wise for to sustain an
heavy body in the Air, as to make it fall upon the Earth; we should not tempt
him, we should not engage him to do a thing unworthy of him, when trusting in
his goodness we should throw our selves out of the windows. In a word provided
a man has always a good design, he can never want prudence.

XLIII.

God being obliged always to act, as becomes him, by simple, general, constant,
and uniform ways; in a word, such as are agreeable to the Idea which we have of
a general cause, whose Wisdom has no bounds; it became him to establish certain
Laws in the Order of Grace, as I have proved he has done in that of Nature. Now
these Laws by reason of their simplicity, have necessarily woeful consequences
in respect of us; but these consequences do not oblige that God should change
these Laws for those that are more Compounded. For these Laws have a greater
proportion of Wisdom and Fruitfulness to the work which they produce, than all
those which he could ordain for the same purpose; since he always acts after
the most wise and perfect manner. It is true, that God might prevent these sad
consequences by an infinite number of particular wills; but his Wisdom which he
loves more than his Work, the immutable and necessary order, which is the rule
of his will, do not permit it. The effect which would happen from each of his
wills, would not be worth the Action which should produce it. And consequently
we ought not to find fault, because God does not confound the order and
simplicity of his Laws by miracles; which would indeed be very convenient for
our necessities, but very much opposite to the Wisdom of God, which it is not
lawful to tempt.

XLIV.

Thus, seeing we ought not to be displeased, that the rain falls into the Sea
where it is useless, and not upon Sown-grounds where it is necessary; because
the laws of the communication of motions are very simple, fruitful, and
perfectly worthy of the wisdom of the Author; and that according to these Laws
it is not possible that the rain should fall rather upon the Land than the
Seas; so that we ought not to complain of that apparent irregularity, whereby
Grace is given to men. It is the regularity wherewithal God acts, it is the
simplicity of the Laws which he observes, it is the wisdom and uniformity of
his Conduct, which is the cause of this seeming irregularity. It is necessary,
according to the Laws of Grace, which God has established in favor of the
Elect, and for the building of his Church, that this Heavenly rain should fall
sometimes upon hardened Hearts, as well as upon prepared Souls. If therefore
Grace is given sometimes to no purpose, it is not because God acts without
design; much less that he acts with an intention, to render Men more culpable
by the abuse of his favors. It is because the simplicity of the general Laws
permits not, that this grace, inefficacious in respect of a corrupted heart,
should fall upon another heart where it would be efficacious. This Grace not
being given by a particular will, but in consequence of the immutability of the
general order of Grace, it is sufficient that this order should produce a work
proportionable to the simplicity of his Laws, to the end it might be worthy of
the wisdom of its Author: For to conclude, the order of Grace would be less
Perfect, less Admirable, less Amiable, if it was more Composed.

XLV.

If God should have given Grace by particular wills, without doubt for the
Conversion of a sinner who had four degrees of Concupiscence, he would not have
resolved to have given but three degrees of Spiritual pleasure, supposing that
these degrees of grace had not been sufficient to convert him. He would have
deferred his bounty, till the sinner should not have been in the presence of
the Object that tempted him: Or rather he would have given this same grace of
three degrees of strength to such an one, whose Concupiscence should have been
less active. For what an odd design would it be to give three degrees of
Spiritual delight to one, to whom four are necessary; and refuse them to him,
whom they would have Converted? Does this agree with the Idea which we have of
the wisdom and goodness of God? Is this to love Men? Is this to will that all
shall be saved? Is this to do all that can be done for them? Yet God cries out
by his Prophet; Inhabitans of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Isa. V. 3, 4.
judge between me and my Vineyard. What could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore had I not reason then to look
for good Grapes, when it brought forth wild Grapes? What wisdom is it by
particular wills to give so many inefficacious Graces to sinners; supposing
that God wills their Conversion as Scripture teaches us, and that he has not
that fatal design of rendering them by his gifts, more Culpable and blame Worthy?

XLVI.

But if Grace be given to men by most simple and general Laws, all these great
difficulties vanish away. The order of Grace which God has established having
more Wisdom and fruitfulness in respect to the work which it produces than any
other; God was obliged to choose it for the establishment of his Church. Thus we
may be assured, that God truly wills the salvation of all men; that he has
done all for them that he could do, acting as he ought to do, that if there had
been any order of Grace as simple and more fruitful; as worthy of his wisdom
and more useful to men, he would have chosen it; and that thus he saves as many
persons as he can save, acting according to those adorable rules which his
wisdom prescribes.

Additions.

Men must in my opinion, be much out of humor to take it ill, that they find
the Wisdom and Goodness of God thus justified, by the principle I have laid
down. For to like it well, that so many Nations should perish, merely because
God would not afford them the light of his Gospel, and to take it ill that God
should do in this what his Wisdom prescribes; that Wisdom which to him is an
inviolable Law, that Wisdom which he loves, and which he ought to love
infinitely more than his work; this assuredly is an extraordinary disposition
of mind. To desire that God should every moment by particular wills, give
Graces useless to those who receive them, and to those who he foresaw would
become more culpable, and more criminal by the contempt of them; this is to
desire that a wise Being should not proportion the means to the end, or that
God should not wish well to them to whom he has applied the Blood of Jesus
Christ; this is to desire to maintain paradoxes.

XLVII.

Let men therefore love and adore not only the good will of God, by which the
Elect are Sanctified, but also the secret judgments of his Justice, by which
there are so many Reprobates. It is the same order of Wisdom, the same laws of
grace which produce such different effects; God is equally adorable, and
amiable in all that he does, his Conduct is always full of wisdom and of
goodness: Woe be to the wicked who condemn it without knowing any thing of it,
who desire that the immutable order of divine wisdom should accommodate its
self to their Passions and Interests.

XLVIII.

The wise and diligent Husbandmen Labor, Manure, and Sow their Lands with a
great deal of trouble and expense. They carefully observe the most proper
seasons for their different cultures, and only depend upon God for the success
of their labors. They give up their work to the order of Nature, well knowing
that it is to no purpose to tempt God, and presume that in favor to us, he
should change the order which his wisdom prescribes unto him.

XLIX.

Jesus Christ came to teach us to imitate their example. As he has an immense
charity for us, and would save us all, as far as the simplicity of the general
Laws of Nature and Grace can permit him; so he has forgotten nothing to bring
us into the way which leads to Heaven. There is not any thing more opposite to
the efficacy of Grace, than sensual pleasures and the sentiments of pride: For
nothing so much corrupts the mind and hardens the heart. But has not Jesus
Christ in his Person sacrificed and annihelated all greatness, and all sensible
pleasures? Was not his life, a continual example of Humility and Penance? How
was he born, how did he dye, how did he converse among men? All the world knows
it. What is the sum of his Doctrine; or whither tended all his Councels? Is it
not to Humility and Penitence, to a general privation of all things that
flatter the senses, of all that corrupts the purity of the Imagination, of all
that maintains and fortifies the concupiscence of Pride? That which he has
said, that which he has done, that which he has suffered, has been to prepare
us by his doctrine, by his example, by his merits, to receive the Heavenly
showers of grace, in such a manner as that they may operate best in us. Since
he could not, or ought not, See the last Explication of the Search after Truth.
to change the laws of Nature, tempt God, nor trouble the order and simplicity
of his ways, he has done for men all that he could, to inspire them with the
most extensive, the most diligent, and the most ardent charity.

L.

I fear not to say, that the Charity of Jesus Christ is immense and
incomprehensible, after that which the Scripture says of it. And tho all men do
not receive the effects of it, it would be rashness to set bounds thereto. He
died for all men, 1 Cor. 8.11.
even for those who daily perish. Why do not sinners enter into the Order of
Grace, why do they not follow the Councels of Jesus Christ, why do they not
prepare themselves to receive the rain of Heaven? They cannot merit it, it is
true, but they may promote its efficacy in respect of themselves. Can they not
by Self-love, or by the fears of Hell, avoid a great many occasions of sinning,
deprive themselves of pleasures, at least of those which as yet they have not
tasted, and to which consequently as yet they are not enslaved? They may also
remove some impediments of the efficacy of Grace, and prepare the soil of the
heart, so that it may become fruitful, when God shall send his rain according
to the general laws he has prescribed. But they desire that God should save
them without any pains of theirs; like to those idle and sloathful Husbandmen,
who without bestowing the ordinary labors upon their field, presume that God
ought to send them such fructifying and plentiful Rains as may spare their
pains. False and Sottish Confidence! God causes it to rain upon fallow Lands,
as well as upon those that are Cultivated. But let the Proud and the Voluptuous
know, that the rain of Grace shall fall much less upon them, than upon other
men; and that in the mean time they put themselves in such a conditition, that
to convert them, they have need of much more.

LI.

Since God does not ordinarily confer his grace but by general Laws, we clearly
see the necessity of the counsels of Jesus Christ. It appears that we ought to
follow his wise counsels, that God may save us by the most simple ways, and
that giving us as little grace, as may be, he may operate much in us. It
clearly appears, that man on his part ought to labor continually; that he
ought to till the ground before the heats of Concupiscence has dried and
hardened it, or at least as soon as the rain has taken away this dryness and
hardness; that he ought carefully to observe the moments when he is at liberty
from his passions, that he may make his advantage thereof; that he ought, as
much as in him lies, to weed out all that may Choke the seed of the Word; and
not foolishly imagine that he shall be Converted, after he has made his fortune
in the World, or shall be ready to quit it. For, besides that it depends not on
the Husbandmen, to cause it to rain according to their necessities, after a
piece of ground has a long time lain fallow, the Briars and Thorns have taken
such deep root, that they who have not accustomed themselves to labor, have
neither strength, nor even desire to cultivate it.

LII.

But if God should act in the order of Grace by particular wills, if he should
efficaciously cause in all men their good motions, and all their good works
with a particular design; I do not see how it could be maintained that he acts
by the most simple Laws. When I consider all the turnings by which men come
whither God leads them; for I doubt not at all, but that God often gives to a
man more than an Hundred good thoughts in one day. Neither can I any more
comprehend, how his Wisdom and Goodness can be made to agree with all those
inefficacious graces which the Malice of men resists: For God being good and
wise, is it not evident that he must proportion his assistance to our needs, if
he granted them with a particular design of encouraging us?

Additions.

It appears by these Articles, that my principle does still perfectly well
agree with the Counsels of Jesus Christ, and that as the Husbandmen ought on
their part to Cultivate, Plow, and Sow their Lands; so men on theirs should
endeavor to remove the impediments of the efficacy of Grace: But that as the
labors of men, are not the cause of rain, so Grace likewise is not given to
natural merits; since its distribution depends upon certain general Laws, like
as the ordinary rain is the natural consequence of the general Laws of the
communication of motions.

LIII.

God causes the weeds to grow with the Corn till the day of Harvest, he makes
it to rain on the just and on the unjust, because grace falling on men by
general Laws, is often given to such as make no use thereof; whereas if others
had received it, they would have been converted by it. If Jesus Christ had
preached to the Tyrians and Sydonians, as well as to the Inhabitants of
Bethsaida, and Corazin, they would have Repented in Sackcloath and Ashes. If
the rain which falls upon the Sands, was shed upon well-managed Land, it would
have rendered it fruitful. But whatsoever is regulated by general Laws, does not
agree with particular designs. That these Laws be wisely established, it is
sufficient that being extremely simple, they bring to perfection the great work
for which God appointed them.

LIVE.

But tho I do not think that God has infinite particular designs in reference
to each of the Elect, so that he every day gives a great number of good
thoughts and good motions by particular wills: Yet nevertheless I deny not, but
they are all predestined by the good will of God toward them; for which they
ought to be eternally thankful. See how I explain these things.

LV.

God discovers in the infinite treasures of his wisdom, an infinite number of
possible works, and at the same time the most perfect way of producing each of
them. Amongst others he considers his Church, J. C. who is the Head thereof,
and all persons who in consequence of certain general laws must compose it. In
short, having in mind Jesus Christ and all his members, he established his laws
for his own glory. This being so, is it not evident that J. C. who is the
principle of all that glory that comes to God from his work, is the first of
the predestined? That all the Elect also are truly and freely beloved and
predestined in J. C. because they may honor God in him; that lastly they are
all infinitely obliged to God, who without considering their merit, has
established the general Laws of Grace, which must sanctify the Elect, and bring
them to that glory which they shall eternally possess.

Additions.

Man is a strange creature, he is as full of pride, as he is worthy of
contempt. He is not satisfied with God, if God does not go out of his way to
please him: He looks upon himself as the Center of the Universe; he refers all
things to his own particular, even God himself, and his Eternal Attributes. God
is not good but as he is good to him, and even the incarnation of J. C. is a
work useless and ill managed, if it do not deliver him from his miseries.

But on Gods side, what excess of bounty! It seems as if God, to render himself
Amiable to those who are most in love with themselves, favors this prejudice
by his way of speaking unto men. God so loved the World, says J. C. himself,
that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that all that believe in him
should have eternal life. What! is J. C. in the eternal designs of God made Man
only for men's salvation? No doubtless. On the contrary, men were made for Jesus
Christ. They are the materials wherewith he is to build the Eternal Temple, and
this Temple is only for God. This is the design of the uncreated Wisdom. J. C.
is the Head of the Church; now the Members are for the Head, and not the Head
for the Members. J. C. is the first in all things, In omnibus primatum tenens:
But he himself is for God; Omnia vestra sunt, vos autem Christi, Christus autem
Dei. Let us be satisfied that God who has no need of us, was pleased to create
us in Jesus Christ for his own glory. He might have left us in our nothing; yet
he has loved us in J. C. before the creation of the world. But let us not
flatter our selves; it is because we have J. C. as our Head, that we can render
unto him divine Honors. For God cannot act but for his own glory; Omnia
propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus. But he cannot find it except in
himself: Because a profane World, a Temple, a Worship, a Priesthood which is
not consecrated by the eternal Spirit, has no proportion with the Holiness of
God.

God after sin might have reduced us to nothing, and yet on the contrary he
has made us his adopted Sons in J. C. He will give us a part in the
inheritance of his well beloved Son. How thankful should we be for such an
extreme kindness! It is true, that they who shall be thus happy are not chosen
by an absolute and rash will; it is because the simplicity of the general Laws
of the order of Grace is favorable unto them, and that herein God acts after
such a manner as may be most worthy of him. But what! shall not God be amiable
to men, if he does not forsake his wisdom to love them with a blind love?
Should Nothing exalt its self, and not be content with its Creator, if he does
not without reason prefer it before the rest of his creatures? shall he not
rather put himself in the condition of so many sinners and nations abandoned to
error, whom God leaves therein without help, he who has sworn by his Prophets
that hedesires their Conversion and Sanctification? God desires the Salvation
of a sinner, and yet he suffers him to dye in his sin; God searches the hearts,
and turns them as he pleases, and without injuring their liberty, and yet all
the World is full of disorders. Who can resist God but God himself? But on the
other hand, who can be displeased that God loves his Wisdom more than his Work?
Let all those who love order, adore and love his Conduct, who makes it his
inviolable Law; let them love and adore his goodness, who being fully
sufficient to himself, has vouchsafed to form a design of making them eternally
happy.

LVI.

It may be said perhaps that these Laws are so simple and so fruitful, that God
must needs prefer them before all others; and that loving only his glory, his
Son must needs become incarnate; and that thus he has done nothing only for his
Elect. I confess, that God has done nothing only for his Elect; 1 Cor. 3.23.
for St Paul teaches us that he has made his Elect for Christ, and J. Christ
for himself. If to render God Amiable to men, he must be made to act only for
us, or after such a manner as is not the most wise; I had rather say nothing,
than talk at this rate. Reason teaches me to render God Amiable, by considering
him infinitely perfect, and representing him so full of Charity for his
Creatures, that he has made none of them with a design to render 'em
miserable. For if all be not so happy as to enjoy his presence, it is because
order requiring that so great a good should be merited, all men do not merit
it, for Reasons which I have already mentioned: Is not this to render God
Amiable, to represent him such, that even the Reprobate cannot but adore his
conduct, and repent of their negligence?

Additions.

Although Predestination be not founded but upon the prescience of God, and the
freedom of grace, (as may be seen in St Aust. de dono Pers. from the 17. C. to
the end) nevertheless the greatest part of men, to the Idea which answers to
this word, fix a divine decree so absolute, that one seems to them to oppose
free grace, when he maintains that God was obliged; by reason of his wisdom,
which he loves invincibly, to choose those whom he has chosen. As the
Palagians suppose that the reason of Gods choice is to be found in the natural
merits of men; and St. Augustine with the whole Church having maintained that
this depends upon the will of God, many imagine that he opposes predestination,
who asserts that the choice of the Elect depends upon the will of God, tho it
be a will enlightened and conducted by eternal Wisdom. To say that the reason of
Gods choice is in man, is to be a Pelagian, and maintain that grace is given to
merits: But to assert that the reason of this choice, is in the eternal wisdom,
which is the Law of God, or the rule of his proceedings. This is to cry out
with St. Paul. O altitudo divitiarum Sapientiae, and Scientiae Dei! But many
men do not understand these words in this sense, they pretend that one is
chosen, and another reprobated, merely because God wills it, and that his will
is his only reason; and that it is upon this account that the Elect are more
especially obliged to God. It is in condescension to this disposition of mind
which I have observed in a great many honest men, that I have composed this
Article. But they who will Meditate a little may easily see what are my
thoughts thereof.

LVII.

In the mean time, to satisfy those who suppose that God has predestined
every one of the Elect by a particular will, it may be said without injuring
the sentiment which I have Proposed, that God, before he created Souls to unite
them to bodies, foresaw all that should happen to them, according to the general
Laws of Nature and Grace, and all that they should do in all possible
circumstances. Thus according to this supposition, it being in his power to
create the Soul of Paul, or that of Peter, and to unite it to such a body which
he foresaw would be the body of one of the predestined; he resolved from all
Eternity to create the Soul of Paul, through the good will he had for him, and to
predestinate him by this choice to Eternal Life. Whereas he creates the Soul of
Peter, and unites it to another body by a kind of necessity, by reason of the
Laws of Union of Souls with Bodies, which he has very wisely established; for
as soon as Bodies are made, he has obliged himself to unite Souls unto them;
which was advantageous for all before sin. Now the Body of Peter being begotten
by an Heathen Father, or by a Father who has no care to Educate his Children;
or lastly, Peter by Birth finding himself engaged in times, places, and
employments, which led him to that which is evil, he will infallibly be amongst
the reprobate. In the mean time Peter will be useful to the designs of God, for
tho he himself does not make one of the Predestined, yet some of his
posterity may. He will promote the Beauty and Greatness of the Church of Jesus
Christ, by the many relations he will have to the Elect. In short, he will not
be miserable, but proportionably to the ill use which he shall have made of his
liberty: For God does not punish [with grief] any but voluntary irregularities.
This is all I can say to satisfy the inclination of some persons: But I do not
clearly see that any one ought to stop here.

LVIII.

They who pretend that God has particular designs and wills for all the
particular effects which are produced in consequence of general Laws, do
ordinarily make use of the authority of Scripture, whereon to found their
opinion. Now seeing Scripture is made for all the World, for the simple as well
as for the learned, it is full of Anthropologies. It gives to God not only a
Body, a Throne, a Chariot, an Equipage, the passions of Joy, of Sadness, of
Anger, Repentance, and other motions of the soul; but also attributes unto him
those ways of acting which are usual among men, that it may speak to the Vulgar
after the most sensible manner. If J. C. was made Man, this was partly to
satisfy the inclination of men, who love that which resembles them, and attend
to that which affects them. It is to persuade them by this true and real kind
of Anthropology, of those truths which they would not have been able to
comprehend. Thus St. Paul to accommodate himself to all men, speaks of the
Sanctification and predestination of the Saints, as if God continually acted in
them by particular wills. And even J. C. himself speaks of his Father, as if he
did by such wills adorn the the Lilies, and preserve even the hairs of the
heads of his Disciples; because in truth the goodness of God toward his
Creatures being extreme, these expressions give a great Idea thereof, and
render God amiable even to those minds which are most gross, and have most of
self love in them. Nevertheless, since by the Idea which we have of God, and by
those passages of Scripture which agree with this Idea, we correct the sense of
some other places, which ascribe unto God members or passions like unto ours:
So when we would speak exactly of the manner of Gods acting in the order of
Nature, or grace, we ought to explain the passages which make him act as a man,
or a particular cause by that Idea which we have of his wisdom and his
goodness, and by other places of Scripture which are agreeable to this Idea. For
in conclusion, if the Idea which we have of God, permits, nay obliges to say,
that he does not cause every drop of rain to fall by particular wills, tho this
sentiment is authorized by the natural sense of some places of Scripture, there
is the like necessity to think, that notwithstanding certain authorities of the
same Scripture, God does not give to some sinners by particular wills, all
those good motions which are of no effect to them, and yet to several others
would be effectual; because otherwise it seems impossible to me, to make the
Holy Scripture agree either with reason, or with its self, as I think I have
proved.

LIX.

If I thought, that what I have already said was not sufficient to convince
considering persons, that God acts not by particular wills, as particular
causes or limited understandings do, I should proceed to show, that there are
few truths whereof more proofs may be given, supposing it granted that God
governs the World, and that the Nature of HEATHEN PHILOSOPHERS is but a
Chimaera. For in truth nothing is done in the World, which does not prove this
sentiment, Miracles only excepted; which nevertheless would not be Miracles
different from the effects which are called natural, if it was true that God
ordinarily acts by particular wills; since Miracles are not such, but because
they happen not according to general Laws. Thus do Miracles suppose these Laws,
and prove the sentiment which I have laid down, but as for ordinary effects,
they clearly and directly demonstrate general Laws or Wills. For example, if a
stone be let fall upon the head of one that passes by, the stone will always
fall with equal swiftness, without distinguishing either the piety or the
quality, the good or evil dispositions of the passenger. If any other effect be
examined, we shall see the same constancy, in the action of the cause which
produces it. But no effect proves that God acts by particular wills, tho men
often imagine that God works Miracles every moment for their sakes. Since the
way by which they would have God to act, is agreeable to ours; since it flatters
self-love which refers all things to its self; since it comports well with the
ignorance we are in of the combination of occasional causes, which produce
extraordinary effects, it naturally enters into the mind, when we do not
sufficiently study Nature, and consult with attention enough, the abstracted
Idea of an infinite Wisdom, of an Universal Cause, of a Being infinitely
perfect.

Additions.

Let me be permitted to desire of the Reader, that he do meditate some time
upon this, first Discourse, before he reads that which follows.

The Second Discourse. Of the Laws of Grace in particular, and of the
Occasional Causes, which Govern and Determine their Efficacy.
First Part. Of the Grace of Jesus Christ.
Additions. Before this 2d. Dis. read 3d. C. of 2d. P. of Search after Truth,
and the Expli. of the same C. where the Author opposes the Efficacy of
pretended second causes.


I Have proved in the First Discourse, the necessity of Occasional Causes in
the Order of Grace, as well as in that of Nature; and I don't think that which
I have written can be distinctly understood, but it must be granted. But now I
am about to prove by those arguments which Faith supplies, that Jesus Christ is
this cause. Since this is of the greatest consequence, clearly to understand
the principles of Religion, and to make us draw near with confidence to the
true Propitiatory, or the occasional cause, which never fails to determine the
efficacy of the general Law of Grace: I think I may require the Reader to
Meditate upon this Second Discourse with all diligence, and without prejudice.

I.

Since there is none but God who acts immediately and by himself upon Spirits,
and who produces in them all the different Modifications whereof they are
capable; it is he alone who enlightens our minds, and inspires us with certain
sentiments which determine our diverse wills. Thus there is none but God who can
as the By the true cause I understand the Cause which Acts by its own strength.
true cause, produce grace in our Souls. For the principle of all the regular
motions of our love, is necessarily, either knowledge which teaches us, or a
sentiment which convinces us that God is our happiness; since we never begin to
love any object, if we do not either clearly see by the light of Reason, or
confusedly feel by the taste of pleasure that the object is good, I mean
capable of rendering us more happy than we are.

II.

But seeing all men are engaged in Original sin, and all even by their nature
infinitely below God; it is only J. Christ who by the dignity of his Person,
and the holiness of his Sacrifice, could have access to his Father, reconcile
us to him, and merit his favors for us. Thus it is J. C. only, who could be
the Meritorous cause of Grace. These truths are agreed on. But we do not seek
after the cause which Produces Grace by its proper efficacy, nor that which
merits it by his sacrifice and good works, we seek after that which regulates,
and determines, the efficacy of the general cause, that which may be called the
second, particular, and occasional.

III.

For that the general cause may act by general Laws or Wills, and that his
action may be regular, constant, and uniform; it is absolutely necessary, that
there be an occasional cause which determines the efficacy of these Laws, and
serves to establish them. If the percussion of bodies, or some such thing, did
not determine the EFFICACY of general LAWS of the Communication of motions, it
would be necessary that God should move bodies by particular wills. The Laws of
the union of the Soul and Body, are made efficacious only by the changes which
happen in each of these substances. For if God should make the Soul feel a
pungent pain, tho the body was not pricked, or if the brain should not be moved
as if the body was pricked, he would not act by the general Laws of the union
between Soul and body, but by a particular will. If it should rain upon the
Earth any other ways but by the necessary consequence of the general Laws of
the communication of motions, the rain and the fall of each drop that composes
it, would be the effect of a particular will: Insomuch that if order did not
require that it should rain, this will would be altogether unworthy of God. It
is therefore necessary that in the order of Grace, there be some occasional
cause which establishes these Laws, and determines the efficacy of them; and
this is that cause which we must endeavor to find out.

IV.

Tho we never so little consult the Idea of Intelligible order, or consider the
sensible order which appears in the works of God, we clearly discover that the
occasional causes which determine the efficacy of the general Laws, and
establish them, must necessarily have relation to the design for which God
appoints these Laws.

For example, we see by experience that God has not, and Reason convinces us
that he ought not, to have made the motions of the Planets the occasional
causes of the union of soul and body. He could not have willed that our Arm
should be moved after such and such a manner, nor the soul suffer the pain of
the Toothache, at the time of the Moons conjunction with the Sun, if this
conjunction does not act upon the body. The design of God being to unite the
Soul to the Body, he could not give to the Soul the sentiments of grief, but
when some changes happen in the body which are contrary to it. Thus we ought
not to seek any where else but in the Soul, and in the Body the occasional
causes of their union.

V.

Hence it follows, that God having a design to form his Church by J. C. could
not according to this design seek any where else but in J. C. and the Creatures
united by reason to J. C. the occasional causes which serve to establish the
general Laws of Grace, by which the spirit of J. C. is shed upon his Members,
and communicates unto them his Life and Holiness. Thus Grace is not showered
down upon our hearts according to the diverse situation of the Stars, nor
according to the meeting of several bodies; nor even according to the different
motion of the animal spirits which give unto us motion and life. No bodies can
excite in us any motions and sentiments, but what are purely natural; for all
that comes to the soul by the body, is only for the body. The Angels themselves
are not made occasional causes of inward grace. They are as well as we Members
of that body of which J. C. alone is the Head, they are Ministers of J. C. for
the salvation of the Saints. I grant that they may produce some change in the
bodies which surround us, and even in that which we animate; and that thus they
may remove some impediments of the efficacy of Grace. But certainly they cannot
distribute to men such a precious gift; they have not immediate power over the
minds of men, which by their nature are equal to them. To conclude, St Paul
teaches us, Heb. 11.5.
to believe that God has not subjected to them the future World, or the Church
of J. C. Thus the occasional cause of Grace cannot be found but in J. C. or in
man.

VI.

But seeing it is certain that grace is not granted to all those that desire
it, nor as soon as they desire it, and it is often given to those who do not
ask it; it follows, that even our desires are not the occasional cause of
Grace. For this kind of causes always have readily their effect, and without
them the effect is never produced. For example, the striking of bodies upon one
another being the occasional cause of the change which happens in their motion,
if two bodies do not meet one another their motions are not changed; and if
they be changed, we may be assured that they did. The general Laws by which
Grace is poured into our hearts, do find nothing in our wills which may
determine their efficacy; like as the general Laws which govern the rains, are
not founded upon the dispositions of the places where it rains. For whither
Lands lie Fallow, or whither they be cultivated, it rains indifferently in all
places, even upon Sands and in the Sea.

VII.

We are then brought to maintain, that since none but J. C. could merit grace,
there is likewise none but he who could give the occasions of the general Laws
according to which it is given to men. For the principle of the foundation of
general Laws, or that which determines their efficacy, being necessarily either
in us, or in J. C. since it is certain it is not in us, for the reasons above
mentioned, it must needs be found in J. C. Thus it was necessary that God after
sin should have no regard to our wills: Being all in disorder, we could no more
be the occasion of Gods giving us Grace. A Mediator therefore was necessary not
only to give us access to God, but also to be the natural or occasional cause
of those favors we hope to receive from him.

VIII.

Since God designed to make his Son the Head of his Church, it was convenient
he should make him the natural or occasional cause of Grace, which sanctifies
it; for it is from the Head that Life and motion ought to be given to the
members. And it was even with this foresight that God permitted sin, for if man
had continued in his Innocence, without being assisted by the Grace of J. C.
seeing his wills would have merited Grace, and even Glory, God should have
established in man the occasional cause of his perfection and happiness: The
inviolable Law of order requires this; so that J. C. would not have been the
Head of his Church, or such an Head whose influences the Members would have had
no need of.

IX.

If our soul had been in our body, before it was formed, and all the parts
which compose it disposed of according to our different wills, with how many
diverse sentiments and motions would she have been affected, by all the effects
which she would have known ought to have followed from her wills, especially if
she had had an extreme desire to have made a more Vigorous and better formed
body? Ephesians. I. 22, 23. IV. 16. Col. 11.19. Act. IX. 5. Col I. 24. 1 Cor. XII.
27. etc.
Now the Holy Scripture does not only say that J. C. is the Head of the Church,
but it also teaches us that he begot it, that he formed it, that he nourishes
it, that he suffered in it; that he merits in it, that he acts and influences
it without ceasing. The zeal which J. C. has for the glory of his Father, and
the love he bears to his Church, inspires him continually with a desire of
making it the most ample, the most magnisicent, and the most perfect, he can
possibly. Thus seeing the soul of J. C. has not an infinite capacity, and yet
desires to give infinite beauties and ornaments to his Church, we have all the
reason to believe that there is a continual succession of thoughts and desires
in his Soul, in respect of his Mystical body which he continually forms.

X.

Now these continual desires of the Soul of Jesus, which sanctify the Church,
and render it worthy of the Majesty of his Father, God has made the occasional
causes of the efficacy of the general Laws of Grace: For Faith teaches us that
God has given to his Son an absolute power over Men, by making him the Head of
his Church; and this cannot be conceived if the different wills of J. C. be not
followed by their effects. For it is visible, I should have no power over mine
arm, if it should move it self whether I would or no, and if when I desire to
move it, it should remain as if it was dead and without motion.

XI.

J. C. has merited his Sovereign power over men, and this quality of Head of
the Church, by the Sacrifice he offered upon Earth; and after his Resurrection
he took full possession of this right. Ioh. VII. 39.
It Is upon this account, that he is now Sovereign Priest of future good things,
and that by his many intercessions, he continually prays unto the Father in the
behalf of men. Heb. 7.25, Romans 8.34. 1 John II. 1. Joh. XI. 42.
And seeing his desires are occasional causes, his prayers are always heard;
his Father denies him nothing, as the Scripture teaches us. Nevertheless he
must pray and desire that he may obtain: For the occasional, physical, natural
causes (for all these words signify the same thing) have no power of
themselves to do any thing; and all creatures, even J. C. himself considered as
man, are in themselves nothing but weakness and impotence.

Additions.

I don't think that hitherto there is any difficulty, if it be not in this last
Article, where I say, that J. C. prays unto his Father; for there are some
Persons whom this very much offends. For I speak as St. Paul to the Romans, and
to the Hebrews, and as Jesus Christ himself: I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter: which is to be understood of J. C. after his
resurrection, according to these words of St. John; The spirit was not yet
given because Jesus was not yet glorified.

For the Spirit fell not upon the Apostles till Ten days after J. C. was
entered into the Holy of Holies, a Sovereign Priest of true good things.

In all these Articles, I speak only of J. C. as to his humanity, according to
which he received all power in Heaven and Earth; because all his prayers or his
desires, which certainly are in his power, (or otherwise he has no power) are
executed in consequence of his qualities, as Sovereign Priest of the House of
God, King of Israel, Architect of the Eternal Temple, Mediator betwixt God and
men, Head of the Church; or to speak like the Philosophers, (for whom I chiefly
write this Treatise) the occasional, natural, or distributive cause of Grace:
The cause which Determines the Efficacy of the general Law by which God would
save all men in his Son.

XII.

J. C. having then successively diverse thoughts in relation to the diverse
dispositions, whereof Souls in general are capable, these diverse thoughts are
accompanied with certain desires in relation to the Sanctification of these
Souls. Now these desires being the occasional causes of Grace, they must pour
it down upon those persons in particular whose dispositions resemble that upon
which the Soul of J. C. actually thinks: And this Grace must be so much the
stronger and more abundant, as these desires of J. C. are greater and more
lasting.

XIII.

When a person considers any part of his body, which is not formed as it ought
to be, he has naturally certain desires in relation to this part, and the use
he desires to make of it in common life; and these desires are followed by
certain insensible motions of the animal Spirits, which tend to give that
proportion or disposition to this part which we desire it should have. When the
Body is altogether formed, and the flesh firm, the motions change nothing in
the construction of the parts; they can only give them certain dispositions
which are called Corporeal habits. But when the body is not altogether formed,
and the flesh is very soft and tender, these motions which accompany the
desires of the Soul, do not only give the body certain particular dispositions,
but may also change the construction thereof. This sufficiently appears by
Children in the Womb, for they are not only moved with the same passions as
there Mothers, but they also receive the marks of these passions in their
bodies, from which yet the Mothers are always free.

XIV.

The Mystical body of J. C. is not yet a perfect man, Ephesians. IV. 13.
it will not be so till the end of the world J. C. forms it continually; for it
is from the Head the whole body joined together receives nourishment by the
efficacy of his influence, according to the measure which is proper to every
one, to the end it may be formed and edified in love. These are the truths
which St Paul teaches us. Now since the soul of J. C. has no other action but
the diverse motions of its heart, it is necessary that these desires be succeeded
by the influence of grace, which only can form J. C. in his Members, and give
them that beauty and proportion which must be the eternal object of the divine
Love.

XV.

The diverse motions of the soul of J. C. being the occasional causes of Grace,
we ought not to be surprised, if it be sometimes given to great sinners, or
those who make no use of it. For the soul of J. C. designing to raise a Temple
of vast extent, and infinite beauty, may desire that Grace may be given to the
greatest sinners; and if in this moment J. C. thinks actually, for example,
upon Covetous persons, the Covetous shall receive Grace. Or else, J. C. having
need of Spirits of a certain merit for the construction of his Church, which is
not ordinarily acquired, but by those who suffer certain persecutions, of which
the passions of men are the natural principle: In a word, J. C. having need of
Spirits of a certain character, for bringing to pass certain effects in his
Church, may in general apply himself to them, and by this application bestow
upon them the Grace which sanctifies: In like manner, as the mind of an
Architect thinks in general upon square stones, for example, when these sort of
stones are actually necessary for his building.

XVI.

But as the soul of J. C. is not a general cause, there is reason to think that
it often has particular desires in respect of certain particular persons. When
we pretend to speak exactly of God, we ought not to consult our selves, and
make him act as we do; we ought to consult the Idea of a Being infinitely
perfect, and make him act according to this Idea, but when we speak of the
action of the soul of Jesus, we may consult our selves, we may suppose it to
act as particular causes would act, which yet are joined to eternal wisdom. We
have reason, for example, to believe that the calling of St. Paul was the
effect of the efficacy of a particular desire of J. Christ. We may also look
upon the desires of the soul of J. C. which generally relate to all the minds
of one certain character, as particular desires, tho they comprehend many
persons; because these desires change every moment, as those of particular
causes do. But the general Laws by which God acts are always the same, because
his wills must be firm, and constant, seeing his wisdom is infinite; as I have
shown in the first Discourse.

Additions.

I think I have demonstrated, that J. C. as man, is the occasional cause of
Grace. Now, since God acts not, if Order does not require, or some occasional
cause determine him thereunto; and that, in respect of Grace, altogether free,
Order never requires that God should give it, seeing it cannot be merited: It Is
evident, that all the difficulties which we find in the distribution of Grace,
must be ascribed to J. C. as man. This is that which I have already done in a
general way; for it was not at all necessary, that I should particularly
justify the wisdom and goodness of God, which was my only design in the
construction of his Church, as I did at first advertise.

But that the minds, least able to discern the usefulness of the principles
laid down, may not fail to apprehend it; I shall endeavor, as clearly as
possibly I can, to show the consequences which may be drawn from these
principles.

There are many difficulties in vindicating Gods Conduct in his way of
distributing the rain of Grace, as well as in that by which he sends down the
ordinary rain, the chief of which are, that it is not always proportioned to
the need of sinners, and that even in respect to the just, tho it answer their
necessities, yet it does not always hinder them from falling into disorder.

God is wise, he wills the conversion of sinners, he has sworn so by his
Prophet. A Being infinitely wise proportions the means to the end. How then can
it be that the Grace which the sinner receives should not be strong enough to
make him quit his sin? Or to take away all equivocation, Why should not such an
Infant be Baptized? Why should there be so many Nations who know not J. C.? It
is easily comprehended by what I have said in the first Discourse, that this is
a consequence of the simplicity of Gods ways, and must proceed from the
occasional cause which God has established for the executing his design after
such a manner, as best resembles his Divine Attributes.

For if it rains upon the Highways, upon the Sand, upon the Sea, as well as
upon the Sown Lands; it is because these rains are necessary consequences of
the simplicity of those ways which God has established for making the Earth
Fruitful.

But whence does it proceed that J. C. who is an intelligent occasional cause,
abandons so many sinners and so many nations? Or to come to the greatest
difficulty, Whence is it that J. C. forsakes even the just, the members of his
body, who are straight united to him by charity? For as to sinners, and they
who do not call upon him, it may be said that he neglects them as unworthy of
his care. But whence comes it to pass, that he gives to the just, exposed to
temptation, such a Grace, which he well foresaw, notwithstanding his assistance
would be overcome? This Grace was altogether sufficient, I grant, and that it
only depended upon the just to make it efficacious. But why did not J. C. give
it more force, since he foresaw the fall of one of his well-beloved Children?
If my principle can clear up these difficulties, without injuring the love of
J. C. toward men, as well as it defends the wisdom and goodness of God,
against the reasonings of Libertines, certainly the consequences thereof will
be very advantageous to Religion. This is that which I am about to examine.

J. C. may be considered according to two respects, one as Architect of the
Eternal Temple; the other, as Head of the Church. I have partly explained the
manner after which J. C. acts as Architect because this manifested the
fruitfulness and necessity of my principle. But I would not speak of the way by
which he acts as Head of the Church, by reason of the difficulty of the fall of
the just, which supposes certain things whereof I thought not then to speak.
That I may explain more particularly the manner after which J. C. acts as
Architect upon the materials which do not as yet make part of his Temple, and
as Head in respect of the Just who are members of his Body, I am obliged to say
what I think concerning the holy Soul of J. C. which regulates all his desires,
with respect nevertheless to the divine Law, the immutable and necessary order;
for the wills of J. C. are always agreeable to those of his Father. Tho several
of the Athan. Orat. 4. in Arianos. S. Iren. Lib. V. S. Basil Ep. 391. ad
Amphil. S. Greg. Naz. Orat. 36. S. Cyr. of Alex. Thres. lib. 9. C. 4. Theod.
Tom. 4. p. 731.
Fathers and those especially who wrote against the Arrians, as Athanasius,
were contented to attribute to Jesus Christ, as God, the knowledge of all
things, and expounded concerning J. C. as man, that which St. Mark reports, The
Day of the Lord knows no Man, no not the Son of Man himself; and some of them
feared not even to say, that Ignorance is one of the defects of Humane Nature
which J. C. took for our sakes: Nevertheless I am far from this thought. For I
am persuaded that J. C. as man knows all Sciences, and has a perfect knowledge
of all things; that he not only knows all the Beings which God has created,
with all their Modifications, and all their relations; but also upon much
greater reason, all those which God can create: In a word, all that which God
contains in the immensity of his Being. I say that J. C. knows upon much
greater reason, all possible Creatures than the existence and relation of those
which God has made; because he knows the first by the right which his union
with the Word, which contains them as the Word, gives him; whereas he knows not
the other but by a kind of a Revelation as I shall show hereafter.

I believe then that J. C. as man, knows all things; but it ought to be
observed that there is a great difference between knowing all things
habitually, and knowing all things actually; between knowing all things and
thinking of all things; which is almost always confounded. There is no man but
knows that two and two make four, and yet there are but few who actually think
of it. A Geometrician knows his Enclid, but he is often a long time without
thinking of any of the propositions of this Author. A man knows a truth, or
Science, when by his Labor, or otherwise, he has gained a right thereunto;
insomuch, that he can no sooner think of these things, but they immediately
present themselves to his mind very clearly, without putting him to any
trouble.

Now the soul of J. C. is personally united to the Word, and the Word, as the
Word, contains all possible being with their relations; he contains all
immutable, necessary, and eternal truths. J. C. as man, can no sooner think of
any truths, but they are instantly discovered to his mind. J. C. therefore
knows all Sciences; he knows all possible things, since he may without any
effort of mind, see all that the Word contains as the Word. For the same reason
J. C. knows all the divine Perfections, since the Word is a substantial
representation of the divine Nature, and the Father communicates to his Son all
his Substance. He knows even the Existence, the Modifications, the relations of
the Creatures; but by a kind of revelation which the Father gives to him
whenever he desires him; according to those words of J. C. himself, I know, O
Father that thou always hear me. For since the creatures are not the
necessary emanations of the Divinity, the Word as the Word, does truly
represent their Nature or Essence, but not their Existence; for their Existence
depends upon the free will of the Creator, which the Word, merely as the Word,
does not contain, seeing the Divine Decrees are common to all the three
Persons. Thus the Existence of the Creatures cannot be known but by a kind of
Revelation. J. C. therefore as man, knows all things. In him are hidden all the
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God, but he does not actually think
upon all things; and this is evident: For the soul of J. C. has not the
capacity of an infinite mind. And those who maintain that there are no
succession of thoughts in J. C. and that he always knows whatsoever he does
know, thinking to attribute to the soul of J. C. a sort of immutability which
is due only to God, they necessarily make him liable to very great ignorance.
See the proof of this: It is certain that natural effects are combined amongst
themselves, and with those of Grace, after an infinitely infinite manner, and
that these combinations are every moment changed after infinite ways, by reason
of the mutability of Men's wills, and the irregular course of the animal
Spirits, which change all our traces and all our Ideas, in consequence of the
Laws of Union of Soul and Body.

Now the capacity of thinking, which the Soul of J. C. has as Man, is finite.
Therefore if he knew, or always actually thought upon that which he knows, he
must necessarily be ignorant of an infinite number of things.

Furthermore, it is certain that the properties of numbers are not only
infinite but infinitely infinite: That in respect of Figures, there may be, for
example, an infinite number of Triangles of different kinds, each of their
sides being capable of being lengthned or shortened to infinity. Now to say that
J. C. knows not the properties of such Triangles, or the relation of one of
their sides, or its Square, or its Cube, or its Quadrata-quadrate, etc. with
other Sides, or their Squares, or their Cubes, or their Quadrata-quadrates,
etc. this is to suppose that J. C. is ignorant of that which the Geometricians
know. But if it be maintained that J. C. as Man, always actually knows every
thing that he knows, it is necessary that he be ignorant of an infinite number
of the properties of these Triangles. Nevertheless let us suppose, that Natural
effects are not combined with the effects of Grace; and that likewise all the
thoughts of men, their circumstances, their combinations, were something
finite, which the mind of man might discern all at once; certainly to suppose
that the Soul of J. C. does always think of them, is to give unto him a very
useless and troublesome knowledge. It is troublesome, for that which renders
the soul of J. C. happy, is the contemplation of the perfection of the
Sovereign good. Now the knowledge of all the Chimaeraes which do, have, and
shall pass in our minds, according to this supposition, continually distracting
the capacity of the soul of J. C. (otherwise entertained in beholding the
Beauties and tasting the sweetness of the chief Good) would not be very
agreeable to him. For it must be observed, that it is one thing to see God, and
another thing to see the Creatures and their modifications in God. I think I
have demonstrated that we see all in God in this life, but this is not to see
God, or to enjoy him. Thus it cannot be said, that J. C. sees all our thoughts,
without dividing his capacity of thinking; because he sees them all in God.
This actual knowledge therefore, which some would give to J. C. is troublesome;
for it is very irksome to think actually upon those things, upon which we do
not desire to think of. A Geometrician who should have found out the Squaring
of a Circle, or any other more surprising Truth, would be very miserable,
should it be always present to his mind. J. C. has an Object more worthy of his
application, than the modification of the Creatures; therefore always to have
an actual knowledge of our thoughts and needs, passed, and future, would be
very troublesome.

Moreover, it would be altogether useless to him, and to us. Certainly it is
sufficient that J. C. thinks of assisting me, when I shall have need; without
thinking thereof for two or three Thousand years, or rather from all Eternity:
For J. C. must actually think thereof from all Eternity, if there be no
succession of thoughts in his soul.

As in the Treatise of Nature and Grace, (which I composed for those Persons
who are not over credulous) I resolved not to propose any Principles which
might be contested; and since if I had supposed that the soul of J. C. had
actually known all things, my supposition might have been opposed, by the
reasons which I have produced, and perhaps by others better: I have therefore
only supposed, that J. C. has a clear Idea of the soul, and the modifications
of which it is capable, to produce a noble effect in the Temple which he builds
to the glory of his Father; that which Reason and Faith do demonstrate. Thus I
suppose J. C. to act in consequence of this only supposition, in the XIII, XIV,
XV, XVI. Articles, where I compare him to an Architect, and to a Soul which
should have power to form all the parts of its Body. For as an Architect may
form a Design, and build an Edifice, without concerning himself from whence the
materials come he employs therein; so J.C. by his union with the Word, may form
his designs, and desires, without thinking on the actual dispositions of all
men. He has admonished them by his Counsels in his Gospel, to put themselves
in such a condition, that Grace may not be useless to them. It becomes him not
to order his desires, (the distributive causes of his Graces) according to the
negligence, or wickedness of men, but according to the condition wherein he
finds the Work he is to build, according to the designs he continually forms;
according to the beauty wherewith he intends to Adorn his Church.

Now this way, after which, I suppose J.C. might act, would be sufficient to
justify Gods Conduct, and make it in general comprehended; whence it is that
the rain of Grace is sent down without effect upon hardened hearts, at such
unseasonable times, after such an unequal manner, and almost always so little
answerable unto the concupiscence of those who receive it: For this reason I
ought not to enter particularly upon the fall of the Just, under an Head who
has so much love for sinners. Nevertheless I shall at present endeavor to
explain it to satisfy the most difficult.

Whilst J.C. acts as Architect, he only regulates his desires according to his
designs. It is indifferent to him to have in his Temple, Paul, or John; if both
the one and the other resemble the Idea which determines his desires: As it is
indifferent to an Architect, who needs only a square stone, or a pillar, to
have that which is on the right hand, or on the left, if they be altogether
alike. Thus the desire of J. C. bestowing Grace which moves men to come unto
him, and cast themselves in his hands, those who come first, and are most
watchful, are they whom he employs in his building.

But men having once followed the motion of Grace, I think it is certain that
J. C. is advertised of their dispositions; and that when he has plac'c them in
his Temple, or made them parts of his Body, no need, no temptation, happens to
them, which he has not notice of, and which he does not provide for. When Bread
is once become part of our flesh, it cannot be touched without hurting us. When
a stone is wrought and laid in the building, it cannot be broken without
offending the Architect. J. C. considered as Head of the Church, is therefore
advertised of all our necessities, even before he particularly desires to know
them. Herein his Father prevents his Charity; It seems to me, that order
requires this. Perhaps he may even actually know the effect, which the
assistance he gives us, will have, even before it be given; and this is that
which makes all the difficulty. For J. C. loves the just, he tenderly cherishes
those who are united unto him by Charity. Now he has notice of a Temptation
which solicits one of his Members, and he may give him Victorious Graces. If
therefore he foresaw, that with such assistance, the Just, tho he might have
overcome, would nevertheless be vanquished; Why did he not augment this
assistance? He desires the just should be Victorious; Why therefore does he not
proportion the means to the end, if he actually knew the relation of the means
to the end?

For my part, I had rather believe that J. C. as man, or the occasional cause
of Grace, does not actually know the future determination of the will of the
just, to whom he gives assistance, than think that he in any sense, wants
Goodness and Charity for his Members. I grant that J.C. as man, may know all
the future determination of our wills, as I know that two and two are four. But
I doubt whether he actually thinks thereon. and I do not believe that he always
thinks thereon, that he may regulate the distribution of Graces according to
this knowledge. These are my Reasons.

J. C. does not see in the Word, precisely as the Word, whether the just will
follow, or will not follow the motion of his Grace: He cannot know it, unless
God discover it to him by a sort of revelation, as I have already said. Now it
seems to me, that he ought not always to demand what effect his Grace will
have; because it seems clear to me, that Order, which is his Rule, and his Law,
does not require that he should proportion his gifts to men's future negligence,
but only to their necessities for his own proper designs.

J.C. must act as man, or as the occasional cause, that God may build up his
Church by the most simple ways. Now none but God can dive in men's hearts, and
see the free determinations of their wills. J. C. therefore before he acts,
ought not to desire of his Father to reveal to him, whether the just being
tempted, will, or will not be vanquished, by such or such a degree of Grace:
For thus his action would not bear the Character of an occasional cause. If God
should by himself, give unto the just Grace to vanquish Temptations, being by
nature Searcher of Hearts, his Conduct ought to comport with this Character;
and if the just should be vanquished, it might be believed, that God designed
to forsake him. But Order requiring that J. C. as Man, should act as Man, his
action is not to bear the Character of Searcher of Hearts: For God intending to
make his wisdom his foresight, the infinite extension of his knowledge, to
appear in the construction of his great work; he was obliged to form it by the
most simple ways. For in conclusion, what marvel would it be, if J. C. should
make a beautiful work, and save even all men, if on the one side he acted by
particular wills, and on the other, his action did not carry in it the
character of an Occasional cause, but of an infinite Wisdom, certainly GOD
ought not to appoint an Occasional Cause, if this Occasional cause must act as
God, and not as man? He ought to do all immediately by himself. But how should
we have justified his wisdom and goodness, seeing so many Monsters among
Bodies, so many irregularrities among Spirits, so much disproportion in his
action, in relation to his Attributes, so much rain upon the Sand and in the
Sea, so many Graces given to hardened Hearts; Graces which serve only to make
them more culpable and more criminal, Ezekiel. 33.2. Eccles. 15.12.
which yet could not have been given, with a design so unworthy of Gods
goodness, who desires the Conversion of sinners, and to whom the wicked were
never necessary?

If that which I have said of the fall of the just, and the manner after which
Jesus Christ forms his Church, be clearly understood; perhaps it would be found
to be probable enough: But I think I ought to say, that this is no ways
necessary in order to defend my principles, and the manner by which I have
justified the wisdom and goodness of God. For it may be that God has given to
J. C. as man, a particular kind of knowledge and power in relation to his
design, by establishing him the occasional cause of the general Law of Grace.
To make my thought understood by a comparison, let us imagine that as soon as
Adam was formed, God acquainted the Angels, that he had united a Spirit to a
Body, to the end that it might take care thereof, without informing them any
thing of the Laws of this union. According to this supposition, the Angels
reasoning according to their Ideas, would doubtless have imagined, that the
first man had no sentiment of Objects; and that, to eat and nourish himself, he
studied to know the consiguration of the parts of the fruits of Paradise, the
relation they might have with those of his Body, thereby to judge whether they
would have been proper for his nourishment. In all probality they would have
believed, that to walk, Adam had thought on the Nerves which answered to his
Legs, and that he had continually conveyed to them such a quantity of Animal
spirits to remove them; and thus they would have judged of other Functions by
which Man's life is preserved. We very near do the same thing as to the manner
in which J. C. forms his Church: We will needs judge thereof according to our
Ideas, and yet perhaps we understand nothing thereof. God united the Soul to
the Body of the first Man, after a much more wise and real manner, than the
Angels themselves could imagine: For God advertised him by sentiments, after a
short and undoubted manner, of what he ought to do; and this without dividing,
as little as might be, the capacity which he had of thinking upon his Sovereign
good: For then his Senses kept silence whenever he desired it. Man may still
walk and meditate, both together, but the first man upon all occasions, might,
and also ought, without withdrawing himself from the presence of God, to give
unto his Body all that which was necessary for it. Why may not God at present
therefore, give unto J. C. certain kinds of compendious knowledge, whereof we
have no Idea, that he may thereby better facilitate the construction of his
Church, so that the relation which he has to us, may not divide the capacity
which he has of seeing God and enjoying his happiness? God appointed certain
general Laws of the union of Soul and Body, that the first Man might preserve
his Life without applying himself overmuch to particular Objects. Why may not
God, by making his Son the Head of the Church, have established such like
general Laws? It may be this ought to have been so, that God might act in such
a manner as agrees best with the divine attributes; and perhaps that apparent
irregularity with which Grace is given unto men, is in part a consequence of
this marvelous invention of eternal wisdom. Assuredly, it may be the first Adam
was even in this a figure of the second, and that J.C. besides his knowledge
and desires, which we cannot deny to him, without impiety, has still
compendious ways, worthy of an infinite wisdom, by which, as we by our
sentiments and passions, he acts in his mystical body, without being diverted
from his Sovereign good, which he loves too much to lose the sight of, or
remove himself from its presence. There are several passages in Scripture may
countenance this opinion, but I might well be accounted rash, should I pretend
to establish it as a point which ought to be believed. That which I say may be
true, but I ought not to assert it as true, before I am well convinced of it my
self. If this be not, it may be, or some such like thing; as for my part, I
have not justified the Wisdom and Goodness of God, but by leaving to J. C. as
Architect of the Eternal Temple, that we cannot take from him without offering
violence to Reason and good Sense. But I am glad to know that there are several
ways of answering those who oppose the Quality which I give to J. C. of an
occasional cause, which determines the efficacy of the good will of God in
respect to men; and that all the Objections which can be made against me in
this, can upon no other account be hard to be resolved, but because we are
ignorant of a great many things which it would be necessary to know for the
clearing them up.

XVII.

The diverse desires of the Soul of J. C. giving Grace, hence we clearly
apprehend whence it is, that it is not equally given to all men, and that it
falls upon certain persons at one time more than at another. Since the Soul of
J. C. does not think at the same time of sanctifying all men, it has not at the
same time all the desires of which it is capable. Thus, J. C. does not act upon
his Members after a particular manner, but by successive influences; like as
our Soul does not at the same time remove all the Muscles of our Bodies: For
the Animal Spirits go equally and successively into our Members, according to
the different impressions of Objects, the diverse motions of our passions, and
different Desires which we freely form in our selves.

XVIII.

It is true, that all the just continually receive the influence of the Head
that gives them life, and that when they act by the Spirit of J. C. they merit
and receive new graces, tho it be not necessary that the Soul of J. C. has any
particular desires which may be the occasional causes of them; for the order,
which requires that all Merit be rewarded, is not in God an Arbitrary Law; it
is a Necessary Law, which depends not upon any occasional cause. But tho he
that has done a Meritorious Action, may be rewarded for it, and yet the soul of
J. C. have actually no desires in respect of him; nevertheless, it is certain
that he has not merited Grace, but by the dignity and holiness which the Spirit
of J. C. communicated to him: For men are not acceptable to God, and do nothing
that is good, John 15.4.
but so far as they are united to his Son by Charity.

Additions.

Although I say order requires that the Just Merit Grace, it must not be
understood of all Graces, but only of those which are absolutely necessary for
the vanquishing unavoidable temptations. But God is faithful who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, says St. Paul. Now Order
requires that God should be faithful. Quis autem dicat eum qui jam coepit
credere, ab illo in quem credit non mereri, says St. Augustine de Praedest.
Sanct. Chapter 2. The just therefore may merit Grace, by the assistance of Grace;
but he cannot in strictness merit those Graces which are not absolutely
necessary for him. This depends upon the good will of J. C. as he is the
occasional cause of the order of Grace. And in strictness, good works perhaps
merit only the reward of happiness: But it is not necessary that I should stand
to explain the different ways of understanding merit.

XIX.

Moreover, it must be confessed, that they who observe the councels of J. C. by
the esteem which they have for them, and by the fear they have of future
Punishments, do solicit, as I may say, by their obedience, the love of J. C.
to think of them, tho as yet they should act only by self-love. But all their
actions are not occasional causes, neither of Grace, since they are not
infallibly attended therewith, nor even of the motions of the Soul of J. C. in
their behalf, since these same motions never fail of giving it. Thus, the
desires of J. C. alone have infallibly their effect, as occasional causes;
because God having made J. C. Head of the Church, it is only by him that the
Grace which sanctifies the Elect ought to be given.

XX.

Now we may consider in the Soul of J. C. two sorts of desires, actual,
transient, and particular desires, the efficacy of which continue but a little
time, constant and permanent desires, which consist in a firm and lasting
disposition of the soul of J. C. in relation to certain effects which tend to
the execution of his design in general.

If our soul by its different motions did communicate to our bodies all that
which is necessary to form and make it grow, we might distinguish therein two
kinds of desires; for it would send into the Muscles of the Body the Spirits
that give it certain dispositions, in respect of the present Objects, or actual
thoughts of the mind, by actual and transient desires. But it would give to the
Heart and the Lungs the natural motions, which serve for respiration and
circulation of the Blood by stable and permanent desires. It would also by such
like desires digest its nourishment, and distribute it to all the parts which
have need thereof; because this sort of action is at all times necessary for
the preservation of the body.

XXI.

By these actual, transient, and particular desires of the soul of J. C. Grace
is given to persons who are not prepared, and after a manner which has
something singular and extraordinary in it. But it is given regularly by
permanent desires to those who worthily receive the Sacraments. For the Grace
which we receive by the Sacraments, is not given merely by the Merit of our
Action, tho we receive with fit dispositions; it is because of the merits of
J.C. which are freely applied to us in consequence of his permanent desires. We
receive by the Sacraments much more Grace than our preparation can deserve, and
it is even sufficient for the receiving some influence thereby that we do not
put any impediment: But it is also to abuse that which is most holy in
Religion, to receive them unworthily.

Additions.

Since J. C. as man, does not act, but by his desires, and the Grace of the
Sacraments is permanent; it is evident, that the Grace which he communicates to
those who receives them worthily, comes not from J. C. as the occasional cause.
If there be not in J. C. a permanent desire, or a constant will to do good unto
those who come unto the Sacraments, there would be no great mystery in them.

XXII.

Among the actual and transient desires of the Soul of Jesus, there are
certainly some which are more lasting and frequent than others; and the
knowledge of the desires is of very great use in morality. Doubtless J. C.
thinks oftener upon them who observe his councels, than on other men. The
motions of love which he has for the Faithful, are more frequent and lasting,
than those which he has for the Libertine and the Wicked.

And since all the Faithful are not equally disposed to enter into the Church
of the predestined, the desires of the Soul of J. C. are not in respect of
them all equally lively, frequent and abiding. Man more earnestly desires those
fruits which are more proper to nourish his Body, he thinks oftener upon Bread
and Wine, than on those Meats which are difficultly digested. J. C. having a
design to form his Church, ought therefore to concern himself more for those
who may easily enter therein, than for those who are very far from it.

Thus the H. Scripture teaches us, that the humble, the poor, the penitent,
receive greater Graces, than other men; because they who despise Honors,
Riches, and Pleasures, are much fitter for the Kingdom of God. They who
according to the example of J. C. have learnt to be meek and humble in heart,
shall find rest to their souls. The yoke of J. C. which the Proud cannot bear,
will become easy and light by the assistance of Grace: For God hears the
Prayers of the Humble, he will comfort them, he will justify them, he will
save them, he will heap Blessings upon them; but he will bring down the
Haughtiness of the Proud.

Blessed are the Poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: But
Cursed are the Rich, for they have received their Consolation in this World.
How hard is it, says J C. for the Rich to enter into the Kingdom of GOD! It is
easier for a Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle. Which cannot be without a
Miracle.

As for them, who, like David, humble their souls with Fasting, put on
Sackcloth: In a word, afflict themselves at the sight of their Sins, and the
Holiness of God, will become fit objects for the compassion of J. C. for God
never will despise an humble and a contrite Heart. We always disarm his wrath,
when we prefer the interests of God before our own, and take vengeance upon our
selves.

XXIII.

Since the will of J. C. is altogether agreeable to Order, of which all men
have naturally some Idea, it may further be discerned by Reason, that the soul
of J. C. has more thoughts and desires, in respect of some Persons, than
others. For Order requires, that J. C. should bestow more Graces; for example,
upon those who are called to H. Orders, than those whose vocation necessarily
engages them in the business of the World. In a word, upon those who make the
principal parts of the body of the Church Militant, than they who have not the
oversight of any, or are engaged in the Ecclesiastical Function, and raise
themselves above others by ambition or interest. For if it be fit that J. C.
give Graces unto these in respect of the Persons whom they govern, yet they
don't deserve such as may sanctify them in that state which they have chosen by
self-love. They may have the gift of Prophecy, without having that of Charity,
as Scripture teaches us.

XXIV.

We have proved, that the different desires of the soul of J. C. are the
occasional causes of Grace, and we have endeavored to discover something of
these desires. Let us now see of what kind of Grace they are the occasional
causes. For tho J. C. be the Meritorious cause of all graces, it is not
necessary he should be the occasional cause of the graces of knowledge, and
certain outward Graces, which prepare the heart for conversion, but cannot
effect it; for J. C. is always the occasional or necessary cause, according to
the order established by God, in respect of all Graces which conduce to men
salvation.

XXV.

Distinctly to understand what is the grace, which J. C. as Head of his Church,
bestows upon his Members, we must know what is the concupiscence which the
first man has communicated to all his Posterity. For the second Adam came to
cure the disorders which the first had caused, and there is such a relation
between the Sinful and Earthly Adam, and the Innocent and Heavenly Adam, that
St. Romans V. 14, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15 48.
Paul looks upon the first communicating sin to his Offspring, by his
disobedience, as the figure of the second giving to Christians by his
obedience, righteousness, and holiness.

XXVI.

Order requires that the soul should govern the body, and that she should not
be distracted whither she will or no, with all those sentiments, and all those
motions which turn her to sensible Objects.

Thus the first man, before sin, was so much Master of his senses, and his
passions, that they were silent whenever he desired it; nothing was able to
turn him from his duty against his will, and all the pleasures which then
prevented his reason, did only respectfully after a gentle and easy manner,
advertise him of what he was to do for the preservation of his life. But after
sin, he lost all at once the power he had over his body, so that not being able
to stop the motions, nor effuse those traces which sensible Objects made in the
principal part of his brain, his soul by the Order of Nature, and as a
punishment of his disobedience, became miserably subject to the Law of
Concupiscence, to that Carnal Law which continually fights against the mind,
and every moment inspires it with the Love of sensible goods, and rules over it
by passions so strong, and lively, and yet at the same time, so sweet and
agreeable, that it cannot; nay, will not, make all necessary endeavors to
break the bonds which captivates it. For the infection of sin is communicated
to all the Children of Adam, by an infallible consequence, of the Order of
Nature, as I have else where Explained.

XXVII.

The Heart of Man is always a slave to pleasure, and when Reason teaches us it
is not convenient to enjoy it, yet we do not avoid it, but that we may find
another more sweet or solid. We willingly sacrifice lesser pleasures to
greater; but the invincible impression which we have for our own happiness,
permits us not all our lives long to deprive our selves of that sweetness which
we taste, when we suffer our selves to follow our passions.

Additions.

In the third discourse you will see how this ought to be understood.

XXVIII.

It is certain, that pleasure makes him happy who enjoys it; at least, while he
does enjoy it. Thus men being made to be happy, pleasure always gives a touch
to the will, and moves it toward that object which causes it, or seems to
cause it: The contrary must be said of grief. Now Concupiscence consists only
in a continual succession of sentiments and motion which prevent reason, and
which are not subject thereunto of pleasures, which coming from the objects
about us, inspire us with the love of them; of griefs, which making the
exercise of virtue harsh and painful, give us an abhorrence of them.

It therefore became the second Adam, that he might cure the disorders of the
first, to produce in us pleasures and aversions contrary to those of
concupiscence; pleasures with respect the true goods, and horrors or aversions
in respect of sensible goods. Thus the grace whereof J. C. is the occasional
cause, and which, as Head of the Church, he continually bestows upon us, is not
the Grace of knowledge, (tho he has merited this Grace, and tho he may
sometimes communicate it, as I shall show by and by,) but it is the Grace of
sentiments. It is this previous delectation which produces and entertains the
love of God in our hearts; for pleasure naturally produces and entertains the
love of those objects, which cause, or seem to cause it: It is likewise the
horror which sometimes accompanies sensible objects, which gives us an aversion
to them, and makes us capable of governing the motions of our love by our
knowledge

XXIX.

The Grace of sentiment should be opposed to concupiscence, pleasure to
pleasure, horror to horror, that the influences of J. C. might be directly
opposed to the influence of the first man. The remedy that it may cure the
disease must be contrary thereto. For the Grace of knowledge cannot heal an
Heart wounded with pleasure; to this end this pleasure must either cease, or
another succeed in its room. Pleasure is the weight of the soul which naturally
enclines it toward it self; sensible pleasures weigh it down toward the
Earth. That the soul may determine it self, either these pleasures must be
dissipated, or the delectation of Grace raise her toward Heaven, and put her
almost in Equilibrio. It Is thus that the new Man opposes the old, that the
influences of our Head resists the influences of our Father Adam, that J. C.
overcomes all our domestic Enemies.

Since Man had no concupiscence before his sin, it was not necessary he should
be carried to the love of good by a previous delectation. He clearly knew that
God was his good, it was not necessary that he should feel it. There was no
need that he should be drawn by pleasure to love him, whom to love nothing
hindered, and who he knew was perfectly worthy of his love; but after sin the
Grace of delectation was necessary to him, to counter-ballance the continual
effort of concupiscence. Thus, knowledge is the Grace of the Creator,
delectation the Grace of the Redeemer. Knowledge is communicated by J. C. as
Eternal Wisdom: Delectation is given by him as Wisdom Incarnate. Knowledge in
its original was no more than Nature, Delectation was always pure Grace.
Knowledge after Sin was not granted to us, but through the Merits of J. C.
Delectation is given to us through the Merits, and by the Efficacy of the power
of J. C. In short, Knowledge is sent down upon our minds, according to our
different desires and applications, as I shall Explain: But the Delectation of
Grace is not shed upon our Hearts, but according to the various desires of the
Soul of J. C.

Additions.

That the Healing Grace of J. C. consists in a preventing Delectation, is a
thing so much out of doubt with St. Augustine, that F. Deschamps, who has so
Learnedly confuted Jansenius, and is so opposite unto him, agrees with him in
this Point; tho they differ from one another as to the manner in which Grace
acts in us. See Jansenius de Great. Chr. Lib. IV. c. 1. and Deschamps Lib III.
Disp. III. c. 16. and 19.

I cannot persuade my self to continue the Explication of those things which to
me seem clear of themselves. Insomuch, that what follows either needs it not,
or is not particular to me. My Principles are sufficiently confirmed by what
has been said, and if they be clearly understood, I don't think there will be
any difficulty in what follows.

XXX.

It is true, that pleasure produces Knowledge, because the soul gives more
attention to the Objects from which she receives more pleasure. Since the
generallity of men despise or neglect the truths of Religion, because these
abstracted truths do not affect them, it may be said that this delectation of
Grace does instruct them; for making these truths sensible, they learn them
more easily by the attention which they bring to them. 1 John 11.72.
It Is upon this account that St. John says the unction we receive from J. C.
teaches us all things, and that they who have this unction have no need to be
instructed.

It is true, that concupiscence, such as we feel, is not necessary in order to
merit. Jesus Christ, whose sufferings were infinite, was not at all subject to
it. But although he was absolute Master of his Body, he willingly suffered the
most troublesome motions and sentiments to be excited therein, that he might
thus merit all thereby which was prepared for him. Of all the sentiments, that
of Grief is the most contrary to a soul which desires and deserves to be happy,
and yet he willingly suffered the most tormenting. Pleasure makes him actually
happy, who actually enjoys it, and yet he willingly deprived himself thereof.

Thus as we ought, he has offered an infinite number of Sacrifices by a Body
which he took like unto ours; but these his Sacrifices differed from those of
the greatest Saints, because he willingly excited in himself all those painful
sentiments, which in the rest of Men are the necessary consequences of sin; and
that thus these Sacrifices being altogether voluntary in him, were more Pure,
and more Meritorious.

XXXI.

Nevertheless, it must be observed that this Unction does not of its self
produce knowledge; it only excites our attention, which is the natural or
occasional cause of our knowledge.

Thus we see, that they who have the most Charity, have not always the most
Knowledge. All men not being equally capable of attention, the same unction
does not equally instruct all those who receive it. Thus, tho knowledge may be
communicated to the Soul by a supernatural infusion, and it may often be
produced by Charity; nevertheless, this Grace ought often to be accounted as a
natural effect, because Charity does not ordinarily produce knowledge in the
minds of Men, but proportionally as it causes the soul to desire the knowledge
of that which she loves. For to conclude, the various desires of the soul are
the natural or occasional causes of the discoveries we make in any subject
whatsoever: But these truths I must explain more at length in the Second Part
of this Discourse.

THE SECOND PART. Of the Grace of the Creator.
XXXII.

I Know but two Principles which determine directly, and by themselves, the
motions of our Love, Knowledge, and Pleasure: Knowledge, by which we discern
different goods, Pleasure, by which we taste them. But there is great
difference betwixt Knowledge and Pleasure. Knowledge leaves us altogether to
our selves, it makes no attempt upon our liberty, it does not force us to love
any thing, it does not produce in us a natural or necessary love; it only puts
us in a condition of determining our selves, and loving the objects which it
discovers to us with a love of choice, or which is the same thing, of fixing
the general impression of Love which God continually gives us upon particular
goods. But Pleasure efficaciously determines the will, it transports it, as I
may say, toward the object which causes it or seems to cause it; it produces
in us a natural and necessary love; it diminishes our liberty, distracts our
reason, and does not leave us wholly to our selves: A small attention to our
inward sentiments may convince of these differences.

XXXIII.

Thus Man before sin, having a perfect freedom, and no Concupiscence which
might hinder him from following his Knowledge in the motions of his Love; and
since he clearly saw that God was infinitely amiable, it was not expedient he
should have been determined by a preventing Delectation, (as I have already
said) nor by other Graces of Sentiment, which might have diminished his merit,
and have engaged him to have loved by instinct, that good which ought to be
loved only by Reason. But since sin, besides Knowledge, the Grace of sentiment
has been necessary, that he might thereby resist the motions of Concupiscence.
For Man invincibly desiring to be happy, it is impossible he should continually
sacrifice his Pleasure to his Knowledge; his Pleasure which renders him
actually happy, and which subsists in himself (notwithstanding he never so much
resists it) to his knowledge which subsists not, but by a troublesome
application of mind, which the least actual pleasure distracts; and which
lastly, does not promise actual happiness till after death; which to the
imagination, seems to be a real Annihilation.

XXXIV.

Knowledge therefore is necessary to Man, for guiding him in the search after
that which is good: It is the Effect of natural order: It supposes neither the
Corruption, nor the Restoration of Nature. But Pleasure which draws us to true
happiness is pure Grace; for naturally what is truly good, ought only to be
loved by reason. Hence the occasional causes of the Graces of sentiment must be
found in J. C. because he is the Author of Grace: But the occasional causes of
Knowledge must ordinarily be found in the order of Nature, because it is the
Grace of the Creator. Let us endeavor to find out these causes.

XXXV.

In the order established by Nature, I only see two occasional causes, which
distribute knowledge to Spirits, and thus determine the general Laws of the
Grace of the Creator. The one in us, which in some sort depends upon us; the
other, which is to be found in the relation we have to the things about us. The
first is nothing else but the different motions of our wills. The second is the
concourse of sensible objects which act upon our mind, in consequence of the
Laws of union of the Soul with the Body.

XXXVI.

The inward sentiment which we have of our selves, teaches us that our desires
produce or excite knowledge in us, and that attention of mind is the natural
prayer by which we prevail with God to enlighten us; for all who apply
themselves to truth, discover it proportionably to their attention. And if our
prayer was not interrupted, if our attention was not disturbed, if we had any
Idea of what we ask, and if we asked it with necessary perseverance, we should
never fail to obtain as far as we are capable to receive. But our prayers are
continually interrupted, if they be not preingaged [by pleasure.] Our senses
and our imagination trouble and confound all our Ideas; and tho the truth we
consult answers our request, yet the confused noise of our passions hinders
from understanding its answers, or causes us presently to forget them.

XXXVII.

If it be considered, that Man before sin was animated with Charity, that he
had in himself all that was necessary for his perseverance in Righteousness,
and that he ought by his perseverance and application to have merited his
reward; it may easily be apprehended, that the various desires of his Heart
were to be made the occasional causes of the knowledge communicated to his
mind: Otherwise, his distraction would not have been Voluntary, nor his
attention Meritorious. Now Nature, although corrupted, is not destroyed; God
has not ceased to will that which he once willed, the same Laws still remain.
Thus our different wills are still at this day the occasional or natural causes
of the presence of Ideas to our minds. Search after Truth, 1. explic. That God
is not the Author of our concupiscence.
But because the union of the Soul with the Body is changed into a dependence
by the natural consequence of sin, and the immutability of the will of God, as
I have * elsewhere explained, our Bodies at present disturb our Ideas, and
speaking so loudly in behalf of the goods which respect them, that the mind
rarely asks, and distractedly hears the inward TRUTH.

XXXVIII.

Experience further teaches us every moment, that our conversation with knowing
Persons, is capable of instructing by exciting our attention; that Sermons,
reading, converse, and many such like occasions, may raise in us good
sentiments. The death of a friend doubtless is able to make us think of Death,
if some great passion does not wholly employ us. And when an able Preacher
undertakes to demonstrate a very plain truth, and convince others of it, it
must be granted that he may persuade his Auditors thereof, and even move their
Conscience, excite their hope and fear, and such like passions in them, which
disposes them less to resist the efficacy of the Grace of J. C. Men being made
to live in society one with another, it was necessary that they might mutually
communicate their thoughts and motions. It was needful that they should be
united by the Mind as well as the Body, and that speaking by the Voice to the
Ears, and by writeing to the Eyes, they should communicate knowledge and
understanding to attentive minds.

XXXIX.

Now Knowledge, what way soever it is produced in us, whether by our particular
desires, or whether some accidents be the occasion thereof, it may be called
Grace, especially when it very much concerns our salvation, tho it should only
be a consequence of the order of Nature; because since sin, God owes us
nothing, and all the good we have, is only what J. C. has merited for us. For
even our very Being subsists not but by J. C. But this kind of Grace, tho
merited by J. C. is not the Grace of J. C. It Is the Grace of the Creator;
because J. C. not being ordinarily the occasional cause thereof, the cause of
it must be sought for in the order of Nature.

XL.

There are a great many natural effects, which may reasonably be accounted
Graces. For example, two Persons at the same time have very different desires
of Curiosity. The one would go to an Opera, and the other hear a famed
Preacher. If they satisfy their curiosity, he who shall go to the Opera will
find such objects, as considering the present disposition of his mind, will
excite in him passions which will ruin him. The other on the contrary, may
find in the Preacher so much clearness and strength, that the Grace of
Conversion being given at this moment, may be very efficacious in him. This
being supposed, a shower of rain or some other accident interveens, which keeps
them at home; this rain doubtless is a natural effect, since it depends upon
the natural Laws of the communication of motions. Nevertheless, it may be said
to be a Grace in respect of him whose Ruin it prevents, and a Punishment to
him, whose Conversion it hinders.

XLI.

Grace being joined with Nature, all the motions of our Souls and of our
Bodies, have some relation to our Salvation. Such a man is saved for having,
whilst he was in the state of Grace, made a step which happily caused him to
break his neck. And is damned for having, at some time, unluckily escaped the
ruins of an house ready to fall. We know not what is beneficial for us, but we
very well know nothing is so indifferent in its self, but that it has some
relation to our salvation, by reason of the mixture and combination of the
effects which depend on the general Laws of Nature with those of Grace.

XLII.

Since then Knowledge discovers the true good, the means of obtaining it, our
duty toward God, in a word, the ways which we ought to follow; since it is
sufficient also for those who are animated with charity to make them act well,
merit new Graces, vanquish certain temptations, as I shall elsewhere Explain; I
think it may very deservedly be called by the name of Grace, tho J. C. be only
the meritorious cause of it.

And since the outward Graces which act not immediately upon the mind,
nevertheless enter into the order of predestination of Saints, I also look upon
them as true Graces. In a word, I think the name of Grace may be given to all
natural effects, when they relate to salvation, when they are subservient to
the Grace of J. C. and remove some impediments of its efficacy. Nevertheless,
if any deny this, I have no design to dispute upon words.

XLIII.

All these sorts of Graces, if we will allow unto them this name, being Graces
of the Creator, the general Laws of these Graces, are the general Laws of
Nature. For it must be observed, that sin has not destroyed nature, tho it has
corrupted it; the general Laws of the communication of motions are always the
same, and those of the union of soul and body are not changed, excepting in
this only, that what was but a union in respect of the mind, is changed into a
dependence, for reasons I have mentioned elsewhere. For at present we depend
upon Bodies, to which by the institution of Nature we were only united.

XLIV.

Now the Laws of Nature are always very simple and very general. For God acts
not by particular wills, except when order requires a Miracle. I have
sufficiently proved this truth in the first discourse. Thus, when a stone falls
upon the Head of a good man and kills him, it falls in consequence of the Laws
of motions; this happens not, because God is just, and would by a particular
will reward him: When a like accident knocks out the brains of a sinner, this
is not because God would actually punish him. For God on the contrary, would
save all men, but it becomes him not to change the simplicity of his Laws to
suspend the punishment of a Criminal. In like manner, when knowledge is
conveyed to the mind, it is because we have desires which are the occasional
causes thereof; it is because we hear some knowing Person, and because our brain
is supposed to receive the impressions of him that speaks. It Is not because God
has any particular will in respect of us, but because he follows the general
Laws of Nature which he has prescribed to himself. I see nothing mysterious in
the distribution of these kinds of Graces, and I shall not stand to draw the
consequences which may be inferred from these Truths.

XLV.

It must be observed that J. C. who alone is the meritorious cause of the good
things which God gives us according to the order of Nature, is sometimes the
occasional cause of knowledge as well as of sentiment. Nevertheless I believe
that this is very rare, because in truth it is not necessary. J. C. as much as
is possible makes Nature, serve Grace. For, besides that Reason teaches us,
that order requires this, as being the most simple way; this sufficiently
appears by his management upon Earth, and by that order which he has founded,
and still preserves in his Church. J. C. made use of preaching the Word for to
enlighten the World, and sent forth his Disciples two by two to prepare the
people to receive him. Luke X. 1. Ephesians. IV. 12. and 12.
He has appointed Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, Bishops, Priests,
for the Edification of the Church. Is not this to make Nature serviceable to
Grace, and to communicate the knowledge of Faith to the minds of Men by the
most simple and natural ways. In truth, it did not become J. C. upon Earth to
enlighten Men by particular wills, since he might instruct them as inward Truth
and eternal Wisdom, by the most simple and most fruitful Laws of Nature.

XLVI.

That which seems most dark in the order which God has observed in founding
his Church, is doubtless the times, the place, and other circumstances of the
Incarnation of his Son, and the preaching of the Gospel. For why should J. C.
for whom the world was created, be made man 4000. years after its creation? Why
should he be born among the Jews who was to reprove this miserable Nation? Why
chosen to be the Son of David, when the House of David was fallen from its
Glory; and not the Son of any of the Emperors, who commanded all the Earth,
since he came to convert and enlighten all the World? Why did he choose low,
mean, and ignorant persons for his Apostles and Disciples; Preach to the
Inhabitants of Bethsaida and Corazin, who were resolved to continue in their
incredulity, and pass by Tire and Zidon, who would have been converted if they
had had the same favor: Hinder St. Paul from Preaching the word of God in
Asia, and command him to pass into Macedonia? These, and a thousand other
circumstances which attended the preaching of the Gospel, doubtless are
Mysteries, whereof it is not possible to give clear and evident reasons, neither
is this my design. I would only lay down some principles, which may give some
light to these and such like difficulties, or at least make it appear, that
from them nothing can be concluded against, what I have hitherto said
concerning the Order of Nature and of Grace.

XLVII.

It is certain that natural effects are combined and mixed after infinite ways
with the effects of Grace. And that the order of Nature increases or lessens
the efficacy of the effects of the order of Grace, according to the different
manners by which these two orders are mixed one with another. The Death, which
according to the general Laws of Nature, sometimes happens to a good or evil
Prince, to a good or an evil Bishop, causes a great deal of good or evil to the
Church; because such like accidents make great change in the consequence of
effects which depend upon the order of Grace. Now God would save all men by the
most simple ways. Therefore it may, and it ought to be said in general, that he
has chosen the times, the place, the manners, which in succession of time, and
according to the general Laws of Nature and Grace, will ( caeteris paribus)
cause the greatest number of the Predestined to enter into the Church. God
does all for his Glory. Therefore, amongst all the possible combinations of
Nature with Grace, he by the infinite extension of his knowledge, has chosen
that, which must make the Church most perfect, and most worthy of his Majesty
and Wisdom.

XLVIII.

It seems to me, this already suffices to answer all difficulties relating to
the circumstances of our Mysteries. For if it be said that J. C. ought to have
been born of a Roman Emperor, and have wrought Miracles in the Capital City of
the World, that so the Gospel might have been more easily spread in the
farthest distant Countries; to this it may be answered boldly, that whatsoever
men think thereof, this combination of Nature with Grace, would not have been
so worthy of the Wisdom of God as that which he has chosen.

I grant, that Religion would thus at first have been spread with more ease;
but its establishment would not have been so divine and so extraordinary, and
consequently not such an invincible proof of its solidity and certainty. Thus,
according to this combination, Religion perhaps would have been at present
either destroyed, or less spread in the World. Moreover, when it is said that
God acts by the most simple ways, an equality is always supposed in all things
else, especially in the glory which must redound to God by his Work. Now the
Church would not have been so perfect, nor so worthy of the greatness and
holiness of God, if it had been formed with so much ease. For the Beauty of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, consisting in the different rewards due to the different
combat of Christians, it was expedient that the Martyrs should shed their
Blood as well as J. C. to enter into the glory which they possess. In a word,
this principle, that amongst all the infinite combinations of the orders of
Nature and Grace, God has chosen that which would produce an effect most worthy
of his Majesty and Wisdom, is sufficient in general to answer all the
difficulties which may be made concerning the circumstances of our Mysteries.
In like manner, to justify the orders of Nature and Grace in themselves, its
enough to know, that God being infinitely Wise, he does not form his designs,
but upon the admirable relation of Wisdom and fruitfulness, which he sees in
the ways capable to execute them; as I have already shown in the first
Discourse.

XLIX.

Since the generality of men judge of God by themselves, they imagine that he
first resolves upon a design, and afterward consults his Wisdom how to bring
it to effect; for our wills every moment go before our reason, so that our
designs are scarce ever perfectly reasonable. For God does not act as Men do.
Behold how he acts, if I have well consulted the idea of an infinitely perfect
being. God, by the infinite knowledge of his wisdom, and in the same wisdom,
sees all possible works, and at the same time all ways of producing each of
them. He sees all the relation of the means to their ends; he compares all
things by an eternal, immutable, necessary foresight, and by the comparison
which he makes of relations of the wisdom and fruitfulness which he discovers
betwixt his designs and the ways of executing them, he freely forms the design.
But the design being resolved upon, he necessarily chooses those general ways
which are most worthy of his wisdom, greatness, and goodness: for since he does
not resolve upon any thing, but by the knowledge he has of the ways of
executing it, the choice of the design contains the choice of the ways.

L.

When I say, that God freely forms his design, I do not mean as if he could
choose another which is less, and reject that which is more worthy of his
wisdom; for supposing that God will make any outward work worthy of himself, he
is not indifferent in his choice: he must produce that which is the most
perfect in respect of the simplicity of the ways by which he acts: he owes this
to himself, to follow the rules of his wisdom: he must always act after the
most wise and perfect manner. But, I say, God freely takes up his resolution,
because he invincibly and necessarily loves nothing but his own substance.
Neither the Incarnation of the Word, much less the Creation of the World, are
necessary Emanations of his Nature. God is altogether sufficient to himself.
For a Being infinitely perfect may be conceived alone, without having a
necessary relation to his Creatures.

LI.

Since God necessarily loves himself, he also necessarily follows the Rules of
his Wisdom. But seeing the Creatures make no part of his Being, he is so
self-sufficient as that nothing can oblige him to produce them: he is very
indifferent or free in respect of them. And it is upon this account that he
made the World in time; for this circumstance makes it evident, that the
Creatures are not necessary Emanations of the Divinity, but do essentially
depend upon the Free Will of a Creator.

LII.

Nevertheless, behold an Objection which at first does surprise the mind: If it
be true, That God necessary follows the Rules of his Wisdom, the World would
not have been created in time. For either the World is worthy, or unworthy of
God. If it was better the World should have been brought out of nothing, it
ought to have been eternal; if better it should have remained in nothing, it
ought not to have been made at all. God therefore is not obliged to follow the
Rules this Wisdom prescribes, seeing the World was created in time. But the
Answer to this Objection is not difficult: It is better the World should be,
than not: but it is better it should not have been at all, than be eternal. The
Creature must carry in it the essential mark of its dependence: If Spirits had
been eternal, they might have had some reason to have looked upon themselves as
Gods, or necessary Beings; or at least capable to contribute something to the
greatness and happiness of God, imagining that he could not but have made them:
they might likewise in some sort have compared themselves to the Divine
Persons, thinking they were, like them, produced by a necessary emanation. Thus
God was obliged, according to the Rules of his Wisdom, to leave unto the
Creatures the character of their dependence: assuring them, nevertheless, that
he has not made them to annihilate them, and that being constant to his
designs, as his infinite Wisdom requires, they shall subsist eternally.

LIII.

This Difficulty may be further urged, after this manner: God necessarily
follows the Rules of his Wisdom; he necessarily does what is the best. Now, it
was better at least, that the World should have been created in time, than that
it should not have been created at all. Certainly it was expedient, according
to the Rules of Divine Wisdom, that the World should have been produced with
those circumstances according to which God had made it. Therefore the Creation
of the World in time is absolutely necessary, God is not at all free in this
respect, he could not but have made it.

To resolve this Difficulty it ought to be observed, That though God follows the
Rules which his Wisdom prescribes unto him, yet he does not necessarily do that
which is best, because he might do nothing: To act and not exactly to follow
the Rules of Wisdom, is a defect. Thus, supposing that God will act, he
necessarily acts after the wifest manner that can be. But, to be free in the
production of the World, is a mark of abundance of fullness, and
self-sufficiency. It is better the World should be, than not be: the
Incarnation of J. C. renders the Work of God worthy of its Author: This I
grant. But seeing God is essentially happy and perfect, seeing nothing but
himself can be good, in relation unto him, or the cause of his perfection and
happiness, he invinsibly loves only his own substance; and all that is without
him, must indeed be made by an eternal and immutable action; but which has no
other necessity, but upon supposition of the Divine Decrees.

See yet another Principle, of which I have already spoken, which may give some
light to the Difficulties which may be made about the Circumstances of the
Incarnation of J. C. and the Creation of the World.

LIVE.

Reason and the Authority of the H. Books, teach us, that the first and
principal of God's Designs is, the Establishment of his Church in J. C. The
present World is not created to continue such as it is. The Lies and Errors,
the Unrighteousness and Disorders which we see, sufficiently show it must have
an end. The future World, where Truth and Righteousness inhabit, is that Land
whose Foundations cannot be shaken; and which, being the external Object of the
Divine Love, shall subsist eternally. God has not created this visible World,
but by little and little, to form thereof that invisible City of which S. John
tells us so many Wonders. And seeing J. C. shall be the chief Beauty thereof,
God always has had J. C. in view in the production of his Work. He has made
all for Man, and with respect to Man, Heb. chapter II.
as the Scripture teaches us: but this Man, for whom God has made all, is,
according to S. Paul, J. C. It Is to teach Men, that they are created, that they
do not subsist, but in J. C. it is to bind them closely to J. C. it is to engage
them to become like unto him, that God has represented J. C. and his Church in
the chiefest of his Creatures. For it was necessary God should find J. C. in
all his Work, that this Work might be the object of his Love and worthy of the
Action by which it is produced.

LV.

If the manner after which the H. Scripture relates the Creation of the first
Man be considered, how his Wife was formed of his Flesh and Bone, the Love he
had for her, and even the Circumstances of their Sin, it will doubtless be
granted, that God thought of the second Adam when he made the first: that he
considered the Father of the World to come, when he created the Father of the
present; and that he intended to make the first Man and the first Woman express
Figures of J. C. and his Church. S. Paul suffers us not to doubt of this truth,
when he assures us, that we are made of the Bone and Flesh of J. C. and that we
are his Members, and that the Marriage of Adam and Eve was the Figure of J. C.
and his Church.

LVI.

God might have formed Men and Animals by ways as simple as the ordinary
Generation is: But seeing this way figured J. C. and his Church; since, it bore
the Character of the Chief of God's Designs; since, it represented, as I may
say, the well-beloved Son of his Father, that Son by whom the whole Creation
subsists: God was obliged to prefer it before all others, whereby to teach us,
that as intelligible Beauties consist only in the relation they have to eternal
Wisdom, so sensible Beauties must in some manner, much unknown to us, have some
relation to the Truth incarnate.

LVII.

Doubtless there are many relations between the principal Creatures and J. C.
who is their model and end. For all is full of J. C. all expresses and figures
him, as far as the simplicity of the Laws of Nature will permit them: but I
dare not enter into the particulars of this. For, besides that I am afraid of
deceiving my self, and that I don't sufficiently know either Nature or Grace,
the present or the future World, to discover the relations thereof: I am
sensible, that Men's Imaginations are so witty and delicate, that one cannot, by
Reason, lead them to God, much less to J. C. without tyring them, and exciting
their railery. The greatest part of Christians are accustomed to a Philosophy,
which rather loves to shelter its self in fictions as extravagant as those of
the Poets, than have recourse to God: and some are so little acquainted with J.
C. that a Man should pass with them for a visionary, if he should say the same
things with S. Paul and not quote his words: For it is rather this great Name,
than the Sight of the Truth, which engages them. The Authority of the Scripture
hinders them from blaspheming against that which they are ignorant of: but
seeing they think but little of it, they cannot thereby be much enlightened.

LVIII.

It is certain the Jews were a figure of the Church, and the most holy and
famous amongst the Kings, Prophets and Patriarchs of this People, did represent
the true Messiah, our Savior J. C. This truth cannot be denied without
undermining the Foundations of Christian Religion, and making the most learned
of the Apostles pass for the most ignorant of Men. J. C. not being yet come, it
was necessary he should at least be prefigured. He ought to be expected, he
ought to be desired, he ought to disperse, by his Figures, some sort of Beauty
in the World, to make it pleasing to his Father. Thus it was necessary he
should have been in some sense as ancient as the World; it was necessary he
should die presently after Sin in the person of Abel: Agnus occisus ab origin
Mundi, principium and finis, Alpha and Omega, heri and hodie est, erat,
venturus est. These are the Qualifications which S. John gives to the Savior
of Men.

LIX.

Now, supposing that J. C. ought to be presigured, it was expedient he should
chiefly be so by his Ancestors: and that their History, dictated by the H.
Spirit, should in all times be preserved, to the end that J. C. may still be
compared with his Figures, and acknowledged as the true Messiah. Of all the
Nations of the Earth, God loving that best which had most relation with his
Son, the Jews were to have been the Ancestors of J. C. according to the flesh,
and to have received this favor of God, since they were the most lively and
most express Representations of his Son.

LX.

But, if this Difficulty be further urged, so as to demand a reason of the
choice which God made of the Jews to be the principal Figures of J. C. I think
I may and ought to affirm, first, That God, always acting by the most simple
ways, and discovering in the infinite Treasures of his Wisdom, all the possible
Combinations of Nature with Grace, chose that which would make the Church most
ample, most perfect, and most worthy of his Majesty and Holiness, as I have
already said. In the second place, I think I ought to answer, That God
foreseeing what would happen to the Jews, by a necessary consequence of natural
Laws, had more relation to the design which he had of representing J. C. and
his Church, than any thing which could happen to any other Nation; it was
expedient that he should choose this People rather than any other. For, in
conclusion, the predestination to the Law is not like the predestination to
Grace; and though there is nothing in Nature which may oblige God to dispense his
Grace equally to all People; it seems to me, that Nature might merit the Law,
in the sense wherein I here understand it.

LXI.

It is true, that all that happened to the Jews, who represented J. C. was not
a necessary consequence of the order of Nature; Miracles were necessary to
render them the lively and express Images of the Church, but Nature must have
furnished the Fund and the Matter, and perhaps the principal Strokes in several
things; Miracles finished the rest. But no other Nation would have been so
proper for so just and high a Design.

LXII.

It appears to me, that we are obliged to think, that God's Wisdom, foreseeing
all the Consequences of all the possible Orders, and all their Combinations,
never works Miracles when Nature suffices: and that thus, he was obliged to
choose the Combination of Natural Effects, which, saving him, as I may say, the
expense of Miracles, might nevertheless very faithfully execute his Intentions.

For example, It Is necessary that all Sins should be punished; but not always
in this World. Supposing, nevertheless, that it was expedient for the glory of
J. C. and the establishment of Religion, that the Jews should be punished in
the face of the whole Earth, for putting to death the Savior of the World: it
was convenient that J. C. came into the World toward the end of Herod's Reign;
supposing, that according to the necessary consequence of the Order of Nature,
that People should be divided amongst themselves about that time; that Civil
Wars and continual Seditions should weaken them; and that, lastly, the Romans
should destroy and scatter them abroad, after the total destruction of their
City and Temple.

It is true, there seems to have been something extraordinary in the desolation
of the Jews. But, since it argues more Wisdom in God to produce such surprising
Effects, by the most simple and general Laws of Nature, than by particular
Wills; I know not whether, on this occasion, we ought to have recourse to a
Miracle. For my part, I don't dispute of it here: this is a thing which is not
easy, nor indeed very necessary to be cleared. I give this Example, for to
make some application of my Principles and to make them the better understood.

It seems to me, that what I have hitherto said, of Nature and Grace, is
sufficient to satisfy all equitable and moderate Persons, concerning an
infinite number of Difficulties, which disturb the Minds of those only who
judge of God by themselves. For if we do faithfully consult the Idea of an
infinitely perfect Being, of a general Cause, of an infinite Wisdom; and if the
Principles I have established of this Idea be granted, I believe none will be
surprised or offended with God's Conduct, and that instead of condemning or
murmuring at it, Men will not forbear to admire and adore it.

The Third Discourse. Of Grace, and the Manner by which it Acts in us.
The First Part. Of Liberty.
I.

THere is nothing more uncomely, than the substance of Spirits, if they are
separated from God: For what is a Mind without Understanding and Reason,
without Motion and Love? In the mean time the Word and Wisdom of God is the
Universal Reason of Spirits; it is the Love by which God loves himself, which
gives to the Soul all the motion that it has toward happiness: The Mind cannot
know the Truth, but by its natural and necessary union with Truth its self; it
cannot be reasonable, but by reason: in short, it cannot, in some sense, be a
Mind and Understanding, but because its Substance is enlightened, penetrated and
perfected by the Light of God himself.

I have elsewhere explained these Truths. Book III. of the Searchafter Truth,
and in the Explication of the Nature of Ideas.
As the substance of the Soul is not capable of loving that which is good, but
by its natural and necessary union with the eternal and substantial Love of the
Sovereign Good; so it moves not toward that which is good, but so far forth as
God carries it: it is not Will, but by the motion which God continually
imprints upon it; it lives not, but by charity; it wills not, but by the love
of good, which God imparts unto it, though it abuses it. For in truth, as God
neither makes nor preserves Minds, but for himself, so he carries them toward
himself as long as he preserves their being: he communicates the love of
happiness to them, as far as they are capable. Now this natural and continual
motion of the Soul toward good in general, toward good undetermined, that is,
toward God, is that which I here call the Will; because it is this motion
which makes the Soul capable of loving different goods.

II.

This natural motion of the Soul toward good in general is invincible; for it
is not in our power to choose not to be happy. We necessarily love that we
clearly know, and sensibly feel to be the true good. All minds love God by the
necessity of their nature: and if they love any thing but God by the free
choice of the will, it is not because they do not seek after God, or the cause
of their happiness, but because having a confused sense, that Bodies about them
make them happy, they look upon them as their Goods, and by a natural and
ordinary consequence, love them, and unite themselves to them.

III.

But the love of all these particular goods, is not naturally invincible. Man,
considered as God made him, may hinder himself from loving those goods which do
not fill the whole capacity he has of loving. Seeing there is a good which
contains all others, Man may sacrifice to the love of this good all other
loves; for God having made minds for himself, he cannot engage them invincibly
to love any thing but himself, or with relation to himself. The inward
sentiment which we have of our selves, teaches us, that we may, for example,
refuse any fruit, tho we are inclined to receive it. Now this power of loving,
or not loving particular goods, this non-invincibility, which is in that
motion, which carries the minds to love that which does not seem to them to
contain all goods; this power, this non-invincibility, is that which I call
liberty. Thus, by putting the definition in the place of the thing defined,
this expression, Our will is free, signifies, that the natural motion of our
Soul toward good in general, is not invincible, in respect of any particular
good. We do also to this word free, join the Idea of voluntary: but hereafter I
shall take this word in the sense which I have observed, because this is most
natural and most ordinary.

IV.

The word good is equivocal, it may signify either pleasure which makes Men
formally happy, or else the true or apparent cause of pleasure.

I shall in this Discourse always take the word good in the second sense;
because in truth pleasure is imprinted upon the Soul, to the end that she may
love the cause of her happiness, that by the motion of her love she may be
carried toward it, and be straightly united thereunto, and so be continually
happy. When the Soul loves nothing but her pleasure, she truly loves nothing
but her self: for pleasure is only a condition or modification of the Soul
which renders her actually happy. Now, since the Soul cannot be to her self the
cause of her happiness, she is unjust, she is ungrateful, she is blind, if she
loves her pleasure, without paying that love and respect which is due to the
true cause which produces it in her. Since there is none but God, who can
immediately and by himself act upon the Soul, and make her feel pleasure by the
actual efficacy of his Almighty Will, there is none but he who can be truly
good. Nevertheless, I call the creatures which are the apparent causes of those
pleasures which they occasion in us, by the name of goods. For I would not
avoid the ordinary way of speaking, but as far as it is necessary clearly to
express my self. All the creatures, tho good in themselves and perfect in
respect of God's designs, are not good in respect to us, I mean, they are not
our good, because they are not the true causes of our pleasure or our happiness.

V.

The natural motion which God continually imprints upon the Soul, to engage it
to love him, or (to use a term which expresses several Ideas, and which can
neither be equivocal nor confused, after the definition I have given thereof)
the will is determined toward particular goods, either by clear and distinct
knowledge, or by a confused sentiment which shows us these goods. If the mind
neither sees nor tastes any particular good, the motion of the Soul continues,
as it were, undetermined, it tends toward good in general. But this motion
receives a particular determination, as soon as the mind has an idea or
sentiment of any particular good: for the Soul being incessantly moved toward
good indetermin'd, she must be moved as soon as any object seems to be good to
her.

VI.

Now, when the good which is present to the Understanding and Senses, does not
altogether fill these two faculties; when it appears under the idea of a
particular good, which does not contain all goods; and when it is tasted by a
sentiment which does not fill all the capacity of the Soul, she must still
further desire the sight and enjoyment of some other good; she may suspend the
judgment of her love; she need not to rest in the actual enjoyment, but may by
her desires seek after some new object. And seeing her desires are the
occasional cause of her knowledge, she may, by the natural and necessary union
of all Spirits with him, who contains the ideas of all goods, discover the true
good; and in the true good, a great many other particular goods, different from
what she saw and tasted before. Thus, being acquainted with the vacuity and
vanity of sensible goods attending to the secret reproaches of reason, and to
the remorse of her conscience, to the complaints and threatenings of the true
good, who will not that we should sacrifice him to apparent and imaginary
goods; she may (by the motion which God imprints continually upon her, after
good in general, or the sovereign good, that is, toward himself) stop her
carrier after any good whatsoever. She may resist all sensible perswasives,
seek and find other objects; compare them betwixt themselves, and with the
indeleble idea of the sovereign good; and love none of them with a determined
love. And if this sovereign good makes it self to be tasted, she may prefer it
to all particular goods; tho the sweetness which they seem to transfer into the
Soul be very great and very agreeable. These Truths must be further explained.

VII.

The Soul is carried toward good in general; she desires to possess all goods,
and would never confine her love; there is no good which appears so to her,
that she refuses to love: Therefore, while she actually enjoys any particular
good, she has yet a motion to go further; she still desires some other thing,
by the natural and invincible impression God puts into her; and to change or
divide her love, it is sufficient to present unto her another good, than that
which she enjoys, and to make her taste the sweetness of it. Now the Soul may
ordinarily seek and discover new goods; she may also come near and enjoy them.
For, in short, these desires are the natural or occasional causes of her
knowledge. Objects discover themselves to her, and approach unto her
proportionally, as she desires to know them. An ambitious person, who considers
the splendor of some dignity, may also think of the slavery, of the
constraint, of the real ills which accompany humane greatness. He may
calculate, weigh and compare all things together, if his passion does not blind
him: For, I confess, there are times, when the passions entirely rob the mind
of its liberty; and they always do diminish it. Thus, seeing any dignity how
great so ever it may appear, is not accounted by a Man free and reasonable, as
the universal and infinite good; and since the will generally reaches to all
goods, this Man, who is perfectly free and reasonable, may seek and find
others, seeing he may desire them: for it is his desires which discover and
present them unto him. He may examine and compare them with that which he
enjoys. But because he can meet with none but particular goods upon earth, he
may and ought here below continually and without intermission seek and enquire;
or, rather, that he may not change every moment, he ought generally to neglect
all these transient goods, and desire only those which are immutable and
eternal.

VIII.

Nevertheless, seeing Men do not love to search, but to enjoy, seeing the
labor of examination is at present very troublesome; but rest and enjoyment
always very pleasant, the Soul ordinarily stops as soon as she has found any
good; she fixes upon it, that she may enjoy it. She deceives her self, because
by deceiving her self, and judging that she has found that she seeks, her
desire is changed into pleasure; and pleasure renders her more happy than
desire. But her happiness cannot last long. Her pleasure being ill grounded,
unjust, and deceitful, it presently troubles and disquiets her, because she
would be truly and solidly happy. Thus the natural love of good awakens and
produces new desires in her: These confused desires represent new objects.
Seeing the Soul loves pleasure, she runs after those which communicate it, or
seems to communicate it; and because she loves repose, she takes up with them.
She does not at first examine the defects of the present good, whilst it
prevents her by its sweetness; she considers it rather on the fair side; she
applies her self to that which charms her; thinks of nothing but enjoying it.
And the more she enjoys it, the more she loves it; the nearer she approaches to
it, the more she considers it. But now the more she considers it, the more
defects she discovers in it: and since she desires to be invincibly happy, she
cannot for ever be deceived. When she is hungry, thirsty, and tired with
seeking, she presently satiates, and fills her self with the first good she
meets; but she presently disgusts the nourishment for which Man was not made.
Thus the love of the true good still excites in her new desires after new
objects; and being in continual change, all her life and all her happiness upon
earth, consists only in a continual circulation of thoughts, desires, and
pleasures. Such is the condition of a Soul which makes no use of its liberty,
which suffers its self to be lead, at all adventures, by the motion which
transports her, and by the fortuitous impression of objects which determine
her. This is the condition of one whose mind is so weak, that he always takes
false goods for the true; and a heart so corrupted, that he sells and blindly
gives himself up to all that affects him, or the good which makes him actually
feel the most sweet and agreeable pleasures.

IX.

But a Man perfectly free, such as we conceive Adam, immediately after his
creation, clearly knows, that God only is his good, or the true cause of the
pleasures which he enjoys. Tho he feels sweetness by the approach of objects
which are about him, he does not love them, he only loves God; and if God
forbids him to unite himself to bodies, he is ready to forsake what pleasure so
ever he finds therein. He will not take up, but in the enjoyment of the
sovereign good: to him he will sacrifice all others; and how much so ever he
desires to be happy, or to enjoy pleasures, no pleasure is too strong for his
knowledge. Not but that pleasures may blind him and disturb his reason, and
fill the capacity which he has of thinking: for the mind being finite, all
pleasure may distract and divide it. But the reason is, because (tho pleasures
be under the Command of his Will) he was not cautious to keep himself from
being intoxicated therewith: because the only invincible pleasure is that of
the blessed, or that which the first Man would have found in God, if God would
have prevented or hindered his fall; not only because this pleasure fills all
the faculties of the Soul, without troubling Reason or engaging it in the love
of false goods; but also nothing opposes the enjoyment of this pleasure,
neither the desire of perfection, nor that of happiness. For whilst we love
God, we are perfect; whilst we love him, we are happy; and when we love him
with pleasure, we are perfect and happy both together. Thus the most perfect
liberty is that of minds, to which no motion toward particular goods is ever
invincible; it is that of Man before sin, before concupiscence had disturbed
his understanding and corrupted his heart. And the most imperfect liberty is
that of a mind, to which every motion, after any particular good, how little so
ever it appears, is always and in all circumstances invincible.

X.

Now, betwixt these two sorts of liberty, there are infinite degrees more or
less perfect, which is not commonly observed. Men ordinarily imagine, that
liberty is equal in all Men, and that it is a faculty essential to their minds,
the nature of which continues always the same, tho its action varies according
to the different objects: Men, who don't reflect, suppose a perfect equality in
all things where they do not sensibly observe an inequality. They comfort and
excuse themselves from all application, by giving to all things an abstracted
form, whose essence consists in a kind of indivisibility. But they deceive
themselves: liberty is not such a faculty as they imagine. There are no two
persons equally free, in respect of the same objects. Children are less than
Men, who have the full use of their reason; and there are no two Men who have
their reason equally firm and assured in respect of the same objects. They who
have violent passions, and are not accustomed to resist them, are less free
than they who have generously opposed them and are naturally moderate: There
are no two Men equally moderate, equally sensible, as to the same objects, and
who have equally contended for the preservation of their liberty. There are
also persons so enslaved to sin, that they do less resist, and less think of
resisting whilst they are awake, than good Men do whilst they sleep: for,
according to the Word of Truth, He that commits sin, is the servant of sin.

XI.

It is true, according to the institution of nature, all Men are equally free:
for God does not invincibly engage minds to love any particular good. But
concupiscence corrupts the heart and reason: and Man, having lost the power of
obliterating the traces of sensible pleasures, and stopping the motions of his
concupiscence, this liberty, equal in all Men, if they had not sinned, is
become unequal, according to the different degrees of their knowledge, and
their concupiscence which differently acts in them. For even concupiscence its
self, which is equal in all Men, as they have lost the power which they had
over their bodies, is unequal a thousand ways, by reason of the diversity which
is to be found in the conformation of their bodies, in the multitude and motion
of the animal spirits, and in the almost infinite relations and connexions
which are made, by their concerns in the World.

XII.

Still further, to discern more distinctly the inequality which is to be found
in different persons, it must be observed, that any Man who is perfectly
reasonable and free, and who would be truly happy, may and ought, when any
pleasant object presents its self, suspend his love, and carefully examine
whether this object be the true good, or whether the motion which carries him
after it, do exactly agree with that which carries after the true good.
Otherwise he would love by instinct, and not by reason; and if he could not
suspend the judgment of his love before he had examined it, he would not be
perfectly free. But if he should clearly see, that this pleasant object should
be truly good for him; and if this evidence joined to the sentiment be such,
that he could not suspend his judgment, then tho perfectly free, yet he is not
so in respect of this good; he invincibly loves it, because pleasure and
knowledge do agree in recommending it: But since there is none but God who can
act in us, or be our good, since the motion which thrusts us forward toward
the creatures, does not agree with that which carries us toward God: any Man,
who is perfectly reasonable and free, may hinder himself from judging that
sensible objects are goods: he may and ought to suspend the judgment which
governs, or ought to govern his love; for he can never evidently see that
sensible goods are true goods, because he can never evidently see that which is
not.

XIII.

This power of suspending the judgment, which actually governs the love; this
power which is the principle of our liberty, and by which it is that pleasures
are not invincible, is much lessened since sin, tho not altogether annihilated.
And that we may have this power, when any object tempts us, it is necessary,
besides some love of order, to have presence of mind, or be sensible of remorse
of conscience; for a Child, or a Man asleep, has not actually this power. But
all Men are not equally enlightened; the minds of sinners are full of darkness.
Consciences are not equally tender; the heart of sinners is hardened. The love
of order and actual graces are unequal in all Men. Therefore all Men are not
equally free: they have not an equal power of suspending their judgment;
pleasure determines, and carries them toward some objects, rather than others.
Such an one can suspend his judgment, or stop his consent, tho the present
object may make him feel a very lively and sensible pleasure: And another has
so little a mind, and a heart so corrupted, that, to him the least pleasure is
invincible, the least affliction insupportable. Not being accustomed to
withstand sensible invitations, his disposition is such, that he will not so much
as think of resisting them. So that, at this time, he has no power of
suspending his consent; seeing he has not so much as the power of reflecting
thereon: In respect of this object, he is like a Man that is asleep, or one who
has lost his mind.

XIV.

The weaker reason is, the more sensible the Soul becomes, and judges more
rashly and falsely of sensible goods or evils. When a Man is in a slumber, if a
straw or feather does but tickle him, he instantly awakes, as much affrighted,
as if a serpent had bitten him. He looks upon this little uneasiness, and
judges of it, as one of the greatest afflictions; to him it seems
insupportable. His reason being weakened by his slumber, he cannot suspend his
judgment; the least goods or evils are almost always invincible to him. The
senses act in him, and they always judge rashly: This must be so for many
reasons. When reason is not so weak, little pleasures are not invincible, nor
little evils insupportable: we do not always pursue after that wherein we find
most pleasure. For there are pleasures so little, that reason despises them;
for reason always supposes some love of order: It causes Men to be not so much
affrighted at the sight of little evils; to resolve, for example, on having a
Vein opened, and to endure it; not to judge so rashly, to suspend, to examine;
and the stronger reason is, the more it will suspend the judgment,
notwithstanding the sensible attractives and horrors. Now, nothing is more
certain, than that all Men do not equally partake of reason, tho all do partake
thereof; that all are not equally sensible, at least, of the same objects; that
they are not equally born, educated, assisted by the grace of J. C. and that,
upon these accounts, they are not all equally free, or capable, to suspend the
judgment of their love, in respect of the same objects.

XV.

Now it ought to be observed, that the principal duty of Spirits is, to
preserve and increase their liberty; because it is only by the good use they
shall make thereof, that they may merit their happiness, if they be assisted by
the grace of J. C. and, at least, lessen their misery, if they be left to
themselves. That which diminishes our liberty, or that which makes pleasures
with respect to us invincible, is because the light of our reason is clouded;
and we have lost the power which we ought to have over our bodies. Man
therefore ought to inform his reason by continual meditations; he ought to
consider his duties, that he may fulfill them; and his weaknesses, that he may
have recourse unto him who is all our strength. And since we have lost the
power of stopping the impressions which are made upon the body by the presence
of objects, and which afterward corrupt the understanding and heart, we ought
to fly these objects; we ought to use that power which we have remaining; we
must be continually careful to purisie our imagination, and even labor with
all our strength to obliterate the traces which false goods have imprinted
thereon; since these traces excite in us such desires as distract our liberty.
By this means, a Man, whose liberty is almost annihilated, in respect of whom,
all pleasures, how little so ever, are invincible, may acquire such a strength
and liberty, that he will not be inferior to the greatest Souls, assistances
being supposed equal. For at the time at least when these pleasures do not
solicit to evil, he may seek to avoid them; he may fortify himself by some
reason, which, by proposing future pleasures, may counter balance those which
he does not actually enjoy. For as there is no person who has not some love of
order, so there is no Man who may not vanquish a weak and light pleasure by a
strong solid reason, by a reasonable fear of some evil, or by the hope of
greater good. In short, there is none who may not at least, by the ordinary
succors of grace, overcome certain pleasures and avoid others. Now these
pleasures, before invincible, or how ever eagerly pursued, being conquered or
avoided, a Man may prepare himself to encounter others, at least before they
attempt him. For the sweetness which he tastes after the victory, encourages
him to the fight; the joy of a good conscience, and the grace of J. C. give
courage; and even the fear of being overcome is not unusal: for it may make him
repair to him, in whom we may do all things; it makes us wisely avoid dangerous
occasions. Thus, by this exercise, we always gain; for, to conclude, if we be
overcome, we thereby become more humble, more wise, more circumspect, and some
times also even more zealous in the fight, and better able to vanquish or
resist.

XVI.

As in the study of Sciences, they who do not consent to the false light of
probability, and accustom themselves to suspend their judgment till the light
of truth shall appear, seldom fall into error; whereas the common sort of Men
are deceived every moment by their rash judgments. In like manner, in the
government of Manners, they who use to sacrifice their pleasures to the love of
order, and daily mortify their senses and their passions, especially in things
which may appear to be of the least consequence (which all the World may do)
will acquire, even in the most important things, a facility of suspending the
judgment which governs the love. Pleasure does not surprise them like other
Men, or at least does not carry them down the stream, without thinking thereon.
On the contrary, when they feel it, it seems to give them notice to take care
of themselves, and consult Reason, or the Rules of the Gospel. They have a more
tender and delicate Conscience, than they, who according to the Language of the
Scripture, drink in sin like water: they are sensible of the secret reproaches
of reason, and the wholesome advertisements of inward truth. So that the habit of
resisting weak and light pleasures, is some progress toward the vanquishing
the more violent, or at least toward the suffering some pain and shame, when a
Man is overcome; which, in a short time, will give an horror and disgust
thereof. Thus liberty increasing by little and little, and perfected by the use
made of it, and the assistance of Grace, may, at last, be able to fulfill even
the most difficult Commandments; because by ordinary graces, which are every
moment given to Christians, we may overcome common temptations, we may, in an
ordinary way, avoid the greater, and by the assistance of the grace of J. C.
there is none which we may not vanquish.

XVII.

It is true, that when the case is so, that a Man is surprised by pleasure, he
is not in a condition so much as to think of resisting it; it is true, I say,
that this Man cannot actually fulfill the Commandment, which forbids him to
enjoy it, for this pleasure is to him invincible.

Thus, supposing this person had this impotence by a natural necessity, his sin
not being free, it would make him no more culpable; I mean, no more worthy to
be punished with grief, than if he had been irregular in his sleep. Likewise,
if this impotence should have been the necessary consequence of sins, even
freely committed before his conversion, it will not be imputed to him, because
of his charity. But since he ought and might resist pleasure, contend for the
preservation and increase of his liberty, have recourse unto him by Prayer, in
whom we may do all things; this sin, tho actually committed by a kind of
necessity, renders him culpable and worthy to be punished; if not upon the
account of this sin, yet at least for the negligence, which is the principle of
it. The commandment of God is not absolutely impossible; even the sinner
himself ought and may, for reasons already mentioned, put himself in a
condition to observe it: because Men ought, and may continually labor to
augment and perfect their liberty, not only by the assistance of the grace of
J. C. but also by their own natural strength, or by the ordinary graces; for,
in short, Nature may be made serviceable to Grace a thousand ways.

THE SECOND PART. Of Grace.
XVIII.

THE inequality which is to be found in the liberty of different persons, being
clearly understood, it will not, in my opinion, be difficult to comprehend, how
Grace acts in us, if to the word Grace, we join clear and particular Ideas; and
if the difference between the Grace of the Creator and the Grace of the
Redeemer be observed. I have already said, in the foregoing Discourse, that
there is this difference betwixt Knowledge and Pleasure, that Knowledge leaves
us entirely to our selves, but Pleasure makes an attempt upon our Liberty: For
Knowledge is without us; it does not touch or modifie our Souls; it does not
push us on toward the Objects it discovers; it only makes us capable to
determine our selves, or to consent, with freedom and reason, to the impression
which God gives us toward Happiness. The knowledge of our Duty, the clear Idea
of Order, separated from all sentiment, the dry, abstracted, altogether pure
and intelligible sight of good, that is to say, without taste or foretaste,
leaves the Soul in a perfect liberty: But Pleasure is in the Soul; it touches
and modifies it. Thus it lessens our liberty, it makes us love good rather by
the love of Instinct and unaccountable Passion, than by the love of Choice and
Reason; it transports us, as I may say, toward sensible Objects. Nevertheless,
this is not to be understood, as if Pleasure was the same thing with Love, or
the motion of the Soul to good; but because it produces it, or determines it
toward the object which renders us happy. Since none but those Truths, whereof
we have clear Ideas, can be demonstrated, and since we have none such of our
inward sentiments, it is impossible, that I should demonstrate that which I
here maintain, as the consequences which depend upon common Notions, are
demonstrated. Every one therefore must consult the inward sentiment which he
has within himself, if he would be convinced of the difference there is betwixt
Knowledge and Pleasure; he must also carefully observe, that ordinarily
Knowledge is accompanied with Pleasure, from which nevertheless it ought to be
separated, that we may judge solidly thereof.

XIX.

If then it be true, that Pleasure naturally produces Love, and that it is as
it were a weight, which makes the Soul incline to the good, which causes it or
seems to cause it, it is visible, that the Grace of J.C. or the Grace of
Sentiment, is efficacious in its self. For tho the preventing delectation, when
it is weak, may not wholly convert the Hearts of those who have very lively
Passions, nevertheless it always has its effect, in that it always carries Men
toward God; it is always efficacious in some sense, but it has not always all
the effect which it might have, because concupiscence opposes it.

XX.

For example, In one of the Scales of a Balance there is a Weight of ten
Pounds, and a Weight of six Pounds only in the other; this last Weight truly
weighs: for if enough be put therein, or taken out of the other Scale; or,
lastly, if the Balance be hung nearer the Scale which has more weight in it,
this weight of six Pound will turn the Balance: But tho this Weight weighs, it
is plain, that its effect always depends upon the Weights which resist it, and
the manner after which they resist it. Thus the Grace of Sentiment is always
efficacious in its self, it always lessens the effort of Concupiscence, because
Pleasure naturally excites Love for the cause which produces it, or seems to
produce it. But tho this Grace be always efficacious in its self, it depends,
or, rather, its effect depends upon the actual dispositions of him to whom it
is given. The Weights of Concupiscence resist it, and sensible Pleasures which
tie us to the Creatures, (which seem to produce them in us) hinder the
Pleasures of Grace from uniting us strictly to him, who is only capable to act
in us and render us happy.

XXI.

But it is not the same of the Grace of Knowledge, or of the Grace of the
Creator. It is not efficacious of its self; it does not transport the Soul; it
does not give it any motion; it leaves it freely to its self. But tho it be not
efficacious of its self, it fails not to be attended with many effects, when it
is great, and animated with some grace of sentiment, which gives it vigor and
strength; or else when it finds no contrary pleasure, which do much resist it.
This is the difference betwixt the Grace of the Creator, and the Grace of the
Redeemer; betwixt Knowledge, and Pleasure; betwixt the Grace which does not
suppose Concupiscence, and the Grace which is given to counter-balance the
Pleasures of Concupiscence. The one is sufficient to a Man perfectly free and
fortified by Charity; the other is efficacious in a weak Man, to whom Pleasure
is necessary, that he may be drawn to the love of the true good.

XXII.

But the strength and efficacy of Grace ought always to be compared with the
action of Concupiscence, with the light of Reason, and especially with the
degree of Liberty that Person has to whom it is given. And it ought not to be
imagined, that God dispenses it by particular Wills, with a design it should
produce in us certain effects and nothing more: For when it is said, that Grace
always produces in the Heart the effect for which God gave it, we are deceived,
if we suppose, that God acts, like Men, with particular designs. God dispenses
his Grace with a general intention, that it may sanctify all those who receive
it, or as the occasional cause determines him to dispense it; nevertheless, he
sees very well, that in some Persons it will not have all the effect it will
have in others, not only by reason of the inequality of strength in respect of
Grace, but also the inequality of resistance in respect of Concupiscence.

XXIII.

Since Concupiscence has not altogether destroyed Humane Liberty, the Grace of
J.C. as efficacious as it is, is not absolutely invincible; Sensible Pleasure
may be overcome whilst it is weak. The judgment of Love may be suspended when a
Man is not hurried along by some violent Passion; and when he yields to the
courtship of this false Pleasure, he is to be blamed for the ill use of his
liberty. In like manner the delectation of Grace is not ordinarily invincible,
the good Motions which it inspires, and which separate us from the false good
we love, may be opposed. This Grace does not so sill the Soul, as to draw it
along toward the true good, without choice, without understanding, without
free consent. Thus when a Man resigns himself to its motion, when a Man goes
faster, as I may say, than it invincibly drives, when he sacrifices the
pleasures which lessen its efficacy; or, in short, when he acts by reason, or
loves the true good as he ought to love it, he then merits by the good use
which he makes of his Liberty.

XXIV.

It is true, that the delectation of Grace, considered in its self, and without
respect to the pleasures of Concupiscence which are contrary thereunto, is
always invincible; because this Holy Pleasure being agreeable to the light of
Reason, nothing can hinder its effect in a Man perfectly free: When the Mind
clearly sees by the light of Reason, that God is its happiness, and has a
lively sense thereof by the taste of pleasure; it is impossible but that it
should love him. For the Mind desires to be happy, and then nothing hinders it
from following the agreeable motions of its love; it suffers no remorse
opposite to its present happiness, and is not restrained by pleasures contrary
to that which it enjoys. The delectation of Grace therefore is not invincible:
The love also which it produces is not Meritorious, if it be not greater than
this delight; I mean, the love which is merely the natural or necessary effect
of the delectation of Grace, has nothing Meritorious in it, tho this love be
always good in its self: For he that goes no faster than he is driven, or
rather, no further than he receives present pay for, has no right to be
rewarded. When a Man loves God no farther than he is drawn, or only because he
is drawn, he does not love him by reason, but by instinct; he does not love him
as he desires, and ought to be beloved. But when he loves God by Choice, by
Reason, by the Knowledge which he has of his Amiableness, then he Merits: He
Merits when he advances, as I may say, toward the true good, after pleasure
has only determined the motion of love.

XXV.

This reason alone demonstrates, either that the first Man was not carried to
the love of God by the blind instinct of pleasure; or at least, that this
pleasure was not so lively as that which he felt from the sight of his natural
perfections, or in the actual use of sensible goods: For it is evident, that
this pleasure would have rendered him impeccable; this pleasure would have put
him into a state like to that of the Blessed, who do no longer Merit; not
because they are not now in the Condition of Travelers; (for Spirits always
Merit, when they do Actions in themselves Meritorious, and God being just, it
is necessary they should be rewarded for them) but they Merit no more, because
the pleasure which they find in God is equal to their love, because they are
altogether wrapped up in him; and [because] being delivered from all kind of
grief and every motion of Concupiscence, they have no longer any thing to
sacrifice to God.

XXVI.

For that which renders a man impeccable, does not altogether make him
incapable of Meriting: J.C. was impeccable, yet, nevertheless he Merited his
own glory and that of the Church, of which he is the Head. Since he was
perfectly free, he loved the Father, not by the instinct of Pleasure, but by
Choice and Reason; he loved him because he saw, by intuition, how lovely he
was. For the most perfect Liberty, is, that of a Mind which has all possible
Knowledge, and is not determined by any Pleasure: For all Pleasure, preventing
or other, naturally produces some love; and if Pleasure be not resisted, it
efficaciously determines the motions of the soul toward the agreeable object:
But Knowledge, how great soever it be conceived, leaves the mind perfectly
free; supposing that this Knowledge be considered singly and without any
Pleasure.

XXVII.

Seeing J.C. is nothing but the Word, or Reason Incarnate, certainly he ought
not to love the true good with a blind love, with the love of instinct, with
the love of sentiment; he ought to love him with reason. He must not love a
Being infinitely Amiable, and which he knows to be perfectly worthy of his
love; as Men love those goods which are not Amiable, and which they cannot know
to be worthy of their love: He ought not to love the Father with a love any
wise like unto that by which Men love the vilest Creatures, by which they love
Bodies. His love, that it may be pure, or at least perfectly Meritorious,
should by no means, be produced by preventing Pleasures: For Pleasure, may and
ought to be the reward of lawful love, as it really is at present in the Saints
and in J.C. himself. But it cannot be the principle of Merit; it should not
prevent Reason if it be not very much weakened. Now Reason in J.C. was no wise
weakened: Sovereign Reason in him supported Created Reason. J.C. not being
subject to the motions of Concupiscence, he had no need of preventing
delectation, to counter-ballance the sensible pleasures which surprise us;
perhaps he would not taste even the Pleasure of joy, or the Pleasures which
naturally followed the knowledge which he had of his Virtue and Perfections; to
the end, that being deprived of all sorts of Pleasures, his Sacrifice might be
more Holy, more Pure, and more dis-interested. Lastly, it may be, besides the
privation of all preventing Pleasures and others, he inwardly suffered those
Horrible desertions, which souls filled with Charity, cannot better express
than by being forsaken of God; according to those words of J.C. upon the Cross,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But if you will have J.C. to be
carried on even by preventing Pleasures, to the love of the Father, it is
necessary to say, according to the Principles which I have laid down, either
that he loved him with more zeal than he tasted Pleasure; (since natural love,
which the instinct of Pleasure produces is not at all Meritorious) or, at
least, that he Merited by the sensible griefs, and by the continual Sacrifice
he freely and voluntarily offered unto God. Luke 24.26. Acts 17.3.
For it became him to Suffer, that he might enter into his Glory, as the
Scripture teaches us.

XXVIII.

If the delectation of Grace, without respect to any contrary Pleasure,
infallibly turns the Consent of the Will, the same cannot be said of the
Pleasures of Concupiscence. These Pleasures considered in themselves, and
without respect to actual Pleasures, are not always invincible. The light of
Reason Condemns them, remorse of Conscience gives us an Horror of them; a Man
may ordinarily suspend his Consent. Thus the Grace of J.C. is stronger than
Concupiscence: It may be called Victorious Grace, because it is always Master
of the Heart, when its Impression is equal to that of Concupiscence. For when
the Balance of our Heart is in Equilibrio, by the equal weights of two
contrary Pleasures, the most solid and most reasonable always turns it;
because, Knowledge always favors its efficacy, and Remorse of Conscience
opposes the action of False Pleasure.

XXIX.

From all which has been said, it may be concluded, that we always Merit when
we love the true-good by Reason; and we do not Merit at all when we love it by
Instinct. We always Merit when we love the true good by Reason; because, Order
requires that the true good should be loved after this manner, and because
Knowledge alone does not transport or invincibly carry us toward the good
which it discovers. We do no wise Merit when we love the true good by Instinct,
or so far as Pleasure invincibly transports or determines the Mind; because,
Order requires that the true good, or the good of the Mind, should be loved by
Reason, by a Free love, by a love of Choice and Discretion; and, because the
love which Pleasure alone produces, is a Blind, Natural and Necessary love. I
confess that when a Man goes further than he is carried by Pleasure, he Merits;
but this is because he acts by Reason, and as Order requires he should act, for
that love which he has above the Pleasure, is a Pure and a Reasonable love.

XXX.

In like manner it must be Concluded, that a Man always demerits when he loves
false goods by the instinct of Pleasure; provided that he loves them more than
he is invincibly engaged to love them. For when we have naturally so little
Liberty and Capacity of Mind, that Pleasure invincibly transports us; tho we be
irregular, and our love be bad and against Order, we do not demerit: For to
demerit, I mean to deserve to be punished, a Man must run after false goods
with more earnestness, or go farther than Pleasure invincibly carrys him. For
it must be observed, that there is a great deal of difference, betwixt a Good
action and a Meritorious Action, betwixt an irregular action, and an action
which deserves to be punished; the love of a Just Person is often irregular in
sleep, and yet deserves not to be punished. Whatsoever is conformed to Order,
is good, and all that is contrary thereunto, is bad; but nothing Merits or
Demerits, but the good or ill use of Liberty, or that wherein we have some
share. Now a Man makes a good use of his Liberty, when he follows his
Knowledge, when he goes on, as I may say, freely and of himself toward the
true good; whether he be at first determined by the preventing delectation, or
by the light of Reason: When he sacrifices sensible Pleasures to his duty, and
conquers grief by the love of Order. On the contrary, he makes an ill use of
his Liberty when his Pleasure is his Reason; when he sacrifices his duty to his
passions, his perfection to his present happiness, his love of Order to
Self-love; and does all this at the time when he is not really forced
thereunto. I shall still explain this more clearly.

XXXI.

When two Objects present themselves to the mind of Man, and he will choose one
of them, I confess that he will never fail to determine himself on that side
where he shall find most Reason and Pleasure, on that side, where he will see
most good. Since the soul cannot will or love, but by the love of good, (the
will being nothing but the love of good, or the natural motion of the soul
toward good) she infallibly loves that which has most conformity with that
which she loves invincibly. But it is certain, that when sensible Pleasures, or
some such like thing, does not disturb the Mind, a Man may always suspend the
judgment of his love, and not determine himself especially in respect of false
goods; for the soul can have no evidence, that false goods are true goods, nor
that the love of these false goods does perfectly agree with the motion which
carrys us toward the true good. Thus, when a Man loves false goods, at the
time when his senses and passions do not altogether disturb his Reason; he
demerits, because then he may and ought to suspend the judgment of his love.
For if he had staid a while to have examined what he ought to have done, this
false good would soon have appeared much the same as it is; Remorse of
Conscience, and perhaps even the delectation of Grace, would have changed all
the dispositions of his mind and heart: For the condition of a Traveller has
nothing fixed, a thousand different objects present themselves continually to
his mind, and the life of Man upon Earth is only a continual succession of
thoughts and desires.

XXXII.

It seems, at first, that in respect of the true good, Man cannot suspend the
judgment of his love; for we cannot suspend our judgment, but when the
evidence is not full. Now we cannot but see that it is most evident, that God
is the true good, and that also none but he can be good to us; we know that he
is infinitely more Amiable, than we can comprehend: But it must be observed,
that tho we cannot suspend the judgment of our Reason in respect of speculative
truths, when the evidence is full; yet we may suspend the judgment of our love,
in respect of good, what evidence soever there is in our Ideas.

For, when Sentiments fight against Reason, when Taste opposes Knowledge, when
we sensibly find that to be bitter and ungrateful, which Reason clearly
represents as sweet and agreeable, we may choose whether we will follow our
Reason or our Senses. We may act, and indeed often do act, against our
Knowledge; because when we attend to Sentiment, Knowledge is lost, if we do not
use violence to retain it; and because we ordinarily attend more to Sentiment
than to Knowledge, because Sentiment is more lively and agreeable than the most
evident Knowledge.

XXXIII.

It is pleasure which makes minds actually happy: Upon this account we ought to
enjoy Pleasure, when we love the true good, the mind thinks upon God, if it
draws near to him by its love and tastes no other sweetness. On the contrary,
God sometimes fills it with bitterness and desolation, He forsakes, He rejects
it, as I may say, not that it should cease to love him, but rather that its
love may be more Humble, more Pure, and more Meritorious: In short, He commands
it to do some things which makes it actually Miserable. But if it draws near to
Bodies, it finds it self happy, proportionably happy as it is united to them;
certainly that is a temptation, what Knowledge soever one may have, for we
invincibly desire to be happy. So that a Man Merits very much if fixing upon
his Knowledge, he denies himself, notwithstanding all uncomfortable desertions;
if he sacrifices his actual happiness to the love of the true good, if living
by Faith and trusting in the Promises of God, he continues inviolably true to
his duty. It therefore plainly appears that J. C. might Merit his Glory, tho he
most evidently knew the true good; because having a great love for his Father,
he entirely submitted himself to his orders, without being carried thereto by
preventing Pleasures: Because altogether complying with his Knowledge, he
suffered very great Asslictions, and sacrificed all the most lively and
sensible Pleasures to the love of God. For he took a Body, as we have, that he
might have a Heb. 8.3.
victim to offer unto God; and by his Body, as the occasional or natural cause,
receiving a great number of diverse sentiments, he might sacrifice himself as an
Holocaust, in Honor of the true good, by suffering afflictions, and the
privation of sensible Pleasures.

XXXIV.

That I may not leave in some Persons an imperfect Idea of the Grace of J. C. I
think I ought further to say, that it does not consist in delectation alone,
for all Grace of sentiment is the Grace of J. C. Now of this sort of Grace
there are several kinds, and of each kind infinite degrees. God sometimes gives
disgust and bitterness to the objects of our passions; he weakens their
sensible perswasives, or causes us to have an horror of them, and this kind of
grace of sentiment has the same effect as delectation. It re-establishes and
fortifies our Liberty, it puts us almost in Equilibrio, so that by this means
we are in a condition of following our Knowledge in the motion of our love. For
to put a Balance in a perfect Equilibrio, or to change the inclination, it is
not necessary to increase the Weights which are too weak; it is sufficient to
take something from those which weigh too much. Thus there are Graces of
Sentiment of several kinds, and each kind is capable of infinite degrees; for
there are Pleasures, Horrors, and Disgusts, greater and lesser to infinity.
That which I have hitherto said of delectation, may be easily applied to other
kinds of Graces of Sentiment: I only took pleasure or delectation as a
particular example that I might explain my self more clearly, and without
equivocation. If there be any other principle of our determinations to good,
besides the Grace of Sentiment and that of Knowledge, I confess to me they are
altogether unknown; and it is upon this account that I have explained the
effects which are necessary to the conversion of the heart, only by these two
Principles, lest I should have been accused, of having spoken in general terms
and such as only excite confused Ideas, which I have avoided with all possible
care. But tho I have explained my self only in such terms as all Men
understand, since there is no person who knows not, that Knowledge and
Sentiment of good are the principles of our determinations; nevertheless I
don't pretend to oppose those, who not making use of these clear Ideas say in
general, that God works in the souls of Men their Conversion by a particular
action, different perhaps from all that I have said here First Explicat. of the
Search after Truth.
and elsewhere, that God does in us. Since I experience nothing in my self but
Motion toward good in general, and Knowledge or Sentiment which determines
this Motion; I ought to suppose nothing else, if by this alone, I can give a
reason of all that which the Scripture and the Councils have defined,
concerning the subjects of which I treat. In a word, I am sure, that Knowledge
and Sentiment, are the Principles of our determinations, but I declare, that I
know not whether there may be something else, of which I have no knowledge.

XXXV.

Beside Grace, efficacious in it self, and the Grace the effect of which
depends entirely upon the good dispositions of the Mind, besides the Grace of
Sentiment and the Grace of Knowledge; the Just also have Habitual Grace, which
makes them agreeable to God, and puts them in a condition of doing actions
Meritorious of Salvation. This Grace is Charity, the Love of God, the Love of
Order; Love which is not properly Charity, if it be not stronger and greater
than all other Loves. As it is Pleasure which ordinarily produces the love of
the object which cause it or seems to cause it; so it is the delectation of
Grace which produces the love of God: It is the enjoyment of sensible
pleasures, which increases Concupiscence: It is also the Grace of Sentiment
which augments Charity. Concupiscence diminishes by the privation of sensible
Pleasures, and then Charity is easily preserved and increased. Charity also
diminishes by the privation of the actual Grace of J. C. and Concupiscence is
easily increased and fortified: For these two loves of Charity and
Concupiscence, continually engage one another, and strengthen themselves by the
weakness of their Enemy.

XXXVI.

All that proceeds from Charity, is agreeable to God, but Charity does not
always act in the just themselves. To the end it may act, it ought, at least,
to be enlightened; for Knowledge is necessary to determine the motion of Love.
Thus the Grace necessary for every good work relating to Salvation, is the
Grace of Sentiment in those who begin their Conversion; it is the Grace of
Knowledge, it is some motion of Faith and Hope in those who are animated by
Charity. For the Just may do good works without the Grace of delectation, yet
they have always need of some actual succors to determine the motion of their
Charity. But tho Charity without Delectation is sufficient to vanquish many
temptations, nevertheless, the Grace of Sentiment is necessary in many
occasions. For Men cannot, without the continual assistance of the second Adam,
resist the continual action of the first: They cannot persevere in
righteousness, if they be not often assisted by the particular Grace of J. C.
which produces, augments, and sustains Charity, against the continual efforts
of Concupiscence.

XXXVII.

The effects of Pleasure, and all the sentiments of the Soul, depend a thousand
ways, upon the actual dispositions of the Mind. The same weight has not always
the same effects: Its action depends upon the machine by which it is applied
with respect to the contrary weights. If a balance be unequally hung, the
force of the weights being unequally applied, the weaker may turn the stronger.
It is the same of the weights of pleasure, they act one upon another, and
determine the motion of the Soul, as they are differently applied. Pleasure
must have more effect in one who has already a love to the Object which causes
the pleasure, than in him who has an aversion to it, or who loves the opposite
goods. Pleasure forcibly determines him who clearly sees, or lively imagines
the advantages of the good which seems to produce it; and it acts weakly upon
the mind of him who knows this good only confusedly, or contemns it.

In conclusion, pleasure acts with all its force in him who blindly follows
that which flatters Concupiscence; and may perhaps have no effect in him who
has attained to some habit of suspending the Judgment of his love.

XXXVIII.

Now the different degrees of Knowledge, Charity, Concupiscence, and the
degrees of Liberty being every moment combined after infinite ways, with the
different degrees of actual pleasures; and these pleasures not having their
effect, but according to the relation which they have to the dispositions of
the mind and heart: It is plain, that no finite mind can judge, with any
assurance, what effect any particular Grace will produce in us: For besides the
Combination of all that which concurs to make it efficacious, or to produce its
effect, contains something infinite. This Combination is not like the springs
and machines, whose effects are always infallible and necessary. Thus, no
spirit can discover what passes in the heart of man; but God being infinitely
wise, it is plain that he clearly knows all the effects which may result from
the mixture and combination of all things, and that diving into the heart of
man, he insallibly discovers, even the effects which depends upon the free act,
or rather consent of our wills. Nevertheless, I confess that I cannot conceive
how God can discover the Consequences of those Actions which have not their
infallibility from his absolute degrees. But I cannot prevail with my self, to
engage in Metaphysics at the expense of morality, and to maintain Opinions
contrary to my inward sentiment, as undeniable Truths; or to speak to the ear a
certain Language, which in my Opinion, says nothing clearly to the mind. I know
very well that Objections may be made, which I may not be able clearly and
evidently to Answer; but this perhaps may be, because even these Objections
themselves may be full of obscurity and darkness: Because they are grounded
upon our ignorance of the properties of the Soul; because, as I have Expli. of
the 7. Chapter lib. 2, part. 3.
elsewhere proved, we have not a clear Idaea of what we are; and because that
which is in us which suffers its self to be overcome by those determinations
which are not invincible, is altogether unknown to us. To Conclude, if I cannot
clearly Answer these Objections, First Explicat,
I can Answer them by other which yet seem more difficult to resolve. I can
from the principles opposite to mine, draw more hard and invidious Consequences
than those which are pretended to follow from that Liberty which I suppose to
be in us. But I will not enter particularly upon this, because I take no
pleasure in walking in the dark, and leading others into precipices.

The First Explication OF THE TREATISE OF Nature and Grace.
What it is to Act by General Wills, and what by Particular.
I.

I Say that God acts by General Wills, when he acts in consequence of the
General Laws he has established: For Example, I say that God acts in me by
General Wills, when he makes me feel pain by the prick of a pin; because in
consequence of the general and efficacious Laws of the Union of Soul and Body,
which he has established, he makes me feel grief or pain when my body is
indisposed. In like manner, when one bowl strikes upon a second; I say, God
moves this last by a General Will, because he moves it in consequence of the
general and efficacious Laws of the communication of motions; God having in
general appointed, that whenever two bodies strike upon one another, the
motion should be divided betwixt them in certain proportions, and it is by the
efficacy of this General Will, that bodies should move one another.

II.

On the contrary, I say that God acts by particular wills, when the efficacy of
his will is not determined by any general law to produce the effect. Thus,
supposing that God makes me feel the pain of the pricking of a pin, tho there
happens not in my body, or in any other Creature, any change which determines
him to act in me according to general Laws; I say, that then God acts by
particular wills.

Likewise, supposing that a body begins to move without being struck upon by
another, or without any change happening in the will of any Spirits, or any
other Creature which determines the efficacy of any general Laws; I say then,
that God moves this body by a particular will.

III.

According to these definitions, it appears that I am so far from denying
providence, that on the contrary, I suppose that it is God who acts all in all;
that the nature of the Pagan Philosophers is a Chimaera, and that properly
speaking, that which is called Nature, is nothing else but the general Laws
which God has established for the making or preserving his Work after the most
simple ways, by an action always uniform, constant, perfectly worthy of
infinite wisdom, and the universal cause. That which I here suppose, tho
certain, for reasons which I have elsewhere given, is not absolutely necessary
to prove what I intend: For if it be supposed that God has communicated his
power to Creatures, and that bodies which are about us, have a real and true
force, by which they may act upon our soul, and render it happy or miserable by
pleasure or grief; and that bodies in motion have in themselves a certain
entity, which is called a Quality imprinted, which they give to those they
meet, and give it with that readiness and uniformity which they suppose, it
will be equally easy for me to prove that which I design; for then the
efficacy of the action of the Concourse of the general cause will be
necessarily determined by the action of the particular cause. God, for example,
will be obliged according to these principles, to afford his concourse to a
body at the moment wherein it strikes upon others: But this body may
communicate motion to them, and this is certainly to act by virtue of a general
Law. Nevertheless, I don't reason according to this supposition, because I
believe it altogether false; as I have showed in the Third Chapter of the
Second Part of the Sixth Book of The Search after Truth, in the Explication of
the same Chapter, and elsewhere. These Truths supposed, I here subjoyn the
Marks by which it may be known, whether an effect be produced by a general
will, or by a particular.

Marks, by which it may be judged, whether an effect is produced by a General,
or by a Particular Will.

IV.

When we see an effect immediately follow the action of an occasional cause, we
ought to judge that this effect is produced by the efficacy of a general will.
A Body is immediately moved after it is struck; the striking of bodies upon one
another is the occasional cause: therefore this body is moved by a general
will. A Stone falls upon the head of a Man and kills him; and this stone falls
as others do, I mean, that its motion is continued almost according to
Arithmetical Proportion, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, etc. This supposed, I say that it is
moved by the efficacy of a general will, or according to the Laws of the
communication of motion, as it is easy to demonstrate.

V.

When we see an effect produced, and yet the occasional cause which is known to
us, is not concerned therein, we have reason to think that this effect is
produced by a paticular will, supposing that this effect be not visibly
unworthy of its cause, as I shall show hereafter. For example, when a body is
moved without being struck upon by another, it is very probable that this body
is moved by a particular will; nevertheless we are not altogether assured
thereof: For supposing there should be a general Law, that bodies should be
moved according to the different wills of Angels, or any other such like, it is
plain that this body might be moved tho it was not struck; since the particular
will of any Angel, according to this supposition, might determine the will of
the general cause to move it. Thus we may be often assured that God acts by
general wills; but we can never be assured, that he acts by particular wills,
even in the best attested miracles.

VI.

Since we don't sufficiently know the diverse combinations of occasionalc auses,
to discover whether such and such effects happen in consequence of their
actions; since we are not, for example, knowing enough to discern, whether such
a shower of rain be produced by the necessary consequence of the communication
of motions, or by a particular will; we ought to judge that an effect is
produced by a general will, when it is plain that the cause is not designed for
a particular end: For the wills of intelligent beings have necessarily some
end; general wills, one general end; and particular, a particular end: Nothing
is more evident.

For example, tho I cannot discover, whether the rain which falls in a meadow,
falls there in consequence of general laws, or by the particular will of God: I
have reason to think, that it falls there in by a general will; if I see that
it falls as well upon the neighboring Lands, or into the River which runs by
this Meadow, as upon the Meadow its self. For if GOD caused it to rain upon
this Meadow, by a particular good will which he has for the owner thereof, this
rain would not fall into the River where it is useless; since it could not fall
therein without a cause, or a will in God, which necessarily has some end.

VII.

But it is still much more reasonable to think, that an effect is produced by a
general will, when the effect is contrary, or else useless to the design which
faith or reason teaches us the cause proposes to himself.

For Example, the end which God proposes in the diverse sensations which he
gives to the soul, when we taste different fruits, is that we should eat those
which are proper to nourish the body, and reject others; I suppose this to be
so. Therefore, when God gives us a grateful sentiment at the time when we eat
poison, or fruits that are poisoned, he does not act in us by particular wills.
We ought to judge thus; for this grateful sentiment is the cause of our death,
and God does give us our sentiments, that he may preserve our life by a
suitable Nourishment. I say again, I suppose it thus; for I only speak in
relation to Grace, which God gives us doubtless for our Conversion; so that it
is plain, that God does not dispense it to men by particular wills, since it
often renders us more culpable, and more criminal, and God cannot have such a
fatal Design. God therefore does not give us a grateful sentiment by particular
wills, when we eat poisoned fruit. But since poisoned fruits excite in our
brain motions like unto those which good fruits produce there, God gives us the
same sentiments, by the general Laws which unite the soul to the body, to the
end that she may take care of its preservation.

In like manner God does not give to those who have lost an arm, sentiments of
grief relating to this arm, but by a general will; for it is useless to the
body of this man for his soul to suffer grief in relation to an arm which he
has not. The same may be said of the motions which are produced in the body of
a Man which commits any crime: In short, supposing we are obliged to think that
God sends rain upon the Earth to make it Fruitful, we cannot think that he
distributes it by particular wills, since it rains upon the Sands and the Sea,
as well as upon Cultivated ground; and it often rains so much upon sound Land
that the Corn thereby is spoiled, and Men's labors made useless.

Thus it is certain, that the rain which is useless and hurtful to the Fruits
of the Earth, are the necessary consequences of the general Laws of the
communication of motions, which God has established to produce in the World
the best effects; supposing that which I here repeat, that God intended not
that the rain should make the Earth to become barren.

VIII.

In short, when any thing happens which is very singular, there is reason to
think that it is not produced by a general will; nevertheless it is impossible
to be assured thereof: For Example, Supposing there was any Reason for the
Author's high Esteem of that Ceremony, the Example serves his Purpose well
enough.
In a Procession of the H. Sacrament, it rains upon the Company, but not upon
the Altar-Cloath, or those that carry it; there is reason to think that this
happens by a particular will of the universal cause. Nevertheless we cannot be
certain thereof, since an occasional intelligent cause may have this particular
design, and thus determine the efficacy of the general Law to execute it.

IX

When the marks which preceed are not sufficient ground for judging whether any
effect be, or be not produced by a general will, yet we ought to think that it
is produced by a general will, if it be evident that an occasional cause is
established for such like effects.

For example, it rains to very good purpose in a Field; we don't inquire
whether it rains upon the Highways: We know not whether it be hurtful to the
neighboring grounds, or no; we also suppose, that it does nothing but good,
and that the circumstances which accompany it are altogether agreeable to the
design for which God would have it rain. Nevertheless, I say, that we ought to
suppose this rain produced by a general will, if we know that God has
established an occasional cause for such like effects: For we ought not without
necessity to have recourse unto Miracles. We should suppose that God acts by
the most simple ways; and tho the owner of the Field ought to give thanks to
God for this favor, yet it ought not to be imagined that God has vouchsafed it
to him after a Miraculous manner, by a particular will.

The Master of the Field is bound to give thanks to God for the good which he
has received; since God foresaw and intended the good effect of this rain, when
he established the general Laws whereof it is a necessary consequence. On the
contrary, if rain be sometimes hurtful to our Lands, since God did not
establish the Laws which make it rain to render them unfruitful, (a great
drought being enough to make them barren) it is plain that we ought to thank
God and adore the wisdom of his providence, even then when we do not feel the
effects of the Laws which he has appointed for our benefit.

X.

In short, tho we should not be assured by the circumstances which accompany
certain effects, that there is an occasional cause established to produce them;
it is sufficient to know that they are very common, and relate to the principal
design of the general cause, to judge that they are not produced by a
particular will.

For example, the Rivers which water the Earth relate to the principle of Gods
designs, which is, that men should not want necessaries for life; This I
suppose. Moreover, Rivers are very common, therefore we ought to think that
they are formed by some general Laws. For as there is more wisdom required in
executing designs by simple and general ways, than by ways compounded and
particular, (as I think I have sufficiently proved elsewhere) we ought to give
this Honor to God, as to believe that his manner of acting is general,
uniform, constant, agreeable to the Idea which we have of his infinite wisdom.

These are the marks by which it may be judged, whether an effect be or be not
produced by a general will. I shall now prove that God dispences Grace to Men
by general Laws, and that J. C. was the occasional cause of determining their
efficacy. I begin with the Proofs drawn from H. Scripture.

XI.

St. Paul teaches us, Col. 2.19.
that J. C. is the Head of the Church, that he continually dispences to her the
Spirit which quickens her, that he forms the Members thereof, and animates them
as the Soul does the Body; or, to speak yet more clearly, the H. Scriptures
teaches us two things.

First, That J. C. Prays continually for his Members. Heb. 7.25. 9.24 John
11.42.


Second, That his Prayers and Desires are always heard.

Whence I conclude, that he is appointed by God the occasional cause of Grace,
and also that Grace is never given unto Sinners but by his means.

Occasional causes, do always and very readily produce their Effect. The
Prayers or diverse Desires of J. C. relating to the formation of his Body, do
always readily obtain their Effect. God refuses nothing to his Son, as J. C.
himself has taught us.

The occasional causes don't produce their effect by their own efficacy, but by
the efficacy of the general cause.

It is also by the efficacy of the power of God, that the soul of J. C.
operates in us; it is not by the efficacy of the humane will: For this reason
it is that St. Paul represents J. C. as Praying continually to his Father; for
he is obliged to Pray, that he may obtain.

The occasional causes are established by God to determine the efficacy of his
general wills; and J. C. according to the Scripture was appointed by God after
his Resurrection to Govern the Church which he had purchased with his own
blood. For J. C. was the Meritorious cause of all Graces, by his sacrifice; but
after his Resurrection he entered into the H. of Holies, a Sovereign Priest of
good things to come, that he might appear in the presence of God, and shed upon
us the Graces which he had merited for us. Thus he himself applies and
distributes his gifts as the occasional cause. He disposes of all things in
God's House, as a well beloved Son in the House of his Father.

I think I have demonstrated, in the Search after Truth, that God only is the
true cause, or acts by his own proper efficacy, and that he does not
communicate his Power unto Creatures, but by making them the occasional causes
of producing certain effects. I have proved, for example, that Men have no
power to produce any motion in their bodies, but because God has made their
wills the occasional causes of these motions; and that fire has no power to
cause pain in me, but because God has made the striking of one body upon
another the occasional cause of the communication of motions, and the violent
shaking of the nerves of my Flesh the occasional cause of my Pain. I may here
suppose a Truth which I have largely proved, in Chap. III. Part 2. of Book IV.
of the Search, etc. And in the Explication of the same Chapter, and which they,
for whom I chiefly write, do not deny.

Now it is certain by Faith, that Power is given to J. C. for forming his
Church; Mat. 28.18.
Data est mihi omnis potestas in Coelo and in terra: This cannot be understood
of J. C. according to his Divinity, for in this respect he never received any
thing. It Is certain therefore, that J. C. according to his humanity, is the
occasional cause of Grace; supposing it proved, that God only can act upon
Minds, and that second causes have no efficacy of their own; which they who
would understand my Sentiments, and judge of them, ought first to examine.

XII.

I say moreover, that no Person is sanctified but by the efficacy of the Power
which God has communicated to J. C. by establishing him the occasional cause of
Grace: For if any sinner was Converted by Grace, of which J. C. was not the
occasional cause, but only the meritorious; the sinner having not received his
new Life by the influence of J. C. he would not be a Member of the Body of
which J. C. is the Head, after that manner in which St. Paul expresses it,
Chap. 4.16. See Col. 11.19.
in these words of the Epistle to the Ephesians. -- That we may grow up into
him in all things who is the Head, Christ; from whom the whole Body fitly
joined together, and compacted by that which which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body unto the edifying it self in love. Which words do not
merely say that J. C. is the Meritorious cause of all Graces, but do more
distinctly express that Christians are the Members of the Body of which J. C.
is the Head; and that it is in him we increase and live a life altogether new,
and that it is by his inward operation, (...), that his Church is formed, that
he was appointed by God, the only occasional cause, who by his diverse desires
and applications distributes those Graces which God as the true cause sends
down upon men.

It Is for this reason St. Coloss. 2.7.
Paul says, that Christians are united to J. C. as to their root: Radicati and
super aedificati in ipso. It Is for this reason likewise, that J. C. compares
himself to a Vine, and his Disciples to the Branches, who receive their life in
him: Ego sum vitis, vos palmites. It Is for this reason that St. Paul assures,
that J. C. lives in us, and we in him; that we are risen in our Head; that our
Life is hid with God in J. C. In a word, that we already have eternal life in
J. C.

These and several other Expressions clearly show, that J. C. is not only the
meritorious, but also the occasional, physical or natural cause of Grace; and
that as the Soul informs, animates, and perfects the Body, so J. C. as the
occasional Cause, distributes to his Members those Graces, which, by his
sacrifice, he has merited for his Church.

For my part, I cannot comprehend, how any one can doubt of these Reasons, nor
upon what foundation a Truth so very edifying, and as ancient as the Religion
of J. C. can be treated as a dangerous Novelty. I grant my Expressions may be
new, but this is because they appeared to me very proper, distinctly to explain
a truth, which I could only have confusedly demonstrated by too general terms.
The words, Occasional Causes, and General Laws, appear to me necessary, to make
those Philosophers, for whom I wrote the Treatise of Nature and Grace,
distinctly comprehend that which the generality of Men are content to know only
confusedly. Since new Expressions are not dangerous, but when they cover
something which is equivocal, or may occasion some thought, contrary to
Religion, to arise in the mind, I do not think that any candid persons, and who
are skilled in St. Paul's Divinity, will be offended, because I explain my self
after a particular manner, since it tends only to make us adore the Wisdom of
God, and to unite us strictly unto J. C.

Objection I.
XIII.

It is objected against what I have said, That neither Angels nor Saints of the
Old Testament received Grace in consequence of the desires of the Soul of
Jesus, since this Holy Soul was not as yet: and thus, tho J. C. be the
meritorious cause of all Graces, he is not the occasional which distributes
them to Men.

Answer.
In respect of Angels, I answer, That there is some probability that Grace was
given to them once only. So that if we consider things in this respect, I
confess, that nothing obliged the Wisdom of God, to establish an occasional
cause for the sanctification of Angels. But if these blessed Spirits be
considered as Members of the Body whereof J. C. is Head, or if it be supposed,
that they were unequally assisted, I believe there is reason to think, that the
diversity of their Graces came from him who-is Head of Angels as well as Men,
and that in this capacity, he, by his sacrifice, not only merited all Graces
which God gave to his Creatures, but also diversely applied these same Graces to
them by his different desires.

Since it cannot be denied, that J. C. along time before he was born or could
merit, was the meritorious cause of Graces which were given to the Angels and
Saints of the Old Testament, it must, in my opinion, be granted, that, by his
Prayers, he might have been the occasional cause of the same Graces a long time
before they were asked. For there is no necessary relation between occasional
causes and the time of their producing their effects; and tho ordinarily these
sorts of causes do produce their effects at the very time of their action,
nevertheless, since their action is not efficacious in its self, seeing its
efficacy depends upon the will of the universal cause, it is not necessary that
it should actually exist, that they may produce their effects.

Suppose, for example, That J. C. to day asks of his Father, that such an one
may receive such an assistance at certain times of his life, the Prayer of J.
C. will infallibly determine the efficacy of the general Will of God, which is
to save all Men in his Son. This person shall receive these assistances, tho
the Soul of J. C. actually thinks of quite another thing, and tho it should
never more think of that which it desired for him. Now, the Prayer of J. C.
which is already passed, is not more present to his Father than the future; for
whatsoever happens in all times is equally present to God. Thus, since God
loves his Son, and knows, that his Son will have such desires, in respect of
his Ancestors, and the People of his own Nation, and also in respect of Angels,
who were to enter into the Spiritual Edifice of his Church, and compose the
Body of which he is the Head; he seems to have been obliged to accomplish the
desires of his Son before they were made, to the end that the Elect, who were
before his birth, and whom he purchased by the merit of his sacrifice, should
as particularly belong to him as others, and he should be their Head as truly
as he is ours.

I confess, it is convenient, that meritorious and occasional causes should go
before their effects, rather than follow them; and even order its self
requires, that these causes and their effects do exist at the same time. For
it is clear, that all merit should be presently rewarded, and that every
occasional cause should actually produce its effect, provided that nothing
hinder but that this may and ought to be so. But since Grace was absolutely
necessary to the Angels and to the Patriarchs, it could not be differed. As for
the Glory and Reward of the Saints of the Old Testament, seeing it might be
delayed, it was expedient, that God should suspend its accomplishment till J.
C. was ascended into Heaven and made an High Priest over the House of God, and
began to use the sovereign power of an occasional cause of all Graces, which he
had merited by his Labors upon Earth. Thus we believe, that the Patriarchs did
not enter into Heaven, till J. C. himself, their Head, their Mediator, and
their Forerunner, was therein entered. Nevertheless, tho it should be granted,
that God should not have appointed an occasional cause for all Graces given to
the Angels and the Patriarchs, I do not see how it can be concluded, that at
present J. C. does not dispense to the Body of the Church that Spirit which
gives it increase and nourishment; that he prays not for it, or that his
Desires or Prayers do not infallibly obtain their effect; or, in a word, that
he is not the occasional cause which applies those Graces to to Men which he
has merited for them.

Before J. C. God gave Grace by particular Wills. This I grant, if it be
desired; the necessity of Order requires it; the occasional Cause could not
regularly be so soon established; the Elect were but very few: But at present,
when the rain of Grace is generally sent upon all the World; when it falls not
as heretofore upon a very few Men of one chosen Nation; when J. C. may or ought
to be established the occasional cause of the goods which he has merited for
his Church, what reason is there to believe, that God should still work
Miracles as often as he gives good Sentiments? For, certainly, all that God
does by particular Wills is a Miracle, since it happens not by the general Laws
which he has established, and whose efficacy is determined by occasional
causes. But how can we think, that, to save Men, he should work all those
Miracles which are useless to their salvation; I mean, that he should give all
those Graces which they resist, because they are not proportioned to the actual
strength of their concupiscence?

St. John teaches us, that Christians receive of J. C. John 1.17.
abundant Graces, because, says he, the Law was given by Moses, but true Grace
by Jesus Christ. For, in truth, the Graces which were before J. C. ought not to
be compared to those which he distributed after his triumph. If they were
miraculous, it must be thought they were very rare: Even the Grace of the
Apostles, before the Holy Spirit was given to them, was not to be compared with
those which they received, when the Sovereign Priest of good things to come,
being entered by his Blood into the Holy of Holies, by the strength of his
Prayers obtained, and by the dignity of his Person, sent the Holy Spirit to
animate and sanctify his Church. The strange Blindness of the Jews, their
gross and carnal Sentiments, their frequent relapses into Idolatry after so
many Miracles, do sufficiently show, they had scarce any love for true goods;
and the fearfulness of the Apostles, before they received the Holy Spirit, is a
sensible mark of their weakness. Thus Grace, in this time, was very rare;
because, as yet, our Nature was not made in J. C. the occasional cause of our
Graces: as yet J. C. was not fully consecrated a Priest, according to the Order
of Melchisedech, and his Father had not yet given him that immortal and
glorious Life, Heb. 5.5, 10. Heb. 7.16, 17.
which is the particular character of his Priesthood. For it was necessary that
J. C. should enter into the Heavens, and receive the glory and power of being
the occasional cause of all goods, before he sent the Spirit, according to the
words of St. John, John 7.39. John 16.7.
The Spirit was not yet given, because J. C. was not yet glorified: And
according to these words of Christ himself, It is expedient for you, that I go:
For if I go not, the Comforter will not come: But if I go, I will send him unto
you. Now, it is not to be imagined, that J. C. considered as God, is the Head
of the Church. He has obtained this honor as Man: the Head and the Members
ought to be of the same nature. It is as Man, that J. C. interceeds for Men: it
is as Man, that he has received of God sovereign power over his Church. For
since God does not interceed at all, he, as God, has not received that Name
which is above every Name: he is equal to the Father, and absolute Master of
all things by right of his birth.

These Truths are evident, and J. C. himself assures us of them, John 5.22, to
27.
since he says, that his Father gave him power to judge Men, because he was the
Son of Man. Thus we must not think, that those Expressions of Scripture, which
teach us, that J. C. is the Author of Grace, ought to be understood of J. C.
considered according to his Divine Person. For if this was so, I confess I
should not have demonstrated, that he is the occasional cause of it; he would
have been only the true cause thereof. But since it is certain, that the three
Persons of the Trinity are equally the true causes of Grace, (seeing all the
outward Operations of God are common to the three Persons) my Arguments cannot
be denied, since the Holy Scripture says of the Son, and not of the Father, nor
of the Spirit, that he is the Head of the Church, and that under this character
he communicates Life to all the Members which compose it.

Object. II.
XIV.

It is God who gives to the Soul of J. C. all Thoughts and Motions which it has
in the formation of his Mystical Body. So that if on one hand the Wills of J.
C. as natural and occasional Causes, determine the efficacy of God's general
Will; on the other hand, it is God himself who determines the diverse Wills of
J. C. Thus it comes to the same thing; for assuredly the Wills of J. C. are
always conformable to those of his Father.

Answer.
I confess that the particular wills of J. C. are always conformable to those
of the Father, but this is not because the Father has particular wills which
answer to those of the Son, and determine them: This is only because the wills
of the Son are always conformable to Order in general, which is necessarily the
rule of the divine wills, and of those which love God. For to love Order, is is
to love God, it is to will what God wills; it is to be Just, Wise, Regular, in
his love. The Soul of J. C. would form to the Glory of his Father the most
Sacred, Magnificent and Perfect Temple that can be: Order requires this, for
nothing can be made too great for God. All the diverse desires of this Soul,
ever intent upon the Execution of its design, come also to it from God or the
Word to which it is united. But the occasional causes of all these thoughts,
most certainly are its diverse desires, for it thinks on what it will.

Now these diverse desires are sometimes altogether free; probably the thoughts
which excite these desires, do not always invincibly determine the Soul of J.
C. to form and resolve to execute them. It is equally advantageous to the
design of Jesus Christ, whether it be Peter or John who does that which the
regularity of his work requires: It is true, that the soul of Jesus Christ is
not indifferent, as to what respects the glory of his Father, or that which
Order necessarily requires; but it is altogether free in every thing else,
nothing out of God invincibly determines its love. Thus it ought not to be
wondered if it have particular wills, tho there are no such wills in God which
determine those of the soul of Jesus Christ.

But I grant that the wills of Jesus Christ are not free, I grant that his
knowledge determines him to will, and always to will after a certain manner, in
the construction of his Church. But it must be Eternal Wisdom to which his soul
is united, which determines these wills; if it is not necessary for this end,
to suppose particular wills in God. It must be observed, that the wills of the
soul of J. C. are particular, or have not any occasional cause which determines
their efficacy, no, not the will of God. For the soul of J. C. not having an
infinite capacity of thinking, his knowledge, and consequently his wills, are
limited. Thus it is necessary that his wills be particular, since they change
according to his diverse thoughts and applications: For it seems to me that the
soul of J. C. otherwise employed in contemplating the beauties, and tasting the
infinite sweetness of the true good, ought not according to the rule of Order,
to think at the same time upon all the Ornaments which it designs to bestow
upon his Church, and the different means of executing each of his intentions.
J. C. desiting to render the Church worthy of the infinite Majesty of his
Father, he desires also to adorn it with infinite beauties, and that by such
means as are most conformable to Order. It is therefore necessary that he
continually change desires; infinite wisdom is only able to prescribe general
Laws for executing his designs. Now seeing the suture world must subsist
eternally, and be infinitely more perfect than the present World, it was
expedient that God should establish an intelligent occasional cause, and
enlightened with divine wisdom, to the end that it might correct the defects
which necessarily happen in works formed by general Laws. The striking of
Bodies upon one another, which determines the efficacy of the general Laws of
Nature, is an occasional cause without Understanding and without Liberty. Thus,
it cannot be, but there must be Defects and Monsters in the World; which
Defects it would be unworthy of the Wisdom of God to correct by particular
wills.

But J. C. being an intelligent occasional cause, enlightened by Divine Wisdom,
and capable of particular wills, as the particular necessities of his work
require; it is plain that the future World will be infinitely more Perfect than
the present; that the Church shall be without deformity, as Scripture teaches
us, and that this work will be altogether worthy of the esteem of GOD himself.

After this manner it is, that the Eternal Wisdom renders, as I may say, to the
Father that which it had taken from him; for not permitting him to act by
particular wills, it seems as if it rendered him impotent. But being incarnate,
it left God to act as became him, by the more simple and general ways, Ut
innotescat principalibus and potestatibus in coelestibus per Ecclesiam
multisormis Sapientia Dei -- (...).
and yet produced a work in which the most enlightened understanding shall never
be able to observe the least defect.

XV.

After having proved by the Authority of Scripture, that the diverse motions of
the Soul of J. C. are the occasional causes, which determine the general
efficacy of the Law of Grace, by which God would save all Men in his Son; it is
necessary further in general to prove by reason, that we ought not to believe
that God in the Order of Grace acts by particular wills. For tho by Reason
without Faith it cannot be demonstrated, that God has established the wills of
a God man, as the occasional cause of his gifts, it may nevertheless be known
that he does not distribute them to Men by particular wills, and that by two
ways, a Priori and a Posteriori, that is to say by the Idea which we have of
God, and by the effects of Grace; for there is nothing but proves this Truth.
See the proof a Priori.

A wise Being must act wisely; God cannot falsify himself: His actions must
bear the Character of his Attributes. Now God knows every thing, and foresees
every thing; his understanding has no bounds: Therefore his manner of acting
must bear the character of an infinite understanding. Now to choose occasional
causes, and establish general Laws for executing any work, denotes a knowledge
infinitely more extended than to change wills every moment, or to act by
particular wills: God therefore executes his designs by general Laws, the
efficacy of which is determined by the occasional causes. Certainly it requires
a more comprehensive understanding, to make a Watch, which according to the
Laws of Mechanism shall go always and regularly, whether a Man carries it about
with him, or hangs it up, or gives it what shake he will; than to make one
which cannot go truly, if he who made it does not every moment change something
in it according to the different postures in which he puts it: For surely, when
there are a great many relations to compare and combine with one another, there
needs a greater understanding. To see all the consequences which may happen
from a general Law, an insinite understanding is requisite; but nothing of all
this is to be foreseen when one changes his wills every moment.

Therefore to establish general Laws, and choose the most simple, and at the
same time the most fruitful, is a way of acting worthy of him, whose Wisdom has
no bounds. On the contrary, to act by particular wills, shows a limited
understanding, and which cannot compare the consequences, or effects of causes
less fruitful. The same truth may further be demonstrated a Priori by some
Attributes of God, as his immutibility, by which Mr. de Carts proves, that
every thing in motion describes a right line, and that there is always an equal
quantity of motion in the World, and other Truths. But these proofs a Priori
are too abstract to convince the generality of Men of the truth which I
propose. It is expedient to prove it by the signs which I have heretofore given
for discerning the effects which are produced by particular wills, from those
which are the consequences of some general Law.

XVI.

God being infinitely wise, neither wills nor does any thing without end. Now
Grace often falls upon hearts so disposed that it is unfruitsul. Therefore it
does not fall upon hearts by a particular will, but only by a necessary
consequence of general Laws, for the same reason that rain falls upon the Sand
and on the Sea, as well as on Sown ground.

Tho God may punish sinners, or make them more miserable than they are, he
cannot design to make them more culpable or more criminal. Now Grace sometimes
renders Persons more culpable and more criminal, and God certainly knows that
according to their actual dispositions, the Grace which he gives them will have
this sad effect. Therefore these Graces do not fall upon corrupted hearts by
the particular will of God, but by a necessary consequence of general Laws
which he has established to produce better effects; for the same reason, that
too much rain sometimes spoils and putrifies the Fruits of the earth, tho God
by his general will, causes it to rain to make them grow and increase.

XVII.

If God intended that certain Lands should be barren, he need only to cease to
will that the rain should water them. In like manner, if God would that the
hearts of some sinners should be hardened, it would suffice that the rain of
grace did not water them, he needed only to leave them to themselves, they
would soon be corrupted.

Why should we attribute to God a particular will, to make so severe a use
thereof, and so irreconcilable with the price of the Blood of his Son? But
some may say, God never had this design when he gave his Grace to sinners. This
doubtless will appear more reasonable, but if God gives his Grace by a
particular will, he has a particular design. Now seeing his Grace has this sad
effect, God is frustrated in his intention, since he gave it with a particular
design to do good to this sinner. For I speak not here of the Graces, or rather
of the Gifts, which St. Paul explains in 1 Cor. Chap. 12. Ver. 9. I speak of
the Grace which God gives for the Conversion of him, to whom it is given; and
not of those Graces which God vouchsafes for the profit of others, such as the
gift of Prophecy, the discerning of Spirits, that of speaking with diverse
Tongues, of Healing diseases, and such like.

When rain falls in such abundance that the floods wash away the root of the
Fruits, it ought to be judged that this rain comes by the necessary consequence
of the general Laws which God has established for better effects. In the mean
time it is certain, that God might have ordained it by a particular will. For
God to punish Men might will, that rains designed to make the Earth Fruitful,
might render them barren upon some account. But it is not the same of the rain
of Grace, since God could not dispense it, with a design of punishing Men, much
less of rendering them more culpable and more criminal. Thus it is still much
more certain, that the rain of Grace is dispensed by general wills than the
ordinary rain. Nevertheless, most Men easily believe, that rains are the
necessary consequences of the general Laws of the communication of motions; and
there are few who do not feel some difficulty in believing that God by general
wills, gives us all those motions of Grace, the effects of which we hinder.

It Is very probable that this difficulty comes, because we naturally think that
God acts much after the same manner that we do; and that he has every moment
particular wills toward men, something like those which we have in respect of
our Friends. For tho we confess with the mouth, that there are infinite
differences betwixt Gods manner of acting, and ours; nevertheless, since we
usually judge others in respect to our selves, without reflecting thereon, few
persons when they would speak of God, seriously consult the Idea of a Being
infinitely perfect.

And because there is some appearance of novelty in that which I say, this
causes some difficulty to the understanding, which reasonably suspects all that
is not ordinary.

I particularly esteem and honor all those, who in matter of Religion, have a
secret aversion for all novelties. They do not offend me at all, when they
oppose my Sentiments, when this is the motive; and since their prejudices are
very reasonable, tho they should even revile me, I should not cease to have a
respect for them. For the disposition of their mind is infinitely more
reasonable, than that of certain People, who readily embrace all that which
carries in it the character of Novelty. Nevertheless, seeing I believe that Man
ought to love and search after the Truth with all his strength, and communicate
it to others, when he believes he has found it; I think having supposed all
that Faith teaches us, I may or ought to discover that which may confirm it, or
cause it to be embraced by all men. I might justify this Sentiment by the
Practice of the Fathers and the Authority of St. Augustine himself, who often
exhorts Men to understand the truth which they already believe in the obscurity
of Faith. But I don't think there are any Persons so unreasonable, as to blame
my conduct, how much prejudiced soever they may be against my Sentiments.
Therefore I beg of those who will give themselves the trouble of reading what I
have written, not to suppose that I am deceived, to suspend their judgment,
till they shall well comprehend my meaning; not to condemn me in general terms,
nor rashly to draw untoward consequences from my meaning.

In matters so obscure as those of Grace, the advantage is always on his side
who makes the onset; and it is not just to make use of it. Men ought to act
with equity, and without prejudice compare all the consequences which may be
drawn from different Sentiments, that at last they may embrace that which shall
seem most conformable to the Goodness and Wisdom of God. For he is not
equitable, who without Examination condemns an Opinion, by reason of some
invidious consequences, which are always drawn from it, when the imagination is
affrighted and prevented by contrary Sentiments.

XVIII.

I know, for example, that some persons have said that I make all Prayers
useless, and that I take from Men that confidence which they ought to have in
God; because God acting by general wills, we ought not according to them to
hope for Heaven by particular assistances. I own, that if this consequence was
contained in my Principles, they would be False, Heretical, and Impious. For he
that takes away the Hope and Trust we ought to have in God, overturns Religion;
and it is partly upon this account that I cannot be of their mind, who do the
most oppose my way of reconciling Grace with Liberty. But my Principles are so
far from leading Men to despair, that they show to the Just, and even to
Sinners (after a way which to me seems most comforting) the means of obtaining
from God the things of which they stand in need.

For if we are Just, our Prayers are Meritorious, and if they be Meritorious,
Order requires they should be heard. And because Order in respect of God
himself, is a Law infinitely more inviolable than the Laws which he has
established for the construction of his work, he never fails to do that which
Order prescribes unto him. Thus the prayers of the Just are never useless: This
I have shown in the 19. Article of the second Discourse. But if we be sinners,
it is certain that our Prayers in themselves are useless. 1 John 2.1. Mat.
9.13. John 11.42.
Nevertheless we ought not to despair: We have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. He came to save Sinners. His Prayers are always and
readily heard; let us Pray in his Name, or address to him himself. Our Prayers
will solicit him to form some desires in our behalf; and his desires are the
occasional causes which infallibly determine the efficacy of the general Law of
Grace, by which God would save all Men in his Son.

This is what I have very largely proved in the second discourse. Thus I am so
far from taking away the confidence which we ought to have in God, that I do
by the Authority of the Scripture, particularly show what way we ought to take
to obtain of God, the Graces which are necessary for us. I therefore beg of the
Readers, that they will do me the justice, as to examine my Sentiments without
prejudice; and I am willing they should afterward judge of them according to
their evidence. For I submit all my thoughts, not only to the censures of the
Church, (which, by an Authority to which I am always ready to refer my self,
has a right to make me quit them) but also to the judgment of particular
persons, by whose Advice I shall endeavor to profit.

The Second Explication, Where it is proved that J. C. is figured every where in
the Scriptures, and that even by the Events which were before the Sin of the
First Man; to teach us that the Principle of God's designs, is the Incarnation
of His Son.
MOses, in the second Chapter of Genesis, thus relates the Marriage of the
first Man:

The great Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he
took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof. And the rib
which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a Woman, and brought her unto
the Man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh:
she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a
Man leave his Father and his Mother, and cleave unto his Wife, and they shall
be one flesh. St. Paul assures us, that this Carnal Marriage is a great
Mystery, that it is the Figure of the Spiritual Marriage of J. C. with his
Church, and also that married persons ought to conform themselves to J. C. and
his Church in the Duties which they are to pay to one another: See his words in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. V. Wives, submit your selves unto your own
Husbands, as unto the Lord. For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as
Christ is the Head of the Church: and he is the Savior of the Body. Therefore
as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husbands
in every thing. Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of Water by the Word. That he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it
should be holy and without blemish. So ought Men to love their Wives, as their
own Bodies: he that loves his Wife, loves himself. For no Man ever yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church:
For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. For this cause
shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall be joined unto his Wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. This is a great Mystery; but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church. We are the Members of the Body of J. C. formed of his
Flesh and of his Bone, as Eve was of Adam. The Man shall leave Father and
Mother and be joined to his Wife, and with her shall make but one Body. This is
a great Mystery, and I explain it of J. C. and his Church. (...).
Sacramentum hoc magnum est: ego autem dico in Christo and in Ecclesia.

The Letter, which kills, because it does not raise the Mind up toward him who
only gives Life, applies that solely to the first Adam, which is said chiefly
to figure the second. But St. Paul, inspired with the same Spirit that Moses
was, clearly explained the Mystery, which the other had only darkly proposed.
He assures us, that what seems to have been written of the first Man, and the
first Woman, ought to be understood of J. C. and his Church. The first Marriage
is a great Secret, for it figures the greatest of our Mysteries, the Eternal
Covenant betwixt J. C. and his Church: a Secret hid in God from all eternity,
and revealed to Men in the fullness of times. This is the Mystery which has
been hid from Ages and Generations, but is now made manifest to his Saints: To
whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery among
the Gentiles, which is Christ, in you the hope of glory, Col. I. 26, 27. I
confess, that ordinary Marriages are indissoluble: that married persons leave
their Father and Mother, and make together one strict Society, and one Body:
but these words of the first Man, Wherefore Man shall leave Father and Mother,
may be applied to them; for J. C. proves, by the same words, that the Husband
ought not to forsake his Wife, because it is God who has joined them together.
But I maintain, that God has joined them, to figure the greatest of our
Mysteries; that Marriages cannot be broken, because J. C. will never forsake
his Church of which he is the Spouse; that the Marriage of Christians is a
Because it figures Jesus C. it may be called a SACRAMENT in the large and
unrestrained Sense, but not according to the strict and limited Sense of the
Word; as it signifies an Outward, Visible sign, which not only signifies but
dispences Grace.
Sacrament, which dispenses Grace to those who are contracted, because it
figures J. C. who communicates Spirit and Fruitfulness to his Church: In a
word, that the first Marriage, and all which have been since, are transient
figures of the eternal and indissoluble Marriage of J. C. with Men.

Now, the first Marriage was celebrated before Sin: God cast Adam into an
ecstatical and mysterious sleep; he formed out of one of his sides, or (to
speak as the Scripture) he built up his Wise, which he designed to give him; he
inspired into him words prophetical of J. C. and, as yet, Adam had not sinned:
for, doubtless, all that the Scripture relates concerning the first Man, before
his sin, does much more sensibly and expressly represent J. C. than that which
is written of him after his fall. Does not this show, that J. C. and his
Church, is the first and chief of God's designs, since it is evident, that the
Figure must be for the sake of the Reality, and not the Reality for the Figure?

When God created the first Man, he made him according to his Image, because he
thought of him who is the Image of the invisible God; he animated him with his
Breath, Tertul. de Resurrect. Carnis. Cyril. Alex. These. p. 153. A. thanas.
Orat. 3. in Arianos.
because he then had the design of uniting his Word to our Nature, which he
foresaw would become altogether earthly and carnal by sin; he made him Lord of
all Animals, because he intended to subject all things to J. C. God, by the
sleep, into which he cast the first Man, expressed the death, or sleep of his
Son upon the Cross; and by the Woman, whom he drew out of his Flesh and his
Bones, the Spouse which J. C. received after he awoke, (or was risen) and which
he purchased by his Blood. If Adam sinned, it was not according to St. Paul,
because he was tempted, but through his fondness to his Wife, 1 Timothy II. 14. J.
C. likewise was not subject to sin, and if he was made sin, as the Scripture
speaks, 2 Cor. 5.21.
it was in love to his Church. If Adam sinned, and communicated his sin to all
his Posterity, he is, even in this (tho in a contrary sense) the figure of J.
C. who only dispences Grace to Men. Where: fore, as by one Man, Sin entered
into the World, and Death by Sin; Romans 5.12.14.
and Death passed upon all Men. -- Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them who had not sinned after Adam's transgression; who is the (...).
figure of him who was to come.

These words, who is the figure of him, who was to come, in the place where
they are, put it out of doubt, that the first Adam represented the second, even
by Concupiscence it self; and the Death which he communicated to all Men,
together with his Son. Hence it is, that St Paul makes so many Antitheses
betwixt the Earthly Man, and the Man from Heaven. The first Man, was made a
living Soul; 1 Cor. 15.45.47.
the second Adam, a quickening Spirit. The first Man, is of the Earth, Earthly;
the second Man, is the Lord from Heaven.

God, by the first Man and Woman, did not only represent J. C. and his Church;
but also by the place into which he put them, by their posterity, especially
those of them whose actions the Scripture does largely recite. The Earthly
Paradise, represented the Church; J. C. keeps and Cultivates it. The River
divided into Four Streams to water this very Delightful and Fruitful place, is
the Eternal wisdom, which enlightens, and animates the Church. I also came out
as a Brook from a River, and as a Conduit Vulg. Lat. de Paradiso. ^ccl.
24.30.31.
into a Garden. I said, I will water my best Garden, and will water abundantly
my Garden-bed. It is written of the true Solomon, that his wisdom ran down
abundantly; as the Rivers at the beginning of Harvest. Who fills all things
with wisdom, Eccl 24.25, 26, 27
as Physon, and as Tygris in the time of the new fruits. He makes the
understanding to abound like Euphrates. -- He makes the doctrine of Knowledge,
appear as the Light, and as Geon in the time of Vintage. The Tree planted in
the middle of the Garden, which brought forth a Fruit able to make Men
Immortal, is also the Eternal Wisdom, according to the words of the Proverbs of
Solomon, She is a Tree of Life, Prove. 3.18.
to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her. He
who shall overcome the World, shall be nourished with this Fruit; for
certainly, these words of St. John, To him that overcomes, Apoc. 11.7.
it shall be given to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God, are to be understood of no other Trees but this. As for the
other Tree, which teaches good and evil, and whose Fruits Eve found so
Beautiful to the Eye, and Pleasant to the Taste; it represents sensible
objects, which at present, excite in us such a strong Concupiscence, and give
Death to those, who suffer themselves to be surprised by their Charms: It Is
plain, that all these relations would not be so exact, if they were no more
than imaginary.

EVE had two Sons, Cain and Abel; Genesis 4.
they both offered their Sacrifice: God rejected that of Cain's, and received
that of Abel's. Cain was troubled hereat, and slew his Brother; the blood of
Abel which was spilt cried for Vengeance. God declared, that Cain should be a
Fugitive all his Life, and that he would hinder him from being slain. Does not
this sufficiently represent the Synagogue, who being the Elder, yet offered not
unto God a Sacrifice acceptable unto him: That the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
was only Worthy of GOD: That Jesus Christ was slain in Abel, by the Jews who
were his Brethren, according to the Flesh: That for their Punishment, the Jews
should be Vagabonds and Fugitives upon the Earth, as Cain was; and that God
will not quite Destroy them, tho their Crime was such, that they might say,
more truly than Cain, All they who meet me will slay me.

If we examine after matters of Fact, and those especially, whose Circumstances
the Scripture more particularly recites, we shall see Jesus C. expected and
figured every where; Expected, becanse of the promise which God had made, that
the seed of the Woman, should break the Serpents Head, Genesis III. 15. And
Figured, because the Spirit of God, takes pleasure in representing unto Men,
him who was to be their Mediator, and render all the Work of God perfectly
worthy of its Author.

I confess, that in these things we may be easily deceived, and that none but
the Spirit of God can make us distinctly and without fear of error, see the
reality of these Figures. But these Figures are so lively, and so express, that
he must be strangely Stupid, who is not Affected with them; and very rash, who
looks upon those as Ridiculous Persons and Visionaries, who according to the
Example of the Apostles and Holy Doctors, seek Jesus Christ in the Scriptures,
as he himself has Commanded us in these words, Search the Scriptures, for they
are they, John. 5.39.
which Testify of me. For, in short, all that is in the Old Testament, relates
to Jesus Christ and his Church. 1 Cor. 10 11.
-- All these things happened to them in Figures.

The Third Explication,
Where it is proved, that the chief of Gods design is J. C. and his Church; that
God truly loves Men; that he sincerely desires to save all; that his Conduct
is worthy of his Wisdom, Goodness, Immutability, and other Attributes: What is
the order of the decrees which contain the Predestination of the Saints.

I. BY this Term, [GOD,] I understand a Being infinitely Perfect.

II. A Being infinitely Perfect, Perfectly knows himself.

III. By the knowledge which he has of his Being, he sees the Essences of all
things; he sees all possible Creatures, or all that which he is able to
Produce: He is Wise by Himself alone.

IV. The Being infinitely Perfect, necessarily loves Himself; He can will
nothing but by his will; I mean the love which he bears to himself: Therefore
he can do nothing but for himself.

V. The Being infinitely Perfect, is Almighty; He can do all that he knows,
supposing he can will it with a practical will.

VI. By a practical will, I mean a decree, or will executive of a design
concluded upon; which supposes in God the knowledge and choice of the ways of
acting which are most worthy of himself. For there are Simple, Fruitful,
General, Uniform, and Constant; and there are Compounded, Barren, Particular,
Irregular, and Unconstant Ways of Actions. The first are to be preferred before
the latter; for they show Wisdom, Goodness, Constancy, Immutability, in him
that makes use of them: The other denotes the want of Understanding,
Malignancy, Inconstancy, Lightness of Mind.

VII. It is visible, that there is something useless in his action, who does
that by compounded ways, which may be brought to pass by simple; and he wants
knowledge, who has more Practical wills, when one suffices.

VIII. The Conduct of a Good, Wise, Constant and Immutable Being, must carry in
it, Wisdom, Goodness, Constancy and immutability; Order requires this.

IX. The Wisdom of GOD renders him Impotent in this sense, that it permits him
not to will certain things, nor to act after certain ways. It permits him not
to will certain things; for if God had made but one animal, he could not have
made it monstrous, or given it useless or ill proportioned members, that being
contrary to his wisdom which he loves invincibly. It would not permit him also
to act after certain ways; for, supposing that a work equally Perfect, might be
produced by ways unequally Simple, Uniform, Constant, etc. God is impotent in
this sense, that he cannot choose the ways of acting which are less worthy of
his Wisdom, or which less resemble his Goodness, his Immutability, or his other
Attributes.

X. Thus God is Almighty, because he does every thing that he undertakes to do;
and because there is nothing without him which can resist him, or hinder him
from executing his design.

It Is not because there is nothing, how irregular soever, which he cannot do;
or, no ways of acting which he cannot observe: But let us suppose God to act.

XI. God cannot act but for himself; if he will act, it is because he resolves
to do something worthy of himself; but no Creature can give unto God an Honor
worthy of him: All the Honor that mere Creatures can give, cannot be worth the
action by which he produces them.

It is unworthy of God, to maintain that there is any thing in the Creature
which can determine him to act; God therefore will do nothing, for he acts only
for himself.

XII. God cannot receive any Honor worthy of himself, but from himself. No
Person can Honor himself. God therefore can never be Honored with an Honor
worthy of him.

XIII. Nevertheless, I am sensible that I do actually exist. Therefore I can
give unto God an Honor worthy of him: Therefore I am Eternal, Uncreated,
Divine, I am not made, and God can make nothing.

XIV. Further, I know that I offend God, and that I cannot satisfy him for my
offenses. Now God would not be offended, and would be fully satisfied.
Therefore I am not the work of god; for if I was, God only acting for his
glory, he would have been deceived in his designs.

XV. Nothing can satisfy God but God himself. Now one and the same Person
cannot make satisfaction to himself. God therefore can never be satisfied for
our offenses.

The wicked therefore are not the work of God, they subsist whether he will or
no; they cannot be annihilated. Behold consequences altogether false! But see
them cleared up in two words, by my Principles, or rather the Principles of
Christian Religion.

XVI. God cannot be Honored with an Honor worthy of himself. He cannot be
fully satisfied for our offenses, if he himself does not undertake for them.
Now no person Honors himself, or satisfies himself: Therefore there is in God
a plurality of Persons. This is also that which Faith teaches us.

XVII. I am Created, therefore I can render to God an Honor worthy of himself.
God is offended, therefore he may be fully satisfied. A Divine Person united to
my nature, may sanctify my devotions, and render them worthy of God. A Divine
Person united to a criminal -- nature may justify and satisfy for it. This is
the solution wherewith Faith supplies Reason when she is Non-plus'd; for Faith
and Reason mutually sustain one another.

XVIII. It is clear therefore, that tho Man had not sinned, a Divine Person
would have been united to the work of God, to sanctisie it, and render it
worthy of its Author; since it is necessary it should subsist as I may say, in
a Divine Person, to the end it might be worthy of him.

XIX. Men offend God, they cannot satisfy him for their offenses; God foresaw
and permitted this: Therefore he had in view the satisfaction of his Son, which
is full and entire; therefore the work of God repaired is more worthy of God,
and Honors him more than the same work before its corruption. God therefore,
who acts for his glory, must necessarily have permitted sin, which he foresaw
would come to pass. All this is clear, and I have proved it elsewhere, but I
speak too much of it; for, at present, it is sufficient, that the first and
chief design of God was J. C. and his Church; that the present World was for
the future, that the natural order was for the supernatural: And I prove it
thus.

XX. God made all things for his glory, He loves that the most, which most
Honors him: Now Jesus Christ Honors him more than all Creatures put together,
since J. C. is a Victim, and a Sovereign Priest, who infinitely Honors God.
Therefore the chief of Gods designs, is J. C. and the Church, which is his
Body, which, with J. C. offers but one Victim, and one Worship. For all
Creatures have access unto God, and pay their Obligations unto him, only in J.
C. Therefore the Present World is for the Future; the Natural Order, for the
Supernatural: this Succession of Generations, to supply the living Temple,
which J. C. raises to the glory of his Father, with Materials. Every thing
passes away, every thing tends to destruction, every thing vanishes; but Gods
chief design (the Object in which he is well pleased) shall remain for ever.

XXI. The great design therefore of God, is, to build to his own Honor a
Spiritual Temple, of which J. C. is the chief Cornerstone, the Architect, the
Sovereign Priest, and Victim. His design is, that this Temple should be as
Large and Perfect as it can be, as far as its greatness and Perfection can
consist with one another. Thus God wills, that all Men should enter into this
Spiritual Building; for thereby it would become more ample. God would that all
Men should be saved, 1 Timothy II. 4. He has also sworn by his Prophet, that he
wills not the Death, but the Conversion of the Wicked. God also desires, that
Men should merit the highest degrees of glory, His will is our Sanctification,
1 Thessalonians. IV. 3. His Temple would thus be more Perfect. Certainly, if God loves
Men, and the beauty of his work, these Truths cannot be denied. Now all Men are
not saved; there either are none at all, or very few Saints, but are capable of
the highest Rewards, and of a more Illustrious Glory, than that which they
possess; and no Creature, even Man himself, cannot hinder God from Converting
and Sanctifying him, if God undertakes his Conversion and Sanctification; for
God is the absolute Master of Hearts. Therefore there must necessarily be
something in God himself, which hinders him from executing his wills, or rather
from forming certain designs, or decrees.

XXII. God in his infinite Wisdom, saw all possible works, and all possible
ways of executing them. He does not blindly resolve upon any design, but always
compares the means with the end; He loves his Wisdom, and he consults it
always. Now there are some ways of acting, more Simple, more Uniform, more
Regular than others; and the Conduct of a Wise, and Immutable Being must carry
in it the Character of Wisdom, and immutability. Therefore the Wisdom of God
resists his wills, in this sense, that all his wills are not Practical wills. I
do thus further explain my self.

XXIII. God loves all Men. He would save all; he would sanctify all; he would
make a beautiful work; he would make his Church as large and perfect as it can
be: But God loves his Wisdom infinitely more; he loves it invincibly; he loves
it with a natural and necessary love. He cannot therefore dispense with himself
from acting after the wisest manner, and which is most worthy of himself; or
from following that Conduct which suits best with his Attributes. Now, God
acting by the most simple ways, and most worthy of his wisdom, his work cannot
be more beautiful and more ample than it is. For if God, by ways equally
simple, could have made his Church more ample and more perfect than it is, he
would not, acting as he has done, have made a work most worthy of himself; he
would also have hated Men before he had established his Decrees, and
consequently before their sin, or even their existence was known. Therefore the
Wisdom of God forbidding him to compound his ways, not permitting him to work
Miracles every moment, and obliging him to act after the most general, constant
and uniform manner; he does not save all Men, tho he truly desires to save all.
For, to conclude, tho he loves all his Creatures, he does nothing for them, but
that which his wisdom permits him to do; and tho he would have the most large
and most perfect Church that can be, yet he does not make it absolutely the
most large and perfect; but only the most simple and most perfect that can be,
with respect to the ways which are most worthy of himself. For, once more, God
does not resolve upon his designs, but by comparing his ways with the work
which they are to effect. For when he sees a greater relation of wisdom and
fruitfulness betwixt certain ways and their work, than all others and their
work, then (I speak after the manner of Men) he takes up his Design, he chooses
his Ways, he establishes his Decrees.

XXIV. Thus the Order of the Divine Decrees, which include the Predestination
of the Saints, is not, that God first wills to save such and such, and
afterward consults his wisdom to find out the ways which may put his designs
into execution: This is to make God act like Men, who often repent of their
undertakings, because they do not compare all the means with the end. God
consults his wisdom for all things; he wills and designs nothing without his
knowledge; he wills not, that such and such shall be saved rather than others,
if he did not see in himself some reasons for this; in himself, I say, not in
them. So that the Principle of Predestination, is the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God. O Altitudo divitiarum sapientiae and scientiae Dei! It Is not his will
separated from his wisdom: for he neither does nor wills any thing without it;
that is, without his Son. Much less is it the Elect, which determine him to
predestinate them, or to form designs, which include their predestination. This
is altogether impertinent; and it is needless for me to spend time in
demonstrating it.

XXV. It Is evident, by the Truths which I have laid down, that Reason furnishes
us with no other means of reconciling Scripture with it self; or this
Proposition, God would save all Men; with this, All Men are not saved. For
assuredly, God would save all Men, even the wicked: This he swears by the mouth
of the Prophet Ezekiel. Now, God is the Master of Hearts; he can give such
Grace to the wicked as will certainly convert him, since he knows what degree
of Grace, and when it ought to be given, that it may work the conversion of the
sinner. Who can hinder him from doing what he will? What Creature can resist
him? Is It not evident, that it is his wisdom which obliges him to act after so
simple and so general a manner, that Grace is not always given to the sinner,
so strong, and at such seasonable moments, as thoroughly to convert, or to
contribute to the conversion of him who receives it?

For, if God acts by particular wills, since he is wise, and wills the
conversion of a sinner, certainly it is impossible, but that all Grace should be
efficacious, and have all the effect for which God gave it: it could never be
resisted, never rendered useless: For an intelligent Being proportions always
the means to the end, the action to the work, or effect which he undertakes to
produce.

XXVI. In short, it is plain, that Predestination, as I have explained it, has
nothing harsh in it: For no person can take it ill, that God should love his
wisdom infinitely more than his work; for it is altogether his gracious gift,
seeing it is the greater relation of wisdom and fruitfulness, which God sees
betwixt his ways and his future Church, which determines him to form the
decrees, which include the Predestination of the Saints, and not our natural
merits which engage him to predestinate us to Grace and Glory. It does not
suppose in God any respect of Persons; for tho Gods choice proceeds not from
our merits, yet it is not the effect of an indifferent or rash will of God, but
of the depth of his Wisdom and Knowledge which governs all his wills. Lastly,
Predestination, thus understood, does not lead to despair; for God often sends
the showers of Grace in such abundance, that we frequently render it useless:
And it will condemn our negligence, for it depends on us to avoid many things
which resist the efficacy of grace; God not giving us his grace by particular
wills, to the end, that it should have such an effect in us, and nothing more.

Objection.
The Predestination of the Saints is a Mystery: The Judgments of God are
hidden, even to the most enlightened understandings, and it is an insufferable
rashness to endeavor to give a reason of them. The Fathers upon this subject
of God's choice of the Elect, always cried out with St. Paul, O the Height! We
ought to imitate them, and hold our peace.

Answer.
I Answer, that we are permitted to Explain, even the Mysteries, provided we do
it according to the Analogy of Faith; and suppose the Doctrines received by the
Church as unquestionable. The Fathers have done so: There is no greater Mystery
than of the Trinity; and yet St. Augustine has Composed 15. Books upon this
subject, St. Hilary 12. St. Thomas, and all the School Divines, were not afraid
to speak and write thereof. But it is certain, that Predestination is not a
Mystery in this sense, as if the mind of Man can discover nothing thereof: for
all the Divine Decrees, do necessarily agree with Order, Reason, the Eternal
Law, of which all Men have some knowledge. There Is no understanding all the
particulars of the Predestination of the Saints: Praedestinatio fine
praescientia esse non potest, Prospresp. ad Cap. XV. Gall. Non tamen Electio
praecedit justificationem, sed electionem justificatio; nemo enim elegitur,
nisi jam distans ab illo qui rejicitur. Unde quod dictum est quia elegit nos
ante mundi constitutionem, non video quomodo sit dictum nisi praescientia, Aug.
l. 1. ad Simp. quaest. 2.
I confess it. Yet all they who know how to enter into themselves and consult
universal Reason, which enlightens all attentive minds, clearly see, that God
acts not by Caprice, that his designs don't prevent his knowledge, that the
Predestination and choice of the Elect supposes the prescience of all good
works, which they ought to do by the assistance of Grace; that it is the depth
of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, which causes one to be chosen
and another rejected. This is that which St. Paul says; this is that which the
Fathers say; and this is also that which I Assert. I don't say that one is
chosen and another rejected, simply and merely because God wills it; for I am
afraid of making God like unto Man, who guides himself by Humor, and has no
regard to his own work. It is not enough to show that God is powerful, and that
he does what he will with his Creatures. We ought, if possible, to justify his
wisdom and his goodness: We ought to represent him as amiable and adorable, as
much at least as we make him terrible. You cry out with St. Paul, O the Height!
but let us go on, and add of the riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; for
it is the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, which is the principle of
the Predestination of Saints; it is not a blind, rash, and imperious will, such
as is often observed in the great ones of the Earth.

But Men will make God such an one as they would be themselves; because they
prefer Power to Wisdom, God shall always be just and wise enough for them,
provided he be Powerful and Sovereign. Men love Independance; it is a sort of
Servitude to them to submit to Reason; to them it is a kind of impotence not to
be able to do that which she forbids. They fear therefore to make God Impotent
instead of making him Wise. They place God above all Reason; according to them
he observes none, he absolutely does all that which he pleases; and for this
reason merely and solely because any thing pleases him; it is just, wise, and
good to be done; Principles which certainly overturn the very Foundation of
Religion, as I have In the Explicat. of the nature of Ideas, To. 3. of the
Search.
elsewhere explained.

Will Men never reflect that the Word of God is Sovereign and Universal Reason;
that this Reason is Coeternal and Substantial with God; that he necessarily,
invincibly, inviolably, loves it: that tho he be obliged to follow it, he
nevertheless continues independent: And that thus all that God wills, is Just,
Wise, Regular; because God cannot act but according to his knowledge, because
he cannot love but according to Order, because he cannot despise his Wisdom,
and falsify himself?

But what! must it be permitted to reason upon Gods way of proceeding? Yes
doubtless, provided we reason upon clear Ideas, and always have regard for the
Truths which Faith teaches us. It Is this infinitely wise Conduct which we
cannot too much examine, and too much admire, nothing is more comforting and
instructing both together; but we lose our time when we examine Men's ways of
proceeding, for they almost always follow the motions of their passions: He who
loves Order, cannot make it his pass-time to see them do so, he cannot be
instructed in his duty, by hearing their discourses.

Let it suffice that the Historians make Heroes of their Benefactors, and great
Men of their Friends; let all their characters flatter, but Christians ought to
propose to themselves other Models. Let them be perfect, as their Heavenly
Father is perfect; let them imitate his Conduct, but I must Answer the
principal Objection.

The Fathers, it is said, and St. Augustine chiefly, permit us not to seek after
the reason of the choice which God makes of the Elect. I maintain that this is
not true, and that the only thing which St. Augustine requires, is, that Gods
choice should not be founded upon natural Merits; so far he is from desiring
that we should not have recourse to the Wisdom and Knowledge of God to give an
account of his choice. But to make this well understood, we must know that the
enemies of Grace, and free Predestination, always used this argument which
enters naturally into the mind, and which in my opinion cannot e answered by
reason, but by the principles which I have laid down. Thus they reason.

There is no choice to be made, where is no inequality or difference: Now God
in the distribution of his Graces, chooses some rather than others.

Therefore there are some Persons whom God judges more worthy of Grace, and
more fit to receive it than others. God wills that all Men should be saved; he
wills that all should come to the knowledge of the Faith: Now all are not
saved, even the Gospel has not been preached to all. Therefore there is some
inequality, or some difference among Men; for if there was a perfect equality
among them, since God would enlighten them all, all would, at least, have the
gift of Faith. Now this difference can only come from the good or ill use of
Liberty: Therefore it is Man who makes himself in this sense to differ from
another Vid. Prosp. adversus Col. c. 6.
, and in some sort merits Grace. For surely it is just, or at least more
reasonable, that God should give his Grace to those who are better disposed to
receive it, and more likely to make a good use of it than others; to those who
actually use their Liberty better, who make some essays toward acquiring
Virtue, and who have more love for Order, the Truth and Justice, than to those
who make no use of their Liberty, and blindly follow the motions of their
passions. Therefore Grace does not prevent our wills, for God acts always with
the most wisdom and reason that can be: Before he assists us, he expects that
we should make that use of our Liberty, which we ought and may. It Is upon this
account that he made us free, our Salvation is in our own hands; See St.
Augustine lib. 1. ad. Bonif. c. 19. and lib. 2. c. 8. and elsewhere
the necessity of a preventing Grace ruins free will, and renders the
exhortations and councils of J. C. useless. It Is Grace must make us act, but
it is in our power to will, to pray, and to begin.

These Reasonings are so plausible, and so easily enter into the mind, that Men
are naturally Pelagians. A Man speaks the Language of the Church, when he is
upon his guard, when he actually feels his own weakness, and remembers that
Grace is not given according to his merits. But when nature speaks, he scarce
ever fails to speak those things which favor and exalt it. The Greek Fathers,
who lived before Pelagius's Heresy, or who were not cautious enough against
this error, have often spoke so as to seem to maintain it; this is a thing
sufficiently known. St. Augustine himself, before he thoroughly understood the
matter of Grace, thought it was in our power to believe and will, but in Gods
only to give strength to perform Nostrum est enim credere, illius autem dare
credentibus and volentibus facultatem been operandi. Lib. Retractat. Cap. 23.
And Lib. 3.
St. Jerome himself writing against the Palagians, says, Vbi autem misericordia
and gratia est, liberum ex part cessat arbitrium, quod in eo tantum est ut
velimus atque cupiamus, and placitis tribuamus assensum. Jam in Domini
potestate est, ut id quod cupimus, quod laboramus ac nitimur, illius open and
auxillio implere valeamus. Since we always feel that we are free, and do not
always actually think upon the proofs which Scripture gives us of the necessity
of Grace, it is difficult to keep our selves from saying nothing in behalf of
Liberty against Grace; since we know and are assured, that God always acts with
Reason and Wisdom, we desire to find even in the Elect themselves, some reason
of their Election.

Since it cannot be said, that the councils and exhortations of God are useless,
we think without reflecting that it altogether depends upon us to follow them.
In short, on what side soever we look upon the sentiments of the Pelagians and
Semi-pelagians, we find them agreeable enough to Reason; and because they
pleasantly court our Pride and Self love, it is difficult not to let fall some
words in their favor. Hence it is that we find many passages in the Fathers
which may be used as a foundation for the errors concerning Grace; insomuch,
that there are those who without ceremony reckon some of the Greek Fathers
among the Heretics: For there are Men who judge of the Sentiments of Authors,
when they seem to contradict one another, only by reporting the passages in
them. They do not consider that all that is said through prejudice, according to
the opinion of those to whom a man speaks, and without having seriously
examined what is said, signifies nothing; but on the contrary, it is sufficient
once to say a truth against common prejudice to discover his opinion. For my
part, I believe that the Greeks and Latins do not much differ one from the
other, and that if they often speak very differently, it is because they were
not equally cautious against the same errors, and had not equally examined them.

Therefore the enemies of Grace believing themselves so strong in reasons,
accused St. Augustine as denying Liberty, making all depend upon fate,
attributing unto God respect of persons, and rendering all Preaching and
Councils useless. They continually demanded of him a reason of God's choice,
since he would not grant the reason of it to be an inequality or difference of
wills, since it could not be an inequality of natures: But St. Augustine on his
part, stuck to the Scriptures. He answered that Grace was not given according
to Merits, that Man could not make himself differ from another, that he was
unable not only to do good without the assistance of Grace, but that he could
not will it; that the heart of Man is in the hands of God, that he disposes of
it as he pleases, and that of our selves we are not able to think a good
thought. In short, that he was not obliged to give an account of the reason of
the choice of the Elect, because the Judgments of God are unsearchable.

But tho St. Augustine says in an hundred places, that the Judgments of God are
unsearchable, to silence the enemies of Grace, who would have the reason of our
being chosen in our selves; he no where says, that these Judgments are not
agreeable to the reason and wisdom which all Men consult, when their senses and
their passions keep silence. The judgments of God are impenitrable, because
it is impossible to know them in particular; but we ought not to be afraid of
asserting that they are Just, Wise, Reasonable, full of Goodness and Equity; St
Augustine himself sometimes seeks and gives Reasons of them: He was always
disposed to receive those which could be reconciled with Faith, and he rejects
not those of his adversaries, but because they supposed, that Grace was given
according to Merits; that which Religion and Christian morality can by no means
grant. See how St. Augustine speaks, De bono persever. c. 9.
Ex duobus itaque parvulis originali peccato obstrictis, cur iste assumatur,
ille relinquatur, and ex duobus aetate jam grandibus impiis, cur iste ita
vocetur, ut vocantem sequatur, ille autem aut non vocetur, aut non ita vocetur;
inscrut abilia sunt judicia Dei: Ex duobus autem piis, cur huic donetur
perseverantia usque in finem, illi autem non donetur, inscrutabiliora sunt
judicia Dei. According to St. Augustine, the most unsearchable judgments of God
are those by which perseverance is granted to some just Persons, and not to
all. In the mean time St. Augustine himself gives a reason of them in his
letter to Vitalis and elsewhere; and is so far from blaming them who examine
Gods way of proceeding with humility, and according to the Analogy of Faith,
that on the contrary he is very ready to receive the reasons of others upon
this subject, provided they agree with the Scripture. Propter hujus timoris
utilitatem, ne regenerati and pie vivere incipientes, tanquam securi alta
sapiamus, quidem non perseveraturi perseveraturis Dei permissione vel
pravisiones ac dispositione miscentur, quibus cadentibus territi, cum timore
and tremore gradiamur viam justam. Sed de hac re, id est, cur quidem non
permansuri in fide, and sanctitate christiana, tamen accipiant ad tempus hanc
gratiam, and dimittantur hic vivere donec cadant, cum possint rapi de hac vita,
ne malitia mutet intellectum eorum, quod de sancto immatura aetate defuncto
Scriptum est in Libro Sapientiae; quaerat quisquis ut potuerit, and si
invenerit praeter hanc quae a me reddita est and aliam pro^abilem rationem, a
recta fidei non recedens, teneat eam, and ego cum illo, si me non latuerit
Epist. 107. de Cor. and Great. c. 23.
.

It Is to make us fear, least being regenerated and beginning to live piously,
we become secure and high-minded, that by Gods permission and prescience, some
who will not persevere, are mix't with those who will; that thus we being
afrighted by their fall, may walk in the way of righteousness with fear and
trembling. But it will be said, why do they who will not persist in the Faith,
receive it, and continue therein till they fall? Why does not God take away
their Lives, before the wickedness of their hearts corrupts their minds, as
it is written in the book of wisdom, of a Saint dying in his Infancy? Let every
one seek after the best reasons of this, and if he shall find any other besides
this which I have given, which renders a reason, that is probable, and
according to the Analogy of Faith, let him embrace it, and if it shall be
imparted to me, I shall embrace it with him. The Author of the calling of the
Gentiles, Lib. 1. c. 13. and seq
observes the same way of proceeding, that St. Augustine does. He every where
says that the Judgments of God are unsearchable, because he opposes the same
errors; and that Faith does not suffer us to give a reason of Gods choice of
Men, from the difference of their natural Merits Lib. 2. c. 23.
. If, for example, he asks himself whence it is, that all Children are not
Baptized? He is not afraid to say, that if this came from any ill use of the
general Grace given to the Parents, that, C. 24.
if all received Baptism, the Parents were too negligent, not fearing lest
their Children should be surprised with Death: He says, that such answers would
give some ground to believe, that the grace of Baptism was due to the innocence
of age, and to deny original sin. When the question is about excluding natural
merits, he cries out, that the Judgments of God are unsearchable; but yet, he
nevertheless does not fail to give some general Reasons thereof, upon other
occasions. Lib. 2. c. 30.
His principle is, that a Reason of all the Designs and Works of God cannot be
given. Tertia Definitio temperanter, and sobrie protestatur, non omnem
voluntatis Dei comprehendi posse rationem, and multas divinorum operum causas
ab humana intelligentia esse subductas. An undeniable principle! But neither
he, nor St. Augustine, nor, I believe, any of the Fathers, ever maintained that
the Judgments of God were so unsearchable, as that it should be a crime to
seek, and give some general Reasons of them. They never forbad Men, to
represent God Amiable, and Adorable, by justifying his Conduct, by that Idea
which we have of a Being infinitely Perfect, and by the Truths Faith teach us;
That which I have endeavored, in The Treatise of Nature and Grace.

The Last Explication, The frequent Miracles of the Old Law, do by no means
show, That God often acted by particular Wills.
I Do not well understand, how Persons, who grant that God does all, and that
therefore he communicates not his power to Creatures, but by making them the
occasional causes of producing certain effects, can Imagine that the Conduct
which he observed in respect of the Jews, should be contrary to that, which I
think I have demonstrated several ways, viz. That God acts not by particular
wills, but when the necessity of Order requires him.

They are always saying, as a thing extraordinary, that the Old Testament is
full of Miracles, that God had promised to the Jews, Plenty and Prosperity,
proportionably to their sidelity and obedience; and that it was not possible,
that nature and morality should be so exactly combined together, that the
Holy Land should abound in fruits, proportionably as its Inhabitants did in
virtue and good works. For my part, I willingly grant all this: But I do not
yet see how this opposes my sentiments; if it be not supposed, that I
acknowledge no other general Laws by which God executes his designs, but those
of the communication of motions. How troublesome is it for a Man not to be able
to explain his thoughts but by words, which popular use has introduced, and
which every one interprets according to his prejucices and temper; and above
all, to have for ones judges such Persons, who, tho they are nimble and quick,
yet often want equity and penetration of mind!

Certainly they do not do me justice, who say that I think Manna fell every day
of the Week among the Israelites except Saturday, by a necessary consequence of
the Laws of the communication of motions. He who is of this opinion, must needs
be very foolish and impious; I am persuaded that the greatest part of the
miraculous effects of the Ancient Law, was done in consequence of some general
Laws, since the general cause ought not to execute his purpose by particular
wills, and for many more Reasons which I might add to those already mentioned.

But I am far from believing, that these extraordinary effects were only the
consequences of the natural Laws of the communication of motions. I grant that
they may be looked upon as Miracles, and that there are more such in the World
than we imagine: But I must explain my self after what manner, that I may not
be thought to have changed.

J. C. as Man, received all Power in Heaven and in Earth, because God executes
all the desires of his holy Soul by the general Law of Grace, by which he would
save all Men in his Son. The Father has given to the Son, after this manner,
all the Nations of the World, as Materials which he is to employ in the
Building of his Church, as I have said elsewhere. Supposing then that J. C. for
the executing of his designs, desires a certain degree of Grace for one of his
Members, or rather that he desired that the fire which sacrificed St. Lawrance
should lose its heat; it is certain this would be what we call a Miracle;
nevertheless God would not work this Miracle by a particular will, but in
consequence of the general Law, the efficacy of which is determined by the
actual desires of the Soul of J. C.

According to the general Laws of the communications of motions, heavy bodies
fall toward the Earth; my arm is heavy, yet nevertheless I lift it up to
Heaven whenever I desire it. Certainly God who determines the motion of the
Animal spirits, for the lifting up my arm according to my desires, does not
then act but in consequence of the general Law of the union of the Soul and
Body, by which Law I have power to move my arm; nevertheless, this motion would
be accounted miraculous, if we did not own some other natural Laws, than those
of the communication of motions.

Now I think I am able to demonstrate by the Authority of the Holy Scripture,
that the Angels have received from God Power over the present World, and that
thus God executes their desires, and by them his own designs, according to
certain general Laws; so that all which appears miraculous in the Old
Testament, does no wise prove that God may often act by particular wills.

St. Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews intending to exalt J. C. above Angels,
says, that God had not subjected the World to come to them, as he had to J. C.
He believed then, as a thing whereof those to whom he wrote had no doubt, that
God had subjected the present World to Angels. If the Angels had had power over
nothing, it would have been much more easy for St. Paul to have exalted J. C.
above them.

Writing to the Ephesians, he assures us, that even the Devils exercise their
power over Infidels, Ephesians. 2.2.
he calls them as J. C. had done, the Princes of this World; that is to say, of
those who live in the darkness of Idolatry, tenebrarum harum. If the Devils
themselves exercise power over Idolaters, if they are Princes of this World,
shall the Angels have no power over it?

The Archangel Michael is called in Daniel, the Prince of the Jews, because he
fought for them against the Prince of the Persians. Can any one fight without
Strength and Power?

The Angels are sent as the Ministers of God to Minister to those who are to be
the Heirs of Salvation. A weak Ministry! if God had not communicated to them
his Power. A useless mission! if God had not established the general Law, whose
efficacy is determined by their desires.

There are in the Old Testament a great many Passages which clearly prove that
the Angels had care of the Israelites, they rewarded the observers of the Law
and punished others; it is not necessary that I should relate them. But it is
more to the purpose, to show, that even from those passages which attribute to
God certain effects, without making any mention of Angels, it cannot be
concluded, that God produced these effects by himself without the Ministry of
Angels; because the Angels acting only by the power of God, and doing nothing
but what was good, the Holy Scripture attributes to God himself, that which he
did by their means.

The greatest example of this may be drawn from the manner after which the Law
was given to the Jews. To read only the Old Teastament, it seems as if God had
by himself spoken to Moses in the Burning-Bush, and that he gave him the Law
upon Mount Sinai, without the Ministry of Angels. It Is God always who speaks,
even JEHOVAH, that Name which is not given to Creatures. And yet St. Stephen
assures us, that God sent Moses to deliver his People, under the conduct and
power of the Angel which had appeared unto him in the Burning-Bush; and that he
conversed also with the same Angel upon Mount Sinai.

St. Paul delivers the same thing in two of his Epistles; and it is upon this
account, that intending in his Epistle to the Hebrews, to exalt the New Law
above the Old, he begins this Epistle with a continual comparison of J. C. the
Minister of Grace, with the Angels, the Ministers of the Jewish Law.

It is evident if the Law had not been given by Angels, that which St. Stephen
and St. Paul assures us of, would be absolutely false. But the Angels having
given it, that which Moses says, does not ever the less cease to be true. For
God always, as the true cause, executes that which his Creatures do as the
occasional causes, to whom God communicates his Power according to certain
Laws. And because it is God only who enlightens Spirits by the manifestation of
necessary and immutable order, (which is the inviolable rule of his own will)
it is truly he who speaks to us, and commands us, when he who speaks to us from
him, does not do it till he has consulted the Eternal Laws which his wisdom
contains, that which the Blessed Angels never fail to do.

J.C. as Man, is Head of the Church, and dispences to his Members Grace which
Sanctifies them. But because he has not this Power, but in consequence of a
general Law which God has established in him, to execute by him his great
design, the Eternal Temple; it is very truly said that God alone gives inward
Grace, tho he does not in truth give it but by the Ministry of J.C. who, as
Man, determines by his prayers, or his desires, the efficacy of the Divine
will: And it is upon this account that Scripture often attributes to God alone
the conversion of hearts.

In like manner, the Angels had power to lead, to conduct, and punish the
Israelites; they may at present give us the outward preparations of Grace, they
may remove out of our way occasions of Sin and Scandal; yet all that they do,
may in general be attributed to God, as the true cause, for they act only by
the Power which God has given them.

Thus, I believe, that the defeat of Senacharib, the Plague which David brought
upon the People for numbering them, the rain of Manna which fell so regularly in
the Wilderness; and a thousand such like effects, were miraculous. But I
believe then, since Scripture assures us thereof in several places, that God
did not do the greatest part of these Miracles but by the action; that is to
say, the desires of the Angels which God chose to conduct his People, after he
had informed himself by his wisdom, that this way would be better than any
other, in relation to his principal work: And that it would spare, as I may
say, a great number of particular wills. I believe also that these desires were
governed (as well as the Divine wills) by the necessary and immutable order,
the inviolable rule of all understandings; by the light of the Word, the
fountain of all Wisdom, and of all Laws both Temporal and Eternal, according to
these words: Fons sapientiae Verbum in excelsis, and ingressus illius Manada
Aeterna.

To be convinced of that which I have said, supposing that God does all, it is
enough to endeavor clearly to understand the sense of any one of those
passages which attribute to the Angels, the Power of defending or punishing the
Israelites. See one of these passages: God, or rather the Angel, or Prince of
the Angels, St. Exodus 23.20.
Michael, says in Gods stead to Moses, after he had given him the Law; Behold I
send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the
place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him
not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him, By this
passage it is evident, that an Angel conducted the People, and had power to
punish them if they did not obey him; now it is supposed that God does all. The
Angel, their Conducter, had not his Power, but because God made it, as I may
say, a Law to himself to obey him; like as I have not the power to remove mine
Arm, but because God has established the Laws of union betwixt the Soul and
Body. And the Angel does nothing actually, but because God actually executes
his desires, and thereby his Eternal purposes; as I do not actually move mine
Arm, but because God only does what I actually desire, and what I think to do.

Thus the Miracles of the Old Testament are only consequences of the general
Laws which God made to communicate his Power to the Archangel Michael, or the
Angel that guided them. Senacharib's Army was defeated by the Angel, the
revenger of Gods glory: Manna was bread made by the hands of Angels,
nevertheless God did these Miracles, but by general wills; for if they had been
performed by particular wills, the Angels could not have wrought them by a
power which God gave them of conducting his people.

Thus St. Michael and his Angels were to the Jews, that which J.C. is to the
Christians. The Angels gave the old Law, J.C. is the Angel of the new Law, as
the Prophet Malachy calls him, Chap. III. 1. The new Convenant promises true
goods; therefore the Mediator of this Covenant must be the occasional or
distributive cause of that Grace, which gives a right to the possession of
these goods. But the Old Covenant promised only Temporal goods, because the
Angel, the Minister of the Law, could only bestow these goods: All that relates
to Eternity, both goods and evils, ought to be reserved to J.C. The Angels who
are pure Spirits, ought according to Order to have power over Bodies, inferior
substances, and by them, upon the minds of Men: For since sin, the Soul depends
upon the Body, they may prepare for Grace, as in St. John, and remove the
occasions of falling.

Lastly, the Angel, or rather the Archangel St. Michael represented J.C. as
the Old Law represents the New; the Synagogue, the Church; Temporal goods,
Eternal: Thus it appears, that to prove the New Covenant more excellent than
the Old, St. Paul was obliged to prove (as he has done in the beginning of the
Epistle to the Hebrews) that J.C. who is the Minister thereof, is infinitely
exalted above the Angels.

It must therefore be granted from the arguments which I have drawn from the
Idea of a Being infinitely Perfect, and from a thousand and a thousand
experiences that God executes his designs by general Laws. But it is not easy
to demonstrate, that God acts upon such and such occasions by particular wills,
tho the H. Scripture, which accommodates its self to our weakness, represents
God sometimes as a Man, and often makes him act like Men. For tho all that
which I have said of Angels, should be absolutely false, I might nevertheless
suppose, and should even have all reason to believe, that God wrought the
Miracles of the Old Law, by certain general Laws, tho I had no knowledge of
them; for we ought not to reject a truth clearly known, because of some
objections which may be drawn from our ignorance of many things.

Thus God forms and preserves the purely material World, by the Laws of the
communication of motions, and makes the Bodies themselves the occasional
causes, which determine these Laws; for it is the striking of bodies upon one
another, which determine their efficacy: A Body is never moved, but when
another strikes upon it, and a Body is always moved when it is struck upon.

God preserves the life of Men, and likewise Civil Society, by the general Laws
of the Union of Soul and Body; and makes something in these two substances, the
occasional causes, which determine the efficacy of these Laws. Mine Arm is
moved according to my desires: my Soul suffers pain, when a Thorn pricks me.

God builds up his great Work by the general Laws of Grace, according to which
he would save all Men in his Son; and because all Men are born sinners, God
draws the occasional causes, which determine the efficacy of his general Laws
only from J.C. who is the Head, which influences his Members, the Mediator
betwixt God and Men, the Sovereign Priest of good things, the true Solomon, who
has received Wisdom without measure, to make a Work, whereof the Jewish Temple
was but the figure, how Magnificent soever it was.

To Conclude, God governed the Jews by general Laws, the efficacy of which was
determined by the Action of St. Michael, and his Angels. In truth, intelligent
Beings are necessary to conduct Men, to reward and punish them, that by the
Laws of the communication of motions, the Hail knocks down the Fruit, which the
Rain had made to grow; this is not properly a disorder: Bodies are not capable
of good or evil, of happiness, or misery: But to adjust Rewards and Merits one
with another, intelligent Beings are necessary. In a word, God has established
all Powers, second Causes, visible and invisible Hierarchies, immediately by
himself, or by the mediation of other powers, that he may execute his designs
by general Laws, whose efficacy is determined by the action of these same
Powers. For he acts not like the Kings of the Earth, who give out their Orders,
and do nothing else. God, in general, does all that which second causes do,
Matter has not in it self any moving virtue, upon which depends its efficacy;
and there is no necessary connection betwixt the wills of spirits, and the
effects which they produce. God does all, but he acts by Creatures, because he
was pleased to communicate his power to them, that he might accomplish his
work, by ways most worthy of himself.

Thus has God done all things with Wisdom: I say with Wisdom; for an infinite
Wisdom is requisite to understand all the consequences of general Laws, to rank
and combine them one with another after the exactest manner, and foresee, that
from thence would proceed a work worthy of himself. It Is an evidence of limited
understandings, to be able to do nothing but by compounded ways. But a God who
knows all things, ought not to disturb the simplicity of his ways; an immutable
Being must always be uniform in his conduct; a General Cause ought to act by
particular wills. God's Conduct must carry in it the Character of his
Attributes, if the immutable and necessary order of Justice do not oblige him
to change: For Order is an inviolable Law, in respect of God himself; He
invincibly loves it, and will always prefer it to the Arbitrary Laws, by which
he executes his Designs.

THE END.
THE Author's Idea of Providence.
SEcond causes, of what nature soever, have no proper efficacy of their own.
But,

All their power is communicated unto them by God, in consequence of those
general Laws which he has established. Now,

All Philosophers and Divines agree, that God governs the World and takes care
of all things by second causes. Therefore,

The Providence of God is Executed by general Laws.

Nevertheless his Providence is not blind and subject to chance.

For, by his infinite Wisdom he knows the consequences of all possible general
Laws. And,

As Searcher of Hearts, He foresees all the future determinations of free
causes. Therefore,

He proportions the means with the end; free Causes, as well as necessary, with
the effects, which he intends they shall produce. Therefore.

He combines Nature with Morality, and with Divinity, after the wisest manner
that can be: So that the effects of the combination and connection of causes
may be most worthy of his Wisdom, Goodness, and other Attributes; for God wills
in particular all the good effects which he produces by general ways.
Nevertheless, the immutable Order of Justice, which God owes to himself, and
his own attributes, requires or permits, that he should sometimes act by
particular wills. But ordinarily, it is then only, and in those circumstances,
when one only Miracle ( i. e. an effect which cannot be the consequence of
natural Laws) does happily adjust a great many events and the most that can be:
For his prescience being infinite, he does not work two Miracles, when one will
suffice.

So that in the Divine Providence, there is nothing that is not Divine, or
which does not bear the character of the Divine Attributes; for God acts
according to what he is.

He is wise, his foreknowledge is infinite: Now, to establish general Laws, and
to foresee that from thence a work will arise worthy of these Laws, is a mark
of such a Wisdom, as has no bounds; and to act by particular wills, is to act
as Men, who can foresee nothing: Therefore God acts by general Laws.

God is the Searcher of Hearts: Now to make use of free Causes for the
execution of his designs, without determining these Causes after an invincible
manner, is to be the Searcher of Hearts; and it is not necessary to have this
quality for the execution of his designs, if he did determine causes after an
invincible manner: Therefore God ordinarily leaves J.C. Angels, and Men, to act
according to their natures. He does not communicate to them his power that he
may destroy their liberty.

He gives them part in the glory of his work, and thereby augments his own. For
leaving them to act according to their natures, and nevertheless, executing by
them designs worthy of himself, he makes it admirably appear that he is
Searcher of Hearts. Nevertheless, the limitation of Angels, the malice of
Devils, and both these qualities in good and evil Men, and many other reasons,
may oblige God to act sometimes by particular wills. For a limited spirit, tho
perfectly united to Order, cannot foresee the connection of free causes, which
is necessary to bring the work of God to its perfection. So that, where Order
permits, God must determine Angels by particular wills, and make even the sins
of Men, and the malice of Devils, to enter into the order of his Providence:
And proportionably the same must be said of Jesus Christ considered as Man, and
Head of the Church, and as Architect of the Eternal Temple.

God is immutable; now immutability in his Conduct, imports immutability in his
nature; to change Conduct every moment, is a mark of inconstancy. So that God
must follow general Laws with respect to this attribute, if none of his other
attributes do otherwise require that he cease to observe it. For God acts not
but for himself, but for that love which he bears unto himself, but to Honor
his attributes, both by the Divinity of his ways, and the Perfection of his
work. In a word, the immutable Order of Justice, which he owes to himself, and
his own perfections, is a Law with which he never can dispense.

Thus experience teaches us, that God governs the purely Corporeal World, by
the general Laws of the communications of motions. By these it is, that he
makes the admirable Vicissitude of Night and Day, Summer and Winter, Rain and
Fair weather. By them also it is, that he covers the Earth with Fruits and
Flowers, that he gives to Animals and Plants their growth and nourishment.

Experience also teaches us, that God governs Men by the general Laws of Union
of Soul and Body. For by these Laws, he does not only unite the Soul to the
Body, for the conservation of Life, but thereby he also diffuses it (as I may
say) over all his works, and so makes it admire the beauties thereof. It is by
these that he forms Societies, and makes, as I may say, but one body of all
People. It is by them that he teaches Men the truths of Religion and Morality.
And Lastly, by them it is that he makes Christians, absolves Penitents,
Sanctifies the Elect, and makes them merit all those degrees of glory, which
makes up the beauty of the Heavenly Jerusalem. When I say, that it is by them,
he does all this; it is easily perceived that I mean they are subservient
thereunto, in the Order of Divine Providence: For it is chiefly by the general
Laws, which give power to J.C. and the Angels, that GOD does build his Church.

Further, Faith teaches us, that it is by general Laws that God punishes and
rewards men, since Angels, who are the distributers of Temporal goods, have no
efficacy of their own. It is by them that God provides for the necessities of
his Elect, and resists the pernicious use which Wicked Men and Devils make of
that Power, which they have to tempt, and afflict us in consequence also of
certain general Laws. But all Powers are submitted to that which J.C. has in
consequence of the general Laws of the Order of Grace; for at present, the
Angels themselves who command others (for there is a certain subordination
among them according to the most probable and received opinion) are submitted
to J.C. their Head and Lord. It is under him, that they labor in the building
of his Temple. They do not now, as under the Law, proportion Rewards to Merits.
For the treasures of Grace are opened by the entrance of J.C. into the
Sanctuary. For it is true, that by afflictions the Saints are purified. So that
it is better, that J.C. give unto Men true goods, than that Angels should
deliver them from their miseries; for if good Men were not afflicted in this
World, J.C. could not give them the form they must necessarily have to be
placed in his building.

Lastly, further yet, it is by general Laws that God exercises his Providence
over his Church, that is to say by the Laws which make the Order of Grace. Laws
which give unto J.C. as Man, Sovereign power in Heaven and in Earth. It is by
J.C, that God has established the different orders which do externally govern
his Church. It Is by him that he spreads abroad inward Grace in Souls. It is by
him that he sanctifies his chosen people; that he will govern them in Heaven,
and recompense them according to their deserts. It is by him, that he will
judge the Devils and the Damned, and condemn them to that fire, whose eternal
efficacy, shall only be the effect of general Laws, which shall be observed for
ever more: By him, I say, enlightened to this end by eternal wisdom, and also
subsisting in this wisdom; by him being advertised by a revelation (whose Laws
are unknown) of all that which Order requires that he should know, and of all
that he desires to know of what passes in the World, to bring his work to its
perfection; by him lastly acting, by practical desires, by prayers, by
endeavors, or actions of an infinite merit, but of a limited virtue, and
proportionable to a finite and a stinted work; but by him perfectly free,
absolutely Master of his desires and actions, submitted only to immurable
Order; the inviolable rule of his will, as well as of his Fathers; and, if I be
not deceived, very rarely determined after an invincible manner, by particular
and practical wills; to the end that he may leave to him more of the glory of
his work, and make the infinite Wisdom of his Father shine more brightly, as he
is the Searcher of Hearts; that glorious attribute which no spirit can
comprehend.

Now if God acts by general Laws, it is visible, that we ought to ascribe unto
occasional causes, to the limitation, the dispositions, and sometimes the
malice of Creatures, all those mischievous effects, which Piety, and the Idea
we have of a good, wise, and just God, oblige us to say, that he rather
permits, than has any design to effect.

For example, if a Woman brings forth a Monster, or a dead Child, or if she
lets her Child fall, and kills it, carrying it to the Church to make it a
Christian; it is because God observes the general Laws, which he has
prescribed. We ought to ascribe this dismal effect to natural or occasional
causes. -- Super defectum causarum secundarum, says St. Thomas. God has
permitted this evil; since there is none but he can be the true cause of it, it
may be said in some sense that he has not done it; because it is not for such
like effects, but for better, that he has established natural Laws; and, if he
follow these Laws, it is because he owes this to himself, that his Conduct may
be uniform and carry the character of his Attributes. This is not, in the
least, to blaspheme against the Divine Power (as some ignorantly object) but it
is rather to blaspheme against the Divine Wisdom and Goodness of God, to
maintain, that he wills directly and positively these dismal effects.

A Man whose Arm is cut off, feels grief in his Arm: We all of us, sleeping,
have a thousand thoughts in relation to objects, which are not at all before
us. This is because God always acts in consequence of his Laws, and gives to
the Soul, the same thoughts and the same sentiments, when there are the same
motions in the brain; whether we have an Arm or no, whether objects are
present, or absent. The DEVIL tempts just Men, the wicked solicit good Men to
evil; Thieves and Soldiers Pillage and Massacre the innocent, as well as the
guilty: God permits this, this therefore ought to be attributed to the
malignity of occasional causes. For tho God does often from thence draw great
advantages by the Grace of J.C. since injustice it self enters into the order
of his providence; Ordinat peccata, says St. Augustine, yet these sad effects,
considered in themselves, are unworthy of his goodness: There is nothing but
good which he wills positively and directly.

And if he makes use of the injustice of Men, to speak as Scripture does, it
is, because it becomes him to obey his own Laws, which were not at first
established for such effects.

In short, the greatest number of Men are damned, and yet God would save all;
for he would and can hinder them from offending him.

God wills the conversion of sinners, and certainly he can give them such
grace, that they shall infallibly be converted, Whence is it then that sinners
dye in their sin, Infants without Baptism, whole nations in the ignorance of
truths necessary to their Salvation? should we rather maintain, that God would
not save all, merely because of these things? Or rather, should we not in
general seek out the reason in that which he owes to himself, to his wisdom,
and his other attributes? Is it not visible, or at least, is it not a sentiment
agreeable with Piety, that those ruful effects ought to be attributed to the
simplicity; in a word, to the divinity of his ways, and limitation of
occasional causes? For seeing that God acts by general Laws, since he makes use
of his Creatures in bringing about his purposes, and that he does not
communicate to them his Power, but by the establishment of his Laws, it is
clear, that all this proceeds from the nature and action of occasional causes.

But why has not God established other general Laws, or given to the finite
action of J.C. an infinite Virtue?

The Reason is, he ought not; because his Wisdom exacts from him, that he do
great works by the most simple ways, and that he proportion the action of
causes to the beauty of the works.

And I fear not to say, that the Eternal Temple, which is the great design of
God, and the end of all his works, is the most beautiful that can be produced
by ways so simple, and so wise, as those are which God makes use of to effect
it. For I am certain, that God loves Men, that he would save all; and therefore
if he does not so, it is because he loves all things in proportion to their
amiableness; it is because he loves his Wisdom more than his Work: It Is because
he does more honor to his attributes by the divinity of his ways, than the
Perfection of his Creatures. In a word, it is because he has the Reason of his
Conduct in himself; for there is nothing out of God which can hinder him from
executing his will. And if he should have a will absolutely to save all Men,
without having respect to the simplicity of his ways; it is certain that he
would save all, because it is certain, that there is an infinite number of
means to execute all his designs, and that likewise, he can execute them by the
absolute efficacy of his will, without the help of his Creatures.

I thought my self obliged to represent in few words, the Idea which I have of
the Divine Providence, to the end, that it may be easily judged, whether it is
not more worthy of the Wisdom of God, more agreeable to all that experience
teaches more useful to answer the Objections of the Libertines, better fitted
to make us love God, and unite us to J.C. our Head; and Lastly, more according
to the Scripture, taking it in its full meaning, than that humane providence
which supposes, that God acts always by particular wills, and would only save
the lesser part of mankind, and this simply and precisely because his will is
so.

Objections against the foregoing Discourse: With the Author's Answers.
Objection I.
THat cannot evidently be seen in the Idea of GOD, which has no necessary
relation to him. Now there is only an Arbitrary, and not any necessary
relation betwixt God, and the observation of the general Rules of nature. This
is one of the Author's Principles: Therefore it is not evident, that the
general cause ought not to produce its effect by particular Wills. Now,
according to this Author, we ought not to believe any thing that he says, if
evidence does not oblige us thereunto: Therefore we may stop here. This
overturns his new System.

Answer.
It Is true, I have said, that the general Laws by which God executes his
designs, are Arbitrary; and this is true in two senses. First, Because God
might have produced nothing: For the World is not a necessary Emanation of the
Divinity. Secondly, Because God might have dispensed with himself, from
observing the Laws which he has established for its preservation, provided
that Order would permit. But supposing that God resolved to act, I maintain
that he will do it, after the wisest manner he can; or after such a manner as
best comports with his Attributes: I hold, that this is not arbitrary, or
indifferent to him. For God necessarily loves himself: he cannot belie himself.
The immutable Order, which consists in the necessary relation, which is betwixt
his Divine Perfections, is his inviolable Law and the Rule of all his wills,
because God cannot will or act, but by the love which he bears unto himself.
Love in God is not, as in us, an impression which comes from without, or
carries him to any thing without himself. He is (as I may say) the Eternal and
Necessary Principle of it; he is also the end thereof, by the necessity of his
Being. This is clearly seen in the Idea of a Being infinitely Perfect, which I
have consulted, and which I think ought to be Consulted, least we should speak
of the Divine providence, too much after the manner of men.

Thus, in this Idea, we clearly see, that God can neither will nor act, but
according to order; but by the love which he bears to himself and his eternal
attributes; but according to what he is; but after such a manner as best suits
with his Wisdom, his Immutability, his Prerogative of being the searcher of
hearts, and his other attributes, as I have elsewhere explained. It is indeed
indifferent to him to act, or not; but by no means to act well, or ill. He may
indifferently choose his ways of acting, when order permits it; that is to say,
when the ways of acting equally agree with his attributes; the different
relations of which make that order, which is his inviolable Law, because he
necessarily loves himself: but he cannot choose those ways of acting which are
less wise, or less worthy of his attributes, there being an equality in other
things; because he cannot falsisie himself, because he infinitely loves his
Wisdom, and after such a manner, that it renders him happily impotent; that is,
incapable of making an ill choice which it may blame, a choice which may not be
worthy thereof, which shall not be infinitely wise, nor perfectly worthy of his
divine attributes.

See the 50, 51, 52, 53, and 54 Article of the Second Discourse of this
Treatise, the 3d Explication, the 11th Christian Meditation, the 1st Chapter of
the Treatise of Morality. See also the 19, 20, and 21 of this Treatise with the
Additions.

It would be to no purpose to send the Reader to other places of my Books to
make it appear, that they who make this Objection, do not take my Sentiments
aright.

It must be observed, that God is not free, or indifferent, as Men are. He is
free in a quite opposite sense. Men are free in the choice of the means of
their Happiness. They may take the worse. This argues a want of understanding.
And they are not free, as to the end. They invincibly seek after their
Happiness from without. This is because they are not self-sufficient. But God
is fully sufficient to himself, it is indifferent to him to act, or not
outwardly. And seeing his Understanding has no bounds, and he sees his own Law
in himself, supposing that he resolves to act, he cannot but resolve also to
act like himself, because he invincibly loves his Wisdom, and his other
Attributes, against which he cannot offend. He is not indifferent in his
choice, but when there is, on all sides, a perfect equality in the relations of
the different ways with their different works.

When I said, That sometimes, tho very rarely, the general Laws of Motions
ought not to produce their effect, I gave this reason thereof; -- Because the
Order of Grace, to which that of Nature ought to be subservient, requires, that
Miracles should be wrought upon some occasions. And I only add, by way (as it
were) of Subscription, -- Besides that, it is expedient Men should know, that
God is so much Master of Nature, that, if he submits to the Laws which he has
established, it is rather because he willingly does so, than by any absolute
necessity.

I did not mean by these last words, that the observation of the Natural Laws,
was arbitrary in God, in this sense, that he could without reason neglect them,
that he might work Miracles: but that it was expedient God should make Nature
serviceable to Grace, and let Men know, that he is superior to that which they
call Nature. For Men look upon Nature and its Laws as something necessary and
independent. The Mind of Man is naturally disposed toward Manichism. The
reason of which is, because natural or occasional Causes are visible, whereas
the continual Operation of God in them, has nothing in it which strikes the
Senses. Thus when God works Miracles, which astonish the World, one reason
amongst others is, to vindicate himself, and hinder Men from being deceived,
and from having a mean Idea of his power; as I have said in the Addition to
Art. 21. This he does also, to teach them who know, that the nature of things
is nothing but the will of their Author; that God is not absolutely
necessitated to do what he does, and that if he follows his Laws, it is because
he chooses to do so. For the only Law, which is not arbitrary to God, is
immutable Order; and whether he follows his Laws, or dispenses with them, it is
because Order requires it: It is because God always acts after such a manner,
as most honors his Perfections; the intelligible Relations of which make that
which I call immutable Order, as I have explained it in several places.

Object. II.
God acts not as Men. He does not well consult the Idea of God, who judges of
his Conduct by theirs. Men indeed are to govern their Designs according to
their Strength; they must compare the Means with the End, the Ways with the
Works: but this is because they are weak. It is enough for God to will, that
things may be. The Ways of God are his own Wills. So that he does not compare
the Ways with the Works, that he may determine his choice, after he has
compared the simplicity of the Ways with the perfection of the Work. But he
resolved to give to the World what Perfection he pleased, without troubling
himself about the Ways; because his Ways are nothing but his Wills, and all his
Wills are efficacious. To understand this Objection well, I desire the Reader
to consult the 13th Article of the first Discourse, against which it is made.

Answer.
I grant, that God does not form his designs as Men do. He does not, as they
do, compare the means with the end, through weakness. He is not like unto an
Architect, who has not Money enough to finish his Edifice. He compares the
designs with the ways, in wisdom, with respect to his attributes, and in that
love which he bears to himself. All the ways of executing his designs are
equally easy to him; but they are not equally wise, equally simple, equally
divine. A wise Man will never undertake a design which dishonours him, how
easily soever it may be executed. And of two designs, the execution of which
will unequally honor him, he will always choose that which will honor him the
most; because his self-love is always enlightened by his Wisdom. Thus, tho God
be Almighty, he neither does, nor can act, but by the love which he bears to
himself, and his own attributes, he always chooses both the work and the ways,
which all together do most honor him.

But, it is said, the ways of God are his wills. It is enough for him to will,
that what he wills may be done. I confess it. The ways of God are nothing but
his practical wills. It Is sufficient for him to will the doing of any thing, to
the end it may be done. But God cannot have two practical wills, when one is
enough. God cannot will, when it is not wise to will. And upon this account it
is, that the practical wills of God are not ordinarily any other than general
wills, whose efficacy is determined by the action of occasional causes. God
loves Men. He would save them all. He desires, that all should know and love
him: For order requires this, and order is his law. This will is agreeable to
his attributes: But God will not do all that is necessary, to the end, that all
may infallibly be brought to know and love him; because order permits him not
to have such practical wills, as are proper to this end. It is because he ought
not to disturb the simplicity of his ways; it is because he must fit his ways to
the work, and choose the work and the ways which honor him the most.

Although God need only to will, that the Church should be formed, to the end it
might be so; tho he needed only to will, that Men should receive grace, to the
end they might receive it; yet nothing is more certain, than that it is by J. C.
he sanctifies Men, and forms his Church: as it is also, that he governs the
Nations by Angels, and produces Animals and Plants by other second Causes. At
present, God acts no more, as he did at the Creation, immediately by himself.
This is undeniable. He acts by Creatures, in consequence of that power which he
has communicated unto them, by the establishment of his general Laws. Thus his
Laws, or his general, practical Wills, are his Ways; and his Ways are simple,
uniform, and constant; they are perfectly worthy of him, because they are
perfectly agreeable with his Attributes, as I have often repeated. When God
created the World, Men, Animals, Plants, organized Bodies, which contain in
their Seeds, wherewithal to furnish all Ages with their kind, he did this by
particular wills. This was convenient for several reasons; and indeed this
could not be otherwise: For particular wills were necessary to begin the
determination of motions. But seeing this way of acting was, as I may say, mean
and servile, because, in one sense, it resembled that of a limited
understanding, God quitted it as soon as he could dispense with himself from
following it, as soon as he could pitch upon another more simple and Divine way
for the government of the World. At present, he rests: not that he ceases to
act; but because he does no more act after a servile manner, something like
unto that of his Ministers: Because he acts most agreeably to his Divine
attributes.

Thus, tho God be Almighty, and all his wills efficacious; it does not follow,
that he ought not to compare the simplicity of the ways, with the perfection of
the works; for it is not to Honor his Power, but to Honor his Wisdom and his
other Attributes, that he does all things immediately by himself. In truth,
what wisdom would it be even to save all Men, and to make a World infinitely
more Beautiful than that which we inhabit, if he had made and governed it by
particular wills? What should we think of his Goodness, and other Attributes,
there being in it so many Miserable Persons, so many Sinners, so many Monsters,
so many Disorders, so many Damned? In a word, things being as we see they are,
he says, that he has no need of the Wicked, and yet the World is full of them:
He has not made Death, and yet all Men are subject thereunto.

It Is the sin, it may be said, of the first Man by which it entered into the
World: Very well. But why did not he hinder his Fall? Why did he not prevent
it? Why did he establish those natural relations betwixt Eve and her Children,
which communicate sin unto them? Why did he make all descend from corrupted
Parents? In a word, why did he not form our bodies by particular wills, or by
such wills did not suspend the general Laws, by which the brain of the Mother
acts upon that of her Child, and thereby See the Explicat. of Original Sin, in
the Search after Truth.
corrupts its mind, and makes its heart irregular? Why, I say, did he not do
this, if it be indifferent to God to act, or not to act by particular wills?
This is that which the Libertines demand, and this is what Christian
Philosophers should explain to them, to stop their Mouths. Reason, as much as
may be, should be reconciled with Religion. Hence it is that I Maintain it to
be more worthy, not of the Power, but of the Wisdom and other Divine
Attributes; that the World should be governed, and the future Church formed by
the general Laws which God has established for this end, than by an infinite
number of particular wills. Hence it is, that I assert, that God has not made
the World, absolutely as perfect as it might have been; but as perfect as he
could, with relation to the ways most worthy of his Attributes; but has chosen
the work and the ways which do most Honor him: For God cannot, and ought not
to act but to Honor his Perfections, both by the simplicity of his ways, and
the excellency of his work.

Object. III.
Whence is it then, that a thing so evident was never perceived by any of the
Fathers, or the most subtle Divines? Whence is it, that St. Augustine, who has
written so much against the Manichees, made no use of this Reason, that God
acts not by particular wills; that thereby he might have proved that there is
no necessity of attributing the destruction of his works one by another, the
generation of Monsters, or other effects, which are thought to disfigure his
Work, to an evil principle? On the contrary, it is certain that never any
person, did more than this Father, own that nothing was done in all this, but
by Gods particular orders, etc.

Answer.
It Is not just to urge the Fathers and the Divines against me, when neither the
one, nor the other are against me. If St. Augustine, or any other Father had
considered my opinion, and afterward refuted it, then he would truly have
been against me, and his authority might have been urged against my sentiment.
But where can it be found that St. Augustine and St. Thomas have opposed that
which I lay down; probably neither the one, nor the other, ever thought of it:
And therefore neither the one, nor the other, could approve, or disapprove it.
They answered the objections of HERETICS and LIBERTINES, after another manner
than I do: I grant it. But are we forbidden to prove Religion by all ways
possible? St. Augustine answered the Manichees according to the principles
which these Heretics received; and I answer the Heretics of these times,
according to those principles which they receive. Ought we not to speak unto
Men according to their Ideas? The Treatise of Nature and Grace, I have often
said, was not made for all Men; I pretend only to justify the Wisdom, and
Goodness of God, in the Construction of his Work to the minds of some certain
Philosophers; notwithstanding all the Disorders which may be observed therein,
and the Damnation of the greatest number of Men. Neither St. Augustine nor St.
Thomas, have written any thing, either for, or against the Cartesians, of whom
they had no knowledge. How then should we find any thing in their works, either
condemning, or approving the Reasons, which I have drawn from the principles of
these Philosophers, to convince them, that God sincerely wills the Salvation of
all Men, and that if he does not save all, it is because he loves his Wisdom
more than his Work? Assuredly it is to abuse the simplicity of the Readers, and
the respect which they have for the Fathers, to raise prejudices in them by a
many citations out of great men; and endeavor by their suffrages, to condemn
those principles, which probably were not known to them, so far were they from
rejecting them, as untrue. For at the bottom, all such passages, tho different
from what I say, tend to prove the same truths of Faith which I maintain; for I
have not, and never shall, I hope, quit this Maxim of the Search after Truth,
That novelty, in matter of Divinity is a sign of Error. I distinguish the
Truths of Faith, from those of Reason; and shall always seek for Theological
Doctrines in Tradition. But I shall endeavor to prove these Doctrines to
others by those Philosophical principles which they receive; or however those
whereby I may hope to be able to convince them.

St. Augustine has not answered the same objectijections, as I do; What follows
from hence, That they did not come into his mind? Not at all. That he did not
approve them? By no means. That he has condemned them, as contrary to the
Faith? Still less. It Is because he did not, perhaps, think them proper to
persuade those, against whom he wrote. For had I lived in St. Augustine's time,
and had written for all men, and not for some particular Men, who are accustom-
to certain Principles; I should not have spoken as I have done in the Treatise
of Nature and Grace, because common sense requires, that we should speak to Men
according to their Ideas, in a Language which they well understand, and
willingly hearken unto. No person can think that the Principles which I suppose
in the Treatise, were known to the Manichees; so that it would have been an odd
undertaking to have persuaded them of the truth thereof, that afterward they
might be convinced by these Principles, that they were in Error.

Moreover, all Men are not capable to understand these principles; to this end
a great deal of time, and application is necessary, without mentioning several
other requisite qualifications, which all Men have not. In truth, the greatest
part of public Disputes, such as those were which St. Augustine had with the
Manichees, will not permit Men to make use of abstracted notions, to give light
to the Truth. It was therefore better done, to deny, for example, That Monsters
made the Work of God less Perfect, by comparing them to the Dissonances in
Music, and the Shades in Painting, which give more Body and Life to the
Figures. It was much the shorter way for the Manichees, to show them, that the
mind of Man is too weak to judge of the Designs of God, and compare all the
parts of the World together, thereby to discover the just relations of them;
than to explain to them those principles, which are necessary to make Men
comprehend that certain dismal effects are the necessary consequences of the
simplicity of the ways, by which God executes his designs. These Heretics
would perhaps have learnt nothing by these principles, and their rebellious
imagination was to be humbled by sensible Reasons, and suitable to their
capacity. And if this was not enough to content the understanding, and convince
by light and evidence; it was however sufficient to oblige them to silence,
restrain their Pride, and to give satisfaction to the Catholics, who assisted
at St. Augustine's Conferences, or read his works with a pious disposition of
mind. I should my self fear that I should be wanting to Religion, if I should
use such like Reasons to satisfy those who should make such objections to me;
if I saw that they could not attend unto Truths much abstracted, and yet that
it was necessary to satisfy them, with respect to their doubts, wherewithal
they were entangled. And assuredly it would be unjust for any man thence to
conclude, either that I contradict my self in my works, or that I have not
those sentiments, of which I am convinced. For we ought to satisfy all Men,
the Simple, as well as the Philosophers, and keep both the one and other in
that submission which they owe to the Truths of Faith. This certainly was St.
Augustine's design in his writings against the Manichees; and it is also of all
the Fathers, and of all Divines: They all labored only to maintain the Faith,
by reasons fitted to the capacity of those they had to deal with, and according
to such Principles as they received.

But if some Philosophers, full of sublime Metaphisicks, come and tell me, that
God as positively and directly wills evil, as he does the good; that he does
not truly will the Beauty of the Universe, and by no means, the particular
perfection of any of his Creatures: That the World is an Harmony, whereof
Monsters are the necessary dissonances: That God wills there should be Sinners
as well as just Persons, and that as the Shades in Painting, make the Face to
appear, and gives (as it were) body to the Picture; So the the wicked are
absolutely necessary in the work of God, that the virtue of good Men may be
more remarkable: And that thus God himself is the Author of Sin, who wills it,
and works it in us, and by us, as truly as our good works; and that Freewill
is no more than a vain title of Honor, wherewithal Men generally flatter
themselves. What shall I answer to these Philosophers, according to their
principles -- That God does all that is real in the Creatures, and that he
permits nothing according to vulgar Ideas? Principles, which in my opinion, it
is impossible to overthrow, and which I should be sorry to see overthrown,
because they are infinitely advantageous to Religion. May I not make it appear,
that the word Permit bears a sense worthy of God, which is not contrary to
their Principles, and yet destroys their Errors? I cannot do it, without taking
another Method than St. Augustine has done. May I not, ought I not to quit the
Reasons which he gives to silence the Manichees, seeing that they are made use
of by some Persons in defense of their Errors, and insinuate them into the
minds of Men; provided that otherwise I use clear Principles, and which, at one
blow, overturns the Heresy of the Manichees, as well as Libertinism? For this,
I appeal to all equitable persons as Judges, what esteem soever they have for
St. Augustine; I also appeal to Epist. 143, and 148. De Trin. Lib. 3. c. 1.
St. Augustine himself, when he directs his Readers how they ought to judge of
his Writings.

Now it is evident, by my Principles, that nothing is more ridiculous than the
Manichees way of reasoning, who pretended to prove the necessity of an Evil
Principle, by all those dismal effects which a beneficent and a wise God cannot
directly and positively will, and which he is said to permit, rather than to
have designedly brought them to pass; tho ordinarily Men do not too well
understand what they say, when they assure us, that God permits, and does not
do them. But if my Principles overturn the very Foundation of Manichism, they
also undeniably confute, if I am not deceived, the most dangerous Errors,
which the World is at present much more ready to embrace.

I say then, without fear of blaspheming against the Power of God, and in
honor of his Wisdom, that he does not directly and positively will Monsters,
and that he does not produce them, but in consequence of his Laws, the
simplicity, uniformity, generality of which he ought not to disturb. I boldly
affirm, with the Scripture, that God has no need of the wicked; and that, if
he suffered the first Man to fall, and to communicate to us his sin, it is
because Treat. of Nature and Grace, Art. 29, 30, -- 34. of the 2d Discourse
Explicat. of the 5th Chapter of the Search, etc. and of Original Sin.
Order required, that he should not prevent it by the grace of sentiment,
seeing Adam had no concupiscence to overcome. It is because God was obliged to
cause Men to be born by the most simple ways of ordinary Generation, that so
his Conduct might agree with his Attributes, and all his Works might have
admirable relations to one another; but, by no means, that Sin might be
communicated, and Monsters produced. It Is true, it may be said against the
Manichees, that Monsters give a kind of Beauty to the World, and that God makes
use of the wicked, and even Devils themselves, for the execution of his
purposes. For all things, even Disorder it self, set forth the Order of
Providence: But Disorder always continues what it is. God permits it, because
he can make it serve diverse uses. But he wills it not, because he has not
established his Laws, that it should happen, and because he has not made Man
free, that he should not love him.

Shadows are necessary in Painting, and Dissonances in Music. Therefore Women
ought to be abortive, and bring forth Monsters. What a Consequence is this! I
can confidently answer the Philosopers, That these Monsters ordinarily come
from modest Women, and subsist but a few days: So necessary are they to the
beauty of the Universe! There are many more wicked, than good Men; reprobate,
than elect: So many Consonances are there in the Harmony of the Creatures!
Shall there be any Monsters in the future Church, and wicked Men in the holy
City? Doubtless not. Behold then the Painter's Cloth without Shades, and an
Harmony without Dissonances. Thus all those dismal Effects which God permits in
the World, are not at all necessary to it. And if there be Black with White,
Dissonances with Consonances, this does not give more Force.
Boldness to the Picture, or Sweetness to the Music: I mean, this does not, at
the bottom, render the Work of God more perfect. This, on the contrary,
disfigures it, and makes it disagreeable to all those who love Order. For tho
it may be said, that Monsters give a kind of beauty to the World, nothing is
more evident, than that this is only a beauty in appearance, and that, in
truth, the World is less perfect. The weak sighted, or the blind, make the most
stupid observe, that they have two good eyes. Thus blind Men serve to
illustrate the perfection of Man: But they do not, I hope, render Mankind more
perfect. Vice, in respect of us, makes Virtue more conspicuous; but surely it
neither adds to its perfection, nor its merit. God makes use of wicked Men, for
the trial of the good: but it is because, as I may say, he finds them already
made so to his hands; for they are no ways necessary to him. God did never
positively and directly will such Shadows and such Dissonances, tho he
positively and directly wills, that they shall be subservient to his Glory.
These are pretty Comparisons, which please the Imagination, but do not
enlighten the Mind; they are proper enough to inculcate that which is already
believed; but assuredly they cannot be used, as a Principle whereby Libertinism
may be destroyed, with what Eloquence soever they may be laid forth.

This is what I should answer, not to St. Augustine, whose meaning was right,
and who deserves to be respected for his edifying Answers, and such as were
fitted to the capacity of those he desired to undeceive. But this is what I
would answer to those who abuse his Authority, and draw from his Writings such
Consequences, as are fitted to overturn the very Foundations of Religion. I
grant, with this holy Doctor, that there is no Evil Principle, which
(notwithstanding all the endeavors of a gracious God to the contrary)
proproduces all the irregularities of the Universe, whether he will or no;
which was that which he designed to prove against the Heretics of his time.
But I am not afraid to give new Proofs, to convince the Heretics of this Age,
that God sincerely wills, that all Men should be saved; that he is not the
Author of Sin; in a word, that Monsters, whether in Nature, or Morality, lessen
the perfection of his Work; that he wills them not, and that if he permits
them, it is because he wills, that his Conduct should bear the Character of his
Attributes. I will never say, that God had a direct and positive will to
produce all those dismal effects which Piety and the Idea of a good, wise, and
just God oblige us to say, that he permits, rather than designedly brings to
pass. And in this it seems to me, that I follow the sentiment or inclination of
all Divines, and all the Fathers, tho perhaps they did not join the same Idea
to the word permit, because they speak to persons who did not reason upon those
Principles they do, for whom I have written the Treatise of Nature and Grace.

Object. IV.
It is great rashness, to find faults in the Works of God; it is nothing but
Men's ignorance which makes them do so; it is because they know not the designs
of the Creator, and cannot compare the parts of the Universe with the whole. If
any one should be so short sighted, as that he could see but a little part of a
piece of Mosaic Work, he would be tempted to blame the Workman, for having put
the parts of this Work ill together; but the reason is, because he could not
apprehend the beauty which they have all together. God makes the Succession of
Ages to go on with an admirable order. Every thing has its time, and ought to
have such a perfection, and such a duration. In a word, nothing in the World is
done, but by the Will of God, Monsters as well as perfect Works, etc.

Answer.
All this sounds well out of the mouth of St Augustine, speaking of the
Manichees. I should willingly make such Answers my self, did I speak to these
Heretics, or those to whom they would be satisfactory, or were not capable to
comprehend such as are more abstract. But since, in the Treatise of Nature and
Grace, I speak to those who have espoused Principles which the Manichees knew
not, I am bound to give other Answers to them; and this the more, because I see
they abuse excellent Principles, and draw from them Consequences injurious to
Religion.

Whether Monsters be, or be not Faults in the Universe; Whether God wills, or
wills them not with a positive will, this is much the same to me. I suppose
that they are faults, and that God wills them only indirectly; because this, if
I mistake not, is the most common Opinion, and which I think is true. Yet
surely it is lawful for me to justify the Wisdom of God to the Minds of those
who are of this Opinion, tho they nevertheless should be deceived. But how far
is this from being that, for which I composed the Treatise of Nature and Grace?
If I have labored to justify the Wisdom of God in the Works of Nature,
notwithstanding Monsters, it is because See the first Discourse of this
Treatise,
I then intended to justify his Wisdom and his Goodness in the Works of Grace,
notwithstanding the infinite number of wicked Men and Reprobates. It
sufficiently appears, that if I speak first of the Disorders of Nature, in the
first Discourse of the Treatise, and have searched after the Reasons thereof;
it was that I might render my Principles more sensible, and accustom Men to
search after, and acknowledge the Cause of other Disorders, more considerable
than the generation of Monsters.

And tho some may say, they admire Men do not perceive how much my way of
speaking ought to offend Christian ears, yet I fear not to repeat it: The
Universe is not as perfect as absolutely it might be, but only as perfect as it
could be, with relation to the ways most worthy of the Divine Attributes. There
are visible Faults in the Work of God, in his Work, I say, but not in his
Conduct. It is a visible fault, that an Infant should be born with superfluous
Members, and which hinders it from living. I have said this, and this I
maintain. I had rather leave this fault in the Body of this unhappy Infant, and
consequently in the Universe, than cast it upon the destructive intentions of
its Author. I know very well, that this Monster comes not into the World, but
by the will of God, as St. Augustine says, and that there is no need of having
recourse to an evil Principle, with the Manichees, that we may explain its
Birth. But I think I am bound to maintain, in honor of the Divine Attributes,
that it is not the Effect of a particular and direct Will of our God; it is
because he is obliged to preserve the simplicity of his Laws, rather than
hinder this particular disorder; it is because he permits it; or that tho he
does it, it is not because he directly and positively wills the doing of it, as
I have explained so many ways.

But, it may be said, What need of these simple Ways, and these Metaphysical
Principles, unknown to the Ancients? Is it not the shorter way to deny, that
there are any Faults in the Work of God? This, I answer, is true: This is to
cut the knot, instead of unloosing it. But I speak to those who hold, that
Monsters do disfigure the Universe, or that Sinners do not. I think I ought not
to tell them, that it is the Ignorance of Men, which make them look upon
Monsters as visible Faults, lest I should confirm them in this Error, That
Sinners are absolutely necessary to the Beauty of the Universe. For it is to
turn them from this abominable thought, that, from Metaphysical Principles
which they receive, I draw Consequences which perhaps may displease some
persons.

But how is it, that Men do not see, that this Answer, which is so much valued,
and is founded upon St. Augustin's Authority, is only fit to darken the mind,
tho well adapted to the understanding of the Manichees? Supposing it be true,
that it is, in truth, the ignorance we are in, of the designs of God, which
makes us find fault with his Works; what can we find in the World, which
deserves our admiration? Let the World be made how it will, it will be always
alike admirable; that is, it will not be admirable at all. Since we know not
the designs of God, that which appears Monstrous to us, is not so in respect of
him; it is because we are deceived, and our ignorance makes us find fault where
there is none: Very well. But by this Principle, nothing is Perfect, but with
relation to the designs of the Creator; now these designs are unknown to us:
Therefore we ought to admire nothing in his work. If I judge it an hand some
and becoming thing, that God has placed the Eyes in the uppermost part of the
Head; I ought by the same reason, to think it is an uncomely thing, that he has
placed them in the Belly of a Monster; or caused one to be born with Eyes which
cannot receive the action of the Light. In a word, let the order of the World
be what it will, I ought equally to admire it, or rather I ought not to admire
it at all, if it be not perfect, but with respect to those designs which are
unknown to me. It Is therefore to be wilfully blind to compare the Works of God
with his unsearchable Designs, instead of discerning their Beauties, and
consequently their Defects by the Light of that universal Reason, which
inlightens all minds and teaches the most Stupid, that the Eyes were made for
seeing, and placed in the uppermost part of the Head, that we might see
further: Is it not plain, that the perfection of a work, depends not upon the
designs of the workman, if his designs themselves be not agreeable to the
Reason which enlightens us. If all the parts of a Watch have such relations and
connections with one another, as are necessary to measure the time exactly;
this is a perfect work in its kind, tho it should be supposed, that the
Watchmaker had the extravagant design of making a thing good for nothing, and
if a Watch should not rightly point to the hours, it would have an Essential
fault, what design soever he had, who made it.

Thus a Monster is an imperfect work, whatsoever the design of God was, in
making it. Ought we not to find fault rather with the works of God, than with
his designs? Should we not rather leave in the World those visible defects,
which all Men observe, and which we cannot remove, and maintain that all these
disorders are consequences of the simplicity of the Natural Laws; then pretend
that God directly and positively wills them, and attribute to a Being
absolutely Perfect such designs as are unworthy of his Wisdom, his Goodness,
and his other Attributes? Not that I assume to my self a Right of pronouncing
concerning all natural effects: For I confess there are an infinite number that
are Equivocal, of which we cannot determine whether they do, or do not, render
the World more Perfect. But there are such Monsters whose Deformity is visible,
and which are so far from making the World more perfect, that God seems to have
repented that he brought them to Light, seeing he strikes them with Death
presently after their Birth; in this number I put not only those effects which
we call Monsters, but all Creatures which want parts necessary for their
preservation: I hold that God directly wills the Perfection of the World, and
of all the parts that compose it. For a World made up of Creatures, which want
nothing which they ought to have, is more Perfect than a World full of
Monsters, and a great many Beings which have not that which Reason teaches us
they ought to have for their preservation. But it should always be remembered
that all this is but accessory to the Question in hand; the Principle is, that
wicked Men are not necessary to the perfection of the Universe, and if we meet
with a great many of them therein notwithstanding God abhors them, it is
because (although he may hinder them by his Power) his Wisdom permits him not to
have practical wills for this end; and because his Justice subjecting them to
the Law of Order, they contribute whether they will or no, not to the Sovereign
Perfection of the Universe, but rather to the glory of its Author, and do
admirably set forth the wisdom of his Conduct.

But, it may be said, you do not consdier the the World in all Ages; you look
only upon the present time: Cast your Eyes further. And if you have a Soul
large enough, admire the Relations which there are betwixt this World, and the
future Church; betwixt the different States of the World, in different Ages.

I Answer, I confess that these Relations are admirable: But it is because God
wonderfully serves himself, even of those disorders themselves which happen in
consequence of the natural Laws; and makes even the ill use which spirits make
of their Liberty, subservient to his glory. Once more, it is not because
Monsters are necessary to render the World more perfect: It is not because he
positively willed, that the number of the Damned should be the greatest part.
Infernal Babylon is not properly his work, but the Devils. By the Rigours of
his Justice, the Wicked are reduced to Order: But he wills not their Malice,
tho he uses it to brighten, and set forth the virtue of his Saints. He figures
Morality by Nature, Sinners by Monsters; but he directly wills neither the one,
nor the other: He suffers them because he can reduce both to Order. But if he
suffers them, it is because the simplicity of his Laws require it, and because
he ows this to himself, that his Conduct should bear the Character of his
Attributes. That which renders the World admirable in all its Conditions, is
not so much the perfection it contains, as the simplicity of the ways which
have produced, and do preserve it. If the future Church was more ample, and
Hell not so full of Reprobates: If the Elect were still more Holy, and the
Devils less Wicked: If all the Creatures did Praise the Lord, and not the
greatest part Blaspheme his Holy Name; is it not evident that the World would
be more perfect than it is? The Devils therefore and the Damned render it less
perfect. And tho God corrects this disorder in his Creatures, yet nevertheless
it is a disorder, that the greatest part of Men should Blaspheme their Creator.
But God is not concerned that there should be disorders in Hell, provided that
there be none in the Heavenly Jerusalem; he is willing that there should be
faults in his work, but not in his Conduct, and in his designs: The Damned are
in disorder, but God's conduct, in respect of them, is perfectly agreeable to
order: The faults of any work oblige those who would judge of it, to compare it
with the ways, that, at the same time, they may admire both the work and the
ways; but the faults of any design directly suppose either malice or ignorance
in the Workman. Hence we are forced to say, that God has made the World not
absolutely as perfect as he could, but as perfect as it could be, with respect
to the ways which his Wisdom and other Attributes did oblige him to observe,
which is the Foundation of the Treatise of Nature and Grace. I desire it may be
examined without prejudice, and with that attention which is necessary to
understand it in its utmost extent, and with reference to all its consequences;
and then let Men judge of it. Then I hope it will have that effect upon them it
has had upon many persons, tho prevented with the sentiments which it
overthrows, without leaving any other difficulties, if I am not mistaken, than
those which have always been looked upon as incomprehensible to the mind of
Man. I do assure my self, that they will clearly see, that there are no such
certain Principles to prove by reason, that which Faith teaches, and to silence
both the Libertines and the Heretics, in a matter wherein they use to insult
and pretend to triumph.

Object. V.
What would the Author of the Treatise have by his great Principle, That the
Ways of God ought to bear the Character of his Immutability? Is it that God
cannot do one thing to day, and another to morrow, without being inconstant?
Cannot he will to day, that the Vine should put forth, and to morrow be
blasted, and will it for very good reasons? We must know the designs of Men, to
understand whether they forsake them, and want constancy and firmness of mind,
or not: For they may have a design, to do, at different times, things quite
opposite to one another. But who knows the designs of God? This would be a
very fit Principle to justify the Reproach which Pagans cast out against
Christians, That their God shows himself to be inconstant, by abolishing the
ancient Sacrifices, which he himself had appointed. This appears by
Marcellinus's Letter to St. Augustine, where he acquaints this Father, That the
Change of the first Sacrifices, was one of the things which stuck most with
Volusianus. Maxim, says he, quia ista varietas inconstantiae Deum possit
arguere. This Objection would have been a convincing Reason against the
Christian Religion, if it be true, that it is always a mark of inconstancy, to
unmake at one time, what is made at another.

Answer.
I do not say, that, to unmake at one time, what is made at another, is not
always a mark of inconstancy: Nay, in respect of God, this, I say, is never a
mark thereof. The reason is, because God does not ordinarily act by particular
wills: For I maintain, that God does not by such wills make a Straw, for
example, turn a 1000 times about; but only by the Wind, in consequence of the
natural Laws, which are his general Wills. I endeavor, by the uniformity of
God's Conduct, and the simplicity of his Ways, to reconcile infinite
Contradictions which we meet with in his Work; and thereby I silence the
Manichees and Philosophers, who judge of God by themselves; those attributing
to a blind Nature, and these to a malevolent God, those natural Effects which
contradict one another. The Lions eat the Wolves, and the Wolves the Sheep, and
the Sheep the Grass, which God makes to grow; and all this, because the Laws of
Nature, tho simple and always exactly observed, are fruitful enough to cover
the Earth with Flowers and Fruits; and furnish to the Sheep, and an infinite
number of other Animals, their food; to the end, that they themselves may be
nourishment to those which are their Superiors, either by strength or cunning.
I omit other Reasons not proper to my Subject. All this, I say again, is done
in consequence of general Laws; insomuch, that all these Effects which
contradict one another, do not imply any contradiction in the Cause which
produces them, because this Cause does not act; and ought not to act by
particular wills. Nevertheless, I have said, and do say it again, that to make
and unmake, and make again the same things a thousand times in a day, is a
sufficient sign of inconstancy; and if otherwise we did not know, that there is
no defect in God, we should naturally be inclined to think there is. If my
Principle should be rejected, -- That God acts not by particular Wills, but in
consequence of general Laws: I maintain, that the ways of God ought to bear the
Character of his Attributes, and that his practical Wills should be the same,
till the work for which they were appointed be achieved: the same, I say, with
respect to his immutability, if the justice which he owes to his other
Attributes does not oblige him to change. But I never said, that God could not
undo that to morrow, which he does to day, without giving Men occasion to
accuse him of inconstancy; because the same general Laws do produce an infinite
number of different Effects in the World: The Night, the Day, the Seasons of
the Year, every thing (says St. Augustine) is subject to change; but the Laws
which God observes in the course of his Providence change not: Haec omnia
mutantur, nec mutatur Divinae Providentiae ratio, qua fit, ut is it a mutentur.
The ways of God, that is, his practical wills are always the same; there has
been no essential change in the general Laws, since their first establishment;
the Bodies which strike upon one another, are reflected now as they were four
thousand Years ago; the Laws of union of the Soul and Body, and those of the
union of the Mind with universal Reason, are still the same now they were in
Adam's time; the sin of the first Man, has only deprived us of the power which
he had of suspending the action of these first Laws, by that strict union which
he then had with universal Reason, in consequence of other Laws which still
subsist, and make our wills the occasional causes of the Ideas which are
presented to our minds. Lastly, The Laws by which God has given unto good and
bad Angels the power to act upon bodies, and by them upon our minds, are still
the same in the main, tho the bad ones cannot make use of this power as they
would, by reason of the resistance of our tutelary Angels, and for other
reasons little understood.

Thus I am of the opinion, that the ways of God always carry in them the
character of his immutability, and that he never changes any thing in them till
his work shall be finished, if the Law of Order requires not that they should
have the Character of some other of his Attributes.

Once more, I never said, that what God makes, unmakes, and makes again,
implies any change in his Conduct, since, according to my opinion, all these
effects are the consequences of the simplicity and fruitfulness of his ways: I
only maintain, that if God should act by particular wills, what he does would
signify inconstancy in his designs, since there are things which he makes,
unmakes, and makes again, an hundred times in a day, without any apparent
profit or necessity; for surely, it is a mark of inconstancy, to undo that
which one has done, to make it again what it was before. And it is, in my
thoughts, to speak of God very much after the manner of Men, and very
unworthily of his Attributes, to ascribe unto him as many particular Designs,
or practical Wills, as there are little Straws which are whirled about with the
Wind, or Leafs and Fruits which the Rain nourishes and the Frost destroys; for
experience teaches us, that these Effects are only the Consequences of the
Natural Laws, which God has established, to make the World as perfect as it
can be, acting as becomes himself.

The Objection which the Pagans made, by asking, Whether the God of the
Christians was not the same with him of the Old Testament; and if so, why he
had abolished his ancient Sacrifices? This Objection, I say, touches me the
least of any one; so far is it, according to my Principle, from being a
convincing Reason of the falseness of Religion; for tho the ways of God be
always the same, the effects thereof may, and ought to be different, according
to different times. God gave to Angels the power of governing the Nations,
especially the Jews, in consequence of general Laws, which are his ways: So
that it is rather the Laws of Angels which are abrogated, than the ways of God
that are changed; for those Laws which God had given to the Jews, by the
Ministry of Angels, were to be abrogated at the coming of J. C. The Figures
were to cease in the presence of the true Messiah and his Mysteries: But the
Power which the Angels have over Men shall never be changed; because the
general Laws, by which God has given them this power, shall never be
abolished, unless perhaps when the holy City shall be built, and Jesus Christ
shall have given up his Kingdom to his Father, and brought to naught all
Powers, and God shall be all in all; till this happy time, the Angels, in
dependence upon J. C. their Head, will always work in the Spiritual Building of
the Church; and God, acting in them, and by them, according to the same Laws,
will produce a thousand and a thousand different effects; and yet, according to
my Principles, cannot be supposed to be in the least unconstant: For tho by
particular wills, he cures (as I may say) the defects which might follow these
Laws, when order requires it, (I have sufficiently explained this elsewhere)
tho he guides our Conductors, that they may faithfully execute his designs;
yet, since his ways are always the same, it sufficiently appears, that it is
not, through inconstancy, that he sometimes acts against the ordinary course of
his Providence, but because he is obliged to have respect unto all his
Attributes, as well as his Immutability.

Object. VI.
The Author of the Treatise says, That he is persuaded, that these two natural
Laws, which are the most simple of all, viz. That all Motion proceeds, or tends
to proceed in a right line -- And that when Bodies strike upon one another,
their motions are communicated proportionably to the magnitude of the Bodies,
which strike upon one another, are sufficient to produce such a World as we
see; I mean, the Heaven, the Stars, the Planets, the Comets, the Earth, the
Water, the Air, and the Fire; in a word, the Elements, and all Bodies, except
those which are organized and animated. This therefore would have been the most
simple way of producing the World, to have stayed till it had formed it self of
the matter which God had created and put into motion, according to these two
Laws, without employing therein particular wills. This supposed, I see not what
the Author could answer to a Libertine, who should thus accost him: Therefore,
according to you, that which is said in Genesis, is not true. For, on the one
hand, you maintain, It is evident, that God cannot falsify himself, and being
infinitely wise, cannot but act wisely; and that it would not to be to act
wisely, to do that by compounded ways and particular wills, which he may
execute by simple ways and general wills. And, on the other, you teach me, that
the World, such as we see it to be, might have been produced by these two
natural Laws, which are the most simple of all other: Therefore God has made it
after this manner, and not as it is said in Genesis, where the Creation is
described, as if it had been made by particular wills, and not by these simple
ways, which yet, you teach us, is unworthy of the wisdom of God. Would you tell
him, that God has his Reasons for this? But this Libertine will answer, That
there can be no reason, why God should falsify himself; why he, who is
infinitely wise, should not act wisely; why, it being in his power to have
formed a work, worthy of himself, by an uniform, constant, and regular Conduct,
he has chosen one, which is unequal, changeable, irregular, and which shows
inconstancy, and ignorance, in him, who observes it, etc.

Answer.
I should say to this Libertine, that he little understands what he says, and
he who undertakes to overthrow the sentiments of any Author, should take them
aright; for nothing is more easy, than to confound things, when the matters
treated of are obscure in themselves. According to your opinion (says this
Libertine) that which Moses relates of the Creation of the World in Genesis, is
not true. Fairly and softly, I should answer, you neither understand what the
Scripture says, nor what my sentiments are; as for Genesis, I shall not
explain it to you: But this is my sense; observe it well. I maintain, that God
always acts by the most simple ways, but it must be always supposed, that there
is an equality in all things else, whether in the ways, or in the works, as I
have so often explained; it must also be supposed, that Order does not require
that he should compound his ways, God never falsifies himself: Very well. But
to change Conduct, is not always to falsify himself. God may, nay, he ought to
compound his ways, when that which he owes to his Wisdom, his Justice, to any
one of his Attributes is more considerable, than that which he owes to his
Immutability; God would falsify himself, if upon some occasions he did not
change his Conduct; for he would not do that Justice which he owes to himself
and his divine attributes, and thus would not observe that immutable Order,
which is properly his Law, or the inviolable Rule of his proceedings. He would
cease to love himself, to act for himself, he would sin. You look upon things
only on one side: You compare the Conduct of God only with his Immutability.
Compare his ways with all his attributes, and you may easily comprehend, that
tho there can be no reason which obliges God to falsify him self, there may be
many which oblige him to change his Conduct: And do not ask me, in such and
such occurrences, what are his reasons; for neither I, nor any person else, can
be assured that we know them. This, in reason, is enough to silence this
Libertine; for tho I do not take upon me, to know the particular reasons, why
God ceases to follow his general Laws, or to act by the most simple ways, I
think I know, that he never ceases to follow these Laws, and that he never
compounds his ways, but when Order obliges him thereunto. And this, I think, I
have proved so many ways, that it is to no purpose to do it any more:
Nevertheless let us examine the difficulty to the bottom.

I maintain that God has made the World by the most simple ways: For I say,
that in forming the World, he has observed these two Laws, as far as 'twas
possible. The form of Bodies proceeds only from the various motions of those
Bodies which are about and within them. Now I maintain that this variety of
motions which is at present observed, and that of the Motions which have been
made from the beginning of the World, is the effect of the same Law of the
communications of motions, by which this Libertine would have had the World
made successively by little and little that God might have spared his
particular wills. This Libertine does not observe, that he puts into his
consequence, that condition, which renders it impossible, viz. That God gives
to the parts of Matter such a motion, as is fit to form the World, without
acting by particular wills; for it is evident at the first, such like wills are
necessary, to determine the first motions, which presently ought to be very
different; some toward the right, others to the left, these moving upwards,
those downwards, to divide matter into an infinite number of parts. It is upon
this oversight, his difficulty is grounded: Let us suppose that the World, as
yet, is no more than a rude heap of matter; it is plain, that Heaven, Earth,
the Stars, etc. may be formed by a little and little, (as this Libertine
pretends) God must needs, at first, put all the parts of matter into motion, or
into a tendency to move in a right line, some on one side, and some on another.
Thus before bodies could strike upon one another, that is, before there could
be any occasional cause of the communication of motions, it was necessary that
God should move the parts of matter, after infinitely different manners, by
particular wills. Now if it be clearly conceived, that it is the diversity of
motions which make the different forms of Bodies; it will easily be
apprehended, that God might form the World all at once, by moving the parts of
matter toward different sides, without employing therein more particular wills
than he would have employed therein, had he moved it after another manner,
which might have been more proper to have made it by little and little. Thus it
became God to form at once the parts which compose the World; and not to expect
till it should have made it self, gradually, by little and little, as this
Libertine argues. Moreover, it became him to give it the same form, which it
would have had in time, by the necessary consequence of the Laws of the
communication of motions; because it is certain, that the World would presently
have been destroyed, if God had made it after such a manner as had been
contrary to the Laws which might have produced it successively. Distinctly to
explain all these things, to those who have not considered the principles upon
which the objection is founded, would require a whole Book, but I don't think I
ought to stay any longer upon it; because they who clearly conceive the
objection will also easily see, that what I have said, is sufficient for the
solution of it: For it is enough to know,

1. That God cannot act by the most simple ways, or which is all one, by
general Laws, before there are any occasional causes, and that therefore the
first motions of the parts of matter on all sides, ought to be made and
determined by particular wills: For Bodies cannot hit upon one another, before
they are moved, and it is this hitting or striking upon one another which is the
occasional cause of motions.

2. That God might have formed the World, such as it is, only by at first
determining the motion of the parts of matter, which surround and penetrate
Bodies on all sides; and that also it was necessary, that God should move all
the parts of matter on all sides, that the World might be formed by little and
little in consequence of the natural Laws, and that therefore it comes to the
same thing; only there would have been very little signs of wisdom and a great
deal of useless action and lost time, if God had formed the World by degrees,
in consequence of the natural Laws, after he had moved the parts of matter
indifferently, and as it were, at all adventures.

3. That, absolutely speaking, God might have made the Heavens, the Earth, and
all things else successively, by observing the same natural Laws, which he
still observes at this day; for that which Moses says in Genesis might perhaps
be as well reconciled with the Cartesian Principles, as with the Opinions of
other Philosophers. Several Persons have already composed Books upon this
Subject, and tho they may not perhaps have succeeded therein, I know not but
that some others may perform it better.

To conclude, Above all things it ought to be observed, that God does not
establish general Laws, but that his way of acting may be the same, and not to
govern the beginning of hi^ action; for as I have said, it is even a
contradiction, that God should begin to move matter, by the general Law of the
communication of motions, since, before he removes Bodies, it is impossible
they should strike upon one another. Thus God was obliged at first to move the
parts of matter, and consequently to give to the World all at once by
particular wills, that form, which it was convenient it should have with
respect to his designs. It became him to form it so, as by the natural Laws of
motion it would necessarily have been formed, that it might be preserved by the
same Laws when he had established them; that is, so, as it would have been
formed gradually, by little and little, by removing the parts of matter in a
right Line, and afterward observing the natural Laws of the communication of
motions.

Object. VII.
According to the Author, God has formed Organized Bodies, by particular wills:
Now the Salvation of one Man, is more worth than all the Insects in the World.
Therefore, if God does not save all Men, it is not because he ought not to act
by particular wills. If it was true, that it becomes not God to act but by
general Laws, he would have made a World without Animals and Plants; seeing
such a World, might have been produced by general Laws, whereas particular
wills must be employed to produce Plants and Animals.

Answer.
It is certain that God wills, that all men should be saved, and that he does
not give them his Grace, but to save them. But it is yet more certain, that if
God gave them his Grace with a particular intent to save them all, they all
would be saved: Therefore God does not dispense his Grace by particular wills.
I have elsewhere explained and proved all the propositions of this argument,
there must therefore needs be an error in the objection, and tho I could not
discover it, I ought not therefore to quit a Truth, proved by every thing which
we know of Gods Conduct; because of an objection grounded upon that which we do
not know: Nevertheless, it is easy to resolve the difficulty. For the Reason
why I maintain, that God ought not to act by particular wills, is, that his
Conduct may be uniform, and thereby carry in it the Character of his Wisdom,
and Immutability.

Now, tho God when he created the World, did form the Bodies of Animals, by
particular wills, it is evident, that this does not disturb the simplicity of
his ways: it cannot be said, that herein, he changed his Conduct. Therefore God
might by particular wills, form Plants and Animals; and, in their Seeds, Iodge
that which might propagate their Species, in consequence of the general Laws,
without doing any thing unworthy of his Attributes. If God, by particular
wills, did again form Plants and Animals in the Seas, which the first
Proposition of the proposed Objection imports, the difficulty would be more
considerable: But I maintain, and always have maintained, that the Germes of
Animals increase, and Plants are unfolded, in consequence of the general Laws
of Nature. I hold, that all organized Bodies were formed at the beginning of
the World, so as to draw their nourishment and come to perfection by the Laws
of the Communication of Motions; and that it is for this reason, and the
relations which God has made betwixt the Mother's Brain, and that of the Fruit
she bears in her Womb. (It is plain enough, that I here speak only of the
primitive parts, for which we have no name, and which are unknown to us) Upon
these accounts, I say, it is, that there are to be found so many Irregularities
and Monsters among Animals. For I never said, or thought, that God, by
particular wills, forms every day the Bodies of Animals and Plants.

That which follows, viz. That, according to my Principles, God ought to have
formed a World, without any other organized Bodies, but those of Men, that he
might have made it by the most simple ways, shows, that the Objector does not
comprehend my meaning: For besides, that God might have great reason to form
such bodies, by particular wills, I hold, that it being at that time necessary
to determine the first motions of matter by such like wills, the conduct which
he then observed, became nevertheless simple, by this way of acting: and
doubtless his work is thereby made more perfect, for the wisdom of the Creator
is most visible in organized bodies. The Objector does not observe, that the
difference of bodies proceeds from the various motion of the neighboring
parts; and that therefore to form all organized Bodies, it was enough for God
to give diverse motions to the diverse parts of matter, from the beginning of the
World. But to do this, 'twas necessary he should act by particular wills, it is
true; but it was likewise necessary for him to employ such like wills to begin
the Chaos, and divide matter into such parts as would have been fit to have
formed a World without Animals. Thus it comes to the same thing, as to the
simplicity of the ways. But, on the other side, to have formed all organized
bodies at once for all ages, shows an infinite wisdom; whereas to have moved
the parts of matter indifferently on all sides, to have formed a World without
Animals successively, and by little and little, would have been no sign of
knowledge. In a word, I affirm, and it ought well to be observed, that there
needs no more particular wills to form Animals, than to divide the parts of
matter. But tho infinitely many more were requisite, besides, that these wills
were necessary when the World was formed, they could not disturb the simplicity
of God's ways, since they preceded the general Laws, and the striking of bodies
upon one another, which is the occasional cause of them. But the general Laws
being once established, God cannot, without great reasons, cease to observe
them. Thus we see, that God, in consequence of his Laws, kills an infinite many
Animals, and that he preserves none of them by particular wills. Lastly, Tho it
should be proved, that God does yet, at this day, form Insects by particular
wills, this would make nothing against the main Principle of the Treatise: For
St. Paul teaches us, that Men do not receive Grace, but by the intercession of
J. C. in consequence of the general Law, by which God would sanctify and save
all, in his Son and by his Son, as I think I have proved in several places, and
chiefly in the Second Discourse of this Treatise.

Object. VIII.
The Author says, that the passages of Scripture, which destroy the efficacy of
Second Causes, should be taken literally. Now these very passages, so
understood, prove, that God does all by particular wills: Therefore God, for
example, clothes the Lillies, and feeds the young Ravens, causes it to rain,
and preserves even the least Hair of our Heads by particular wills. For this is
the greatest contradiction in the World, that the same words of the holy
Spirit, should be explained strictly, and according to the Letter, where Second
Causes are to be discarded; and that they should not then be taken literally,
but looked upon as Anthropologies, when we would have it believed, that God
acts not by particular wills.

Answer.
This Objection is surely the weakest in the World: For why is it the most
plain contradiction in the World, that the same passage ought and ought not to
be explained strictly, and according to the Letter, in diverse respects? The
Scripture tells us, that God makes the Lillies to grow, and clothes them. Why
may not this, and many such like passages, be explained literally against the
self-efficacy of Second Causes; and favorably, and not so as to exclude the
necessary condition of these same Causes? God makes the Plants to grow; he
forms the Children in the Mother's Womb, says the Scripture: The rigor of the
Letter therefore signifies, that God does this by his own proper efficacy; but
it does not exclude the Conditions which he has prescribed unto himself that
he may act after an uniform manner. God makes the Plants to increase by his own
power; but it is in consequence of his Laws, by the heat of the Sun, and a
great deal of Rain. This passage, and several such like, neither speak of
natural Laws, nor the Sun, nor the Rain; but if they be rigorously interpreted,
as if God made the Plants to grow by particular wills, and not in consequence
of his Laws, a Man must renounce common sense, and the Scripture it self, which
in a thousand places speaks of Second Causes, as the ordinary means of
Providence. It is objected, That we sind no places of Scripture which prove,
that God acts ordinarily in consequence of his Laws: and I am seriously blamed
for producing no such Texts. But, it seemed to me, that I should have rendered
my self ridiculous, should I have concerned my self to show that which no
person doubts of: For supposing only, that the Philosopher's Nature is but a
Chymera, as I have often proved, there is no truth more confirmed in the Holy
Scripture. For all those passages which seem to favor the efficacy of Second
Causes, are certain proofs thereof. I have, if I am not deceived, demonstrated
in the Explication of the Efficacy of Second Causes, that my Opinion perfectly
well agrees with the Holy Scripture, and that it agrees much better with
Religion, than that which the prejudices of the Senses, and Pagan Philosophy,
has introduced into the World.

FINIS.

