A GOOD-WORK FOR BAD TIMES, Or a WAY to Make ENGLAND Rich and Happy SHOWING How
the CHARGE of the WAR (if it should continue) may be Born without any TAX or
PRESSURE to the SVBJECT.

AND ALL THE Poor and Idle Persons In this NATION May be EMPLOYED or Set to
WORK, by which the Nation will Gain more than Double the CHARGE of the WAR, as
is herein plainly set forth; And the Poor of all Sorts that are not able to Get
their Living by their Work, may be Better Maintained than now they are, without
Begging; And the Children be Brought up to Work, and Taught to Read, Write, and
cast Accounts, and be Virtuously Educated, so as they may be Serviceable to the
Nation; And also MONEY will be made Plenty, and TRADE Brisk: And some (amongst
a great many) of the vast Advantages that will Accrue to the Nation by it, are
here set forth. Most humbly Dedicated to the Consideration of His MAJESTY and
the PARLIAMENT.

By G. MALKIN.

THE PREFACE.
IT is well known that the Poor in this Nation, have a Greater Revenue than any
Incorporate Body or Society of Men in the Whole Kingdom have; and yet they are
so far from being Maintained or Relieved by it, That they daily Increase in
their Numbers; the Cause of which, some impute to the Defect, some to the
Non-execution of the Laws already in Force, others to the Misapplying and
Mismanagement of the Money yearly Raised; For any or all which Grievances, This
here proposed, will be a certain Remedy (if His Majesty and the Parliament in
their Great Wisdom, do think fit to digest it into a Law) so as it may not be
Stifled, but thoroughly Executed, for the Good of the Whole Nation; For it is
well known that in Foreign Countries, no people are suffered to Live idle and
to Beg, as they are in England; although the English Nation has more of its own
Growth and Product, and might Employ them to more Profit and Advantage than any
Kingdom or Country in Europe can Employ their Poor; And therefore it is hoped,
That His Majesty and the Parliament, when they do seriously Consider the same,
will provide such Remedies, that all the idle People in the Nation may be
Employed, so as that they may Earn their own Living by their Work, without the
Poor's Rates, or Begging, or Stealing. To set forth a way for the doing of
which, is the Intent of the Author in publishing this Little Book; which, if
put in practice will effectually do it; so as that in few Years there will be
no Beggars, or scarcely a Thief in England; for their being bred in Idleness
whilst young, is the Cause of there being so many both Thieves and Beggars: But
by this here Proposed, all Children will be Bred up to Work from their Infancy,
so as they will know how to get their own Living, without Begging or Stealing;
and besides there will be always Work ready for them, or for any that want
Work, or will come to work; so that none can excuse themselves by Saying they
cannot get Work, or else they would not do as they do; which is now the common
Excuse of most Beggars,^

TO THE Courteous READERS.
GENTLEMEN,
THESE few following Lines are Published by the Author, to show to the
Commonalty of England, That there is a way to make the Nation Rich,
notwithstanding the War, and all the present Wants and Pressures it now groans
under for want of Money (by which Trade is Decayed) and also by reason of the
heavy Taxes which do now lie upon it; all which, by the Ways herein mentioned,
will be taken off and amended, and the Army and Navy will be better Paid than
at any time yet they have been, although the War do continue for several Years
longer; and all this may be done without any Tax upon the People, but only the
Rates that are now paid to the Poor; and which will continue ever to be paid,
except the Nation by this Means be Eased of them; which if the Ways hereafter
set down, be put in Practice, it will in a few Years be; and also the Nation
will Gain by it near Double to what the Charge of the War is, as will appear by
this Little Book. And the Author does not doubt but that he is able to give
Rational and Satisfactory Answers to all the Objections that can be made
against any thing herein Proposed, if the Objectors please to own their
Objections, either in Print, or cause them to be sent to Him in Writing, with
their Names to them; And the Author hopes the Readers will not so much Censure
him for want of Method, rudeness of Phrase, or blunt Expressions in this Book,
as they will be ready to excuse Him for endeavoring to show his Love and Duty
to the Public good of the Kingdom, by adding his Mite to the Treasury: And
that all that truly wish the Prosperity of the Nation will put their helping
Hand to so good a Work, by Rectifying (rather than Condemning) what is herein
amiss, and by adding to it what is wanting.

And the Author desires all Courteous Readers, That they will please to Read
this Book throughout Considerately before they condemn it; and He humbly begs
of the Right Honorable House of LORDS, and especially of the Representatives
of the Nation, the Honorable House of COMMONS, that they will please thoroughly
to consider it; and that all private and particular Interest being laid aside,
they will so Act as may Raise the drooping Spirits of this Nation, and be for
the Public Good; and then he hopes the Almighty will give a Blessing to their
good Endeavors, which is and shall ever be Prayed for by

G. M.

A GOOD-WORK FOR Bad Times, etc.
WHEREIN A Plain and Easy Method is set forth to Employ the POOR and IDLE
People in England, and thereby to Enrich the Nation.
WHereas the Poor of this Nation have the greatest Revenue of any Body of Men,
yet they are so far from being Maintained by it, that they rather daily
Increase in their Numbers and Miseries, to the Great Nuisance as well as Danger
of the Public; To demonstrate which: The Poor's Rates about the End of King
Charles the II. were Computed, and then were 665 thousand Pounds a Year; and it
is too well known, that they have increased ever since, and that in the last
four or five years they are increased in some Places one Half or more (and
particularly in Parishes in the Liberties of Westminster) So that the Poor's
Rates may now (modestly) be thought to be Eight or nine hundred Thousand Pounds
a Year (if not a whole Million) by which it does appear, That no Incorporate
Body or Society of Men in this Nation have half so much in Revenue as the Poor
have; And if His Majesty and the Parliament please to pass into a Law, what is
here Proposed the Nation, after a few Years, will save all that Money which is
now paid to the Poor; and not only that, but will Gain by the Employing of the
Poor and Idle People, more than Ten times so much Clearly; as the Proposer
doubts not but to make appear plainly in this Little-Book.

For if His Majesty and the Parliament, please to Establish a Bank for the Use
of the Poor, and Benefit of the Public (in which private and particular
Interest that clasheth with the Benefit of the Public, may have no place, and
this Bank to be under the Government and Direction of Commissioners) appointed
by His Majesty or the Parliament; which Commissioners may be accountable to His
Majesty and Privy Council, or to such other Super-Intendants as shall be
Appointed by His Majesty in Parliament, as often as shall be thought fit; and
that the Commissioners may incur a Praemunire, if they Issue out more Bills, or
Employ them otherwise than Appointed; And besides the Account given to the
Super-Intendants appointed, the Commissioners may at all times be liable to
give an Account of all things done by them, to the Commons Assembled in
Parliament: And that these Commissioners may be Employed, (First) To issue out
Bills to the Value of Twenty Millions for the Use of the Poor, to be Employed
as hereafter mentioned, and Ten Millions, or more, or less for the Use of the
War, as shall be needful, or thought fit by His Majesty and the Parliament, the
Thing holding good in proportion to a greater or less Sum; But because of
Assertaining the Particulars hereafter mentioned. There may be supposed to be
Thirty Millions Raised in the aforesaid Bills for the Use of both Poor and War)
and the Poor's Rates may be supposed to Amount to 900 thousand Pounds a Year)
which Bills may, by the Sanction of a Law, pass Current in all Payments,
Barters and Bargains betwixt Man and man as Money does, with a Penalty laid
upon such as shall Refuse to take the same; which Bills may be made from a Half
Crown to Twenty shillings, and no one Bill for any greater Sum; and then these
Bills will serve all People's Occasions to pay any Sum whatsoever, as well as
Half Crowns, Five Shilling-pieces, or Guineas do now; For if these Bills pass
Current by Law, so that none can Refuse to take them for any Debt, or Goods
sold, then they will be as Good to every one as Silver or Gold) for although
they will not melt into Plate, they will purchase Plate.) And there has been a
time in England (as may be seen in Chronicles, when there was none but Leather
Money in the Nation, and that Served all People's Occasion (it passing Current)
as well as Silver or Gold does now; And we know in our own Memory, That there
were Brass Bodles set forth by Tradesmen, all over England, and passed for
Halfpenny apiece, which did the same Service in Paying any small Sum, as
either Gold or Silver would do, till such time as the Government thought good
to Prohibit them from passing any longer: And there will be no danger of any
Man's Loosing by these Bills; for there will be a Sufficient, and the best Fund
that is in the World settled, to pay them all off in a certain Time, as
hereafter will appear; And these Bills will be of the same Use (till Paid,
Cancelled and Destroyed, as hereafter mentioned) and as Good to all Men as any
Money; For if a Man take a piece of Parchment or Paper, Tinn, Copper, Lead or
Leather, for a Debt owing, or for Goods, or Estate sold, or for Rent to the
value of Five shillings (or for a greater or less Sum) and that piece of
Parchment or Paper, Tinn, Copper, Lead or Leather, will pass from him to pay a
Debt, or purchase any Thing that he wants of that Value he took it for, then no
Man can deny but that such a piece of Parchment, etc. is as good for his Use,
as so much Coined Silver; And if the Proposed Bills be made to pass Current by
a Law, they will do it; For it is nothing that makes Money pass now at a
certain Rate as it does, but a Law, Silver and Gold being a Commodity that
rises and falls, like other Goods; which we have lately had Experience of in
Guineas (to some Men's Loss) That it is only a Law that can Regulate Money to
pass as it does, and consequently a Law will make the Bills here proposed to do
the like.

And if His Majesty and the Parliament shall think good to pass this Proposal
into a Law, then every Parish in England and Wales, may have so many of these
Bills Appropriated to it, as such Parish Rates to the Poor amounts to in
Sixteen Years: which Sums may be laid out in Building one House in every
Parish, where all the Poor and Laboring People that want Work (whether Men,
Women or Children, may at any time Resort and be Employed in such Work as each
of them is most Capable of, and at such Rates as is usually given in that
Country or Place; So that none will need to be Idle or to Beg by reason they
can get no Work, as now is the common Complaint of most Beggars, which
generally say, If they could but get any Work, they would not Beg: And in each
of the said Houses there may be Conveniences, wherein the Old, or Indigent
Poor, or Children may be Lodged and Provided with all Necessaries; and also may
be Employed in doing something, according to their several Abilities, there
being few or none (above five Years old) but what are able to Earn something by
their Work toward their own Living; And all Children that are put into these
Houses to be Maintained, may be kept there till they be Fifteen or Sixteen
Years of Age, and be employed, so that they may Learn to Work well, and in that
Time they may also be Taught to Read, Write, and Cast Accounts, and be
Virtuously Educated, so as they will be Serviceable to the Kingdom in their
Generation; whereas now they are only bred up in Vice, or at best in Idleness
and Begging, which makes them grow so many as they are, and will certainly in
time, be the Ruin of the whole Kingdom, if they be not better Employed and set
to Work, whilst Young, to prevent it.

And in every of the said Houses, there may be laid in a Stock of Wool, Hemp,
Flax, Iron, or any other English Manufactury, according to the Genius of the
People, or the Employment that is used most in that Country or Place;
sufficient to Employ all in that Parish that want Work, or any that will come
to Work; And after such Houses shall be Built, and such Stock laid into them;
as the Building and Stock will amount to sixteen Years Value of all the Poor's
Rates (which if in England and Wales, they amount to 900 hundred thousand
Pounds a Year and no more) it will be 14 Millions, and 400 thousand pounds; and
then there will remain of the 20 Millions of Bills proposed for the Use of the
Poor, Five Millions, and Six hundred thousand pounds; which Sum of five
Millions, and Six hundred thousand pounds, if it be laid out in Land at 20
years Value, will purchase 280 Thousand pounds a Year; but if the Poor's Rates
amount to more than 900 Hundred thousand pounds a Year, then there will more go
in Building and Stock, and there will be less to purchase Land; and then these
Bills will be sooner paid, Cancelled, and Destroyed, as hereafter will appear.

Now it may reasonably be supposed, that one eight part of what is to be
Employed in Building and Laying in Stock for Trade, will be fully sufficient to
Build all the Houses (there being no need to build a House in every little
Parish; but that a small Parish, where there is but a very few Poor, may in
this be joined to the next Parish to it, to save the building of a House; So
that if there go an eight part of the Whole in Building, then there will be
Twelve Millions and Six hundred thousand pounds, to be employed in Stock for a
Trade, except some small part to pay Wages with, until such time as part of the
Goods laid in are Wrought-up, and fit to be Sold to Raise Money to pay Wages,
and the Charges of the Undertaking, and to Maintain the Indigent Poor, and
Children, and to purchase other Goods to keep up the Stock:

Now the Trade of these Workhouses or Colleges, may in some Countries be in
Working-up to the height and increasing our Woollen Manufactury, which is now
Transported before it is near Wrought to perfection, which is to the Great Loss
of the Nation, as may easily be made to appear; and in some places it may be in
the Linen Manufactury, in Making Linen Cloth, such as is Necessary for the
Use and Wear of the Nation; and in Making Canvis for Sail-Cloth; and in Making
all Sorts of Cordage, Line, and Twine for Ships; and in Making Yarn and Thread
for Nets; and in Making Nets for the Fishery: And this will in a great Measure
encourage the Growth of Hemp and Flax in this Kingdom, the Neglect or Want of
which, is a Great damage to the Nation, by reason of the Consumption of our
Money to Fetch it in; although at the same time we might have it as Good and
Cheaper, of our own Growth, if Industry were Countenanced and Encouraged
amongst us, and Idleness and Vice decryed; And the Trade in some places may be
in Iron-Work, in Making Nails and Boults for Ships, both for His Majesty's
Yards, and Merchant's Ships; and in Making all Sorts of Edge-Tools and Nails,
and all other Iron Commodities, both for Use here, and for Transportation: Any,
or all which Trades will be vastly beneficial to the Nation, if they be
Encouraged and ordered by a Law, so as to be Managed to the best Advantage for
the Public Good.

Now the Benefit that will accrue to the Nation, only out of the Profits of
this Trade or Trades, will be more than Two Millions a Year, as may be thus
Demonstrated: All Tradesmen know well, and it is matter of Fact, so that all
People may know it, if they will take Notice, That a Tradesman of any Trade,
that has 500 l. Stock to Begin with, can, and does out of the Profits of a
Trade, driven by that Stock (if he understand his Trade, and be careful and
diligent in it) Maintain his Family better, wear better Clothes, spend Higher,
and have more Money always at Command, than a Gentleman of 100 Pounds a Year
Estate in Land; and besides, can commonly give his Children better Fortune than
a Gentleman of such an Estate; and therefore, such Tradesmen must needs get
much more than a Hundred pounds a Year by such a Stock, or else it were
impossible for him to do it: And if the Stock in Trade in these Houses do Gain
the like in Proportion; and in all Probability it will Gain much more, it being
a maxim in Trade, that great Stocks gain far more in proportion than small ones
do; then if there be but Twelve Millions in Stock for Trade, the Gain by the
Trade will be Two Millions and Four hundred thousand pounds a Year; which,
added to what is hereafter set forth, will be Eight or Ten Millions a Year,
clear Profit to the Nation.

And that there may be a certain Fund and Security, That the Bills so issued
shall be paid in a short time, so as none can doubt there can be any Loss by
them; The Poor's Rates, and the Rents of Land here proposed to be bought, and
all Profits arising by the Trade (after the Old, and Indigent Poor and
Children, that are not able to Earn their whole Living by their Work, are
provided for, and the Charges of the Undertaking paid) may be settled to be
paid yearly into the hands of the Commissioners aforementioned (in Bills or
Money) and the Commissioners may be obliged to pay off, Cancel, and destroy so
many of the said Bills yearly, as such Sums so paid to them either in Bills or
Money, will amount to.

By which Payments all the Bills for the whole Sum of thirty Millions will be
paid off, Cancelled and destroyed, in less than ten Years, as may be thus
demonstrated; The profits of the Trade, as before showed, will amount to Two
Millions and Four hundred thousand pounds a Year, the Rents of Land proposed to
be bought, will amount to Two hundred and eighty thousand pounds a Year, the
Poor's Rates are Nine hundred thousand pounds a Year: All which Sums, added
together, make three Millions and five hundred and eighty thousand pounds a
Year; and it is reasonably to think that 200 thousand pounds a Year of that
Sum, will Maintain the Poor what they will want more than they can Earn by
their Work, and pay the Charges of the Undertaking; but if Three hundred and
eighty thousand pounds a Year, be allowed to do this with, there will then
remain Three Millions and two hundred thousand pounds a Year, which will pay
all the Bills in nine Years and half; And it may be thus made to appear, That
there will not need so much as 380 thousand pounds a Year, as afore-allowed to
pay the Charges of the Undertaking, and to maintain the Old, and Indigent Poor,
and Children; for there is no Old or Lame people so weak, nor no Children of
five years Old or upward, but may be Employed and Taught to Earn very near
enough to Maintain them with, by Sorting, Locking, and Picking of Wool, or by
Spinning of Linen or Woollen; or by Winding, Doubling or Twisting Yarn, or by
Knitting of Nets or Stockins, or by some other such kind of easy Work; in
which the Blind may also be employed, and those that are strong, though they are
Blind, may be employed in other Works.

Now to set forth and make appear some part of the vast Benefits that will
accrue to the Nation by putting this in Practice; they are as follows, and is
thus made Plain; There are in England and Wales more than Ten thousand
Parishes, now supposing that these Parishes one with another, have but fifty a
piece of Men, Women and Children, that now are Unemployed, and live by Alms,
Begging and Stealing (and I believe all people will Conclude, that the Poor get
five times more by Begging and Stealing, than the Parish Rates come to) which
fifty in a Parish, one Parish with another, are much fewer than they can be
thought to be; it being certainly known, that in Parishes in some Cities and
great Towns, there is more than Five hundred in a Parish; but at fifty in a
Parish, one with another, they will amount to Five hundred thousand people, and
if they one with another, Live now of Sixpence aday, which they now get out of
the Parish Rates for the Poor, and by Begging and Stealing, the whole will
amount to above four Millions and half a year: All which will be saved to the
Nation by Employing them, and they when they are Employed and set to Work, will
not earn so little as Sixpence apiece a day, which will amount to four Millions
and a half more a year. So that there is Nine Millions a year saved and got to
the Nation by Employing them, and two Millions a year as afore-shewed by the
Profits of the Trade; all which amounts to Eleven Millions a year; Besides what
the Nation will Gain by having our Commodities, for all or most uses made
amongst our selves, and by Working our own Manufactury to perfection, which
will much Encourage the Merchants to bring dying Stuff, and other Things
necessary to do it with; And if the Woollen Manufactury be wrought to perfection
before it be sent out, it will bring in double the Profit to the Nation, it now
does; And such a Trade will Employ and set to Work all other Trades, by Reason
it will make Money Circulate plentifully, which is the Life and Vigor of all
Trade: Besides, after the Bills are paid, the Poor's Rates will for ever Cease
to be paid any more, so that the Nation clearly Gains them, and there will be
the Workhouses and the Stock in them, with all the Profits that arise by the
Trade, and the Rents of Land bought all Remaining, which will be so great a
Revenue as will mightily enrich the Nation, and enable it to do very Great
Things for the Good of the Public in a few Years; and many other Commodities
will arise to the Nation by it, too long here to insert; But these already
mentioned, the Author hopes are Sufficient to induce all those that desire the
prosperity of the Kingdom, to set to their helping-hands to so good a Work; For
by this means there will be Money Speedily dispersed into every Parish in
England, and there it will be presently Laid out in Building and Stock, to set
the Trade a going; So that the whole Nation will be plentifully Supplied with
Money in a short time, the want of which is now so great a burden, that it makes
the Nation to groan under the weight of it; and it cannot so well and so soon
be Remedied by any other Way or Means whatsoever, as it will be by this.

But here some objections that I have already met with against this
Undertaking, requires an answer; The which objections, I will here assert in
their full force, and as near as I can, in the same Words I Received them,
which the Gentleman that made them will know that I do.

First, It is objected that although these Bills do pass for Current Money in
England, and so may pay the Navy and the Soldiers that are in England, and may
Provide all Stores and Necessaries both for the Navy and the Army, that the
Nation affords; yet they will not pay the Kings Army that are beyond the Seas.

Answ. These Bills passing Current for Money here, the Merchants may as well
make Returns by them, as if he had the Money in Gold or Silver, these Bills
paying any Debt, or purchasing any Thing in the Kingdom as well; but if Returns
should be Scrupled by reason of the Bills, then there may be allowed two or
thee per Cent. for the Return, and that Gain will cause Merchants to be Willing
and Ready to Return as much as will need; And His Majesty and the Kingdom, may
very well give it His Majesty, having his Money always Ready without delays, or
the Trouble of Borrowing, or the Charges of paying Interest, and will have it
at all times when wanted; So that the Country nor the Soldiers will not suffer
as they have done for want of Pay; which things have been far greater Damages
to His Majesty and the Nation, than the paying of Returns will be.

Obj. These Bills will hinder the Merchants from bringing in Foreign
Commodities, because they cannot carry Them beyond Seas to pay for others.

Answ. If Merchants bring Foreign Commodities to us, with an intent to Carry
away our Money in Specie for them, then the Nation had much better be without
them than have them; And if it be not to carry away the Money, but to Lay it out
here in Goods; then these Bills will be as good as Money, they passing in all
Payments, and purchasing all sorts of Goods as well; And this will cause more
of the Product and Manufactury of the Nation to be Transported: For now the
Merchant can carry away Money to Advantage; but then there will be a Force upon
them to lay out all the Bills here, because they will go in no other Country,
which will much Advance our own Manufactury and Trade, although the Merchant may
be displeased at it.

Obj. 3. If the Parliament should attempt to raise so Great a Sum as Twenty or
Thirty Millions, and the Thing should miscarry, it would be a Loss past Remedy;
therefore best to begin with some small Sum upon some other Fund, for His
Majesty's Use, and try what that will do before they undertake so much.

Answ. If the Parliament do begin with a small Sum upon another Fund, although
neither that or this can miscarry, being settled by a Law; yet people would be
apt to fear they might be served by it, as they have been by the Bank already
Settled; but few or none that thoroughly understand This, will fear the like by
this, by reason all the Money Raised by this, is wholly employed for the
Public Good, and not to the particular or private Interest of any Man
disjoynted from the Public as that is: And if Ten Millions of it be employed
for the Use of the War, it saves the Nation from paying so much, which they
must else do, if the War continue; and the other twenty Millions will be wholly
in their own hands, being dispersed into every Parish in England and Wales,
where the Fund also will be to pay the Bills with; so that none can fear to
lose by the Bills, for they may pay them themselves, by every Parish paying so
many Bills into the Office Yearly, as the the Poor's Rates of that Parish, and
the Profits in Trade do amount to until there be none left, and by that means
only all the the Bills will return to the Office, and be Cancelled and
destroyed in nine or ten years: And if the King and Patliament please to let
the Bank already settled be paid off by this, then the Nation will save all the
Money that now pays the Interest of that Bank; and that Interest so saved, will
pay off all the Bills that pay that Bank, in 12 or 14 Years at most; but if it
do go on as it is now Settled, it will be as far from being paid at the end of
that time, as it is now; and this will enliven Trade at once all over England
and Wales, and set all People to Work, which will make the whole Natien brisk
and industrious, when they see that there is Riches 10 be got by taking Pains.

Obj. 4. But who can tell whether this Trade here spoke of will gain so Great a
Sum as proposed, or whether it will gain any thing at all; for there must be a
great many employed about the Managing of it: So that the People employed may
eat out all the Profits, and then how will the Bills be paid?

Answ. It is true that no man can tell what any Tradesman or Trade will Gain,
before it be set a going and tried; and yet this does not discourage or hinder
any Man from putting his Child or Children Prentice, or Setting them up when
they come forth of their Prentiships: And we see very few that are Careful, and
understand their Trade, and have a Stock to begin with, but what live well by
it; And for them employed about this Trade eating out all the Profits: we see
no Merchants or other great Traders, that are afraid to employ so many Factors
in foreign Countries, and Clerks, and Book-Keepers, and Servants at home, as
is necessary to Manage the Trade that each of them drive, without ever fearing
the effects of this Objection; and yet we see many of them do grow vastly Rich
by their Trade, notwithstanding that they pay all necessary Servants: And why
this Trade may not, cannot, or will not do the same, is unaccountable; For
there is no particular Tradesman in England, that will have the Tenth (or I
believe the twentieth part of Stock to manage his Trade) with that this Trade
will have; and then if the Maxim be true, That great Stocks do gain more in
proportion than small ones do, then this Trade will gain vastly more in
proportion to the Stock, after all Servants and Officers are paid which will be
needful to be employed about it; But if it should gain nothing at all, as is
objected, but only employ the Poor, so as to get their Living by their Work,
yet the Nation will gain eight or nine Millions a Year by that, as is
before-shew'd; and the Bills for twenty Millions for the Use of the Poor, will
be paid by the Poor's Rates and Rents of Land bought in 17 Years and less; And
if ten Millions be employed for the Use of the War, all the Bills will be paid
by the Poors Rates and Rent of Land bought, in less than twenty five Years; So
that if 10 profits arise by the Stock in Trade, yet the Gain to the Nation by
it will be vastly Great, as is before Set-forth, by employing the People that
now live in Idieness, and by working our own Manufactury, and in gaining the
Poor's Rates, and Rents of Land bought, after the Bills are paid, and all the
Workhouses, and Stock in them.

Obj. 5. If so great a Sum as thirty Millions should be raised in Current
Bills, it would be more than would be needful to be employed in Trade, and
would make a Glutt of Money in the Nation.

Answ. If there were a hundred Millions Raised, it would be no Damage, but a
great Benefit to the Nation; for if Trade did not at first Circulate all the
Money raised, yet there can be no Loss or Damage by its lying dead; (but the
Nation does at this time sufficiently feel the Damage that comes by want of
Money) and the plenty of Money will be a means to raise the Price of our
Homebred Commodities; and that will make people more industrious in Raising
and Manufacturing them, and by that the Rents of Land will be heightened, and
the Nation generally enriched; And if there were Money sufficient to Build
Storehouses in or near all Market Towns, in Corn Countries, and to purchase
and lay-up Corn there, when at Low prices, and to Sell it out again upon a
Rise, it would always keep Corn at a moderate Price; and this in Cheap-Times
would enable the Farmer to pay his Rent well; and in Dear-Times the Nation
would not need to the help of Foreigners, who in Cheap-Times buy-up, and carry
hence great Quantities of Corn, and in Dear-times bring it, and Sell it here
again, and carry away, very often, more than four times the Money, given at
first for it, to the Great detriment and Shame of the Nation; that a Country
that has no Corn growing in it, should be able to Supply us in a Dear-time
with our own Corn, which was carried away from hence when it was cheap and laid
up; but I hope in time this may be amended.

Obj. 6. If so many Bills be set and pass for Current Money, it will cause all
the Ready Money in the Nation to be Hoarded up or Transported out of the Land;
so that when the Bills are paid off and destroyed, we shall be left destitute
of all sorts of Money.

Answ. There can be no just ground to fear that either the Money will be
Hoarded up or Transported out of the Nation, ever the more for the Currency of
the Bills; for the meaner Sort of People are not able to hoard it up, and
Usurers do not care to keep or hoard-up great (...) of Money to lie by them and
yield no Profit: the Gentry, for the genera^y of them l^ve so as to be no great
Hoarders of Money; so that it will be hard to find out people to hoard it up,
especially when Trade is brisk, and that Money may be profited by; And besides
that, these Bills when they are issued out, will yearly grow a considerable
quantity less: So that people with some Reason may hope that Money which is now
so scarce in the Nation may yearly increase, for to Supply the decrease of the
Bills, and by that means keep Trade brisk, and the Nation easy: And as to the
Transportation of Money, these Bills will not in the least further it; for if
the Merchant can transport Silver or Gold to get more by it than by our
Homebred Commodities, he will certainly transport it, whether there be Bills
or no; And these Bills will cause our Homebred Commodities to be better, and
more plentifully wrought-up; so that they will be more ready, and better
Traffic for the Merchant than they are now; and therefore they will rather
hinder the Transportation of Money than cause it to be transported. All which
is submitted to the better Judgment of the Judicious Readers, and the Author
hopes he may obtain pardon (from the most Critical) for publishing this, it
being really done out of the Desire he has to serve the Kingdom, and to incite
others, either to set this forward, or to produce something that is better for
the Public Good.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
COnscience Quieted, in the Case of Putting out Money at Use; wherein its
Lawfulness is Evidenced by the Laws of Nature, Scripture, Nation, and the
Doctrines of Divines: With a full Answer to the Allegations of Fathers,
Councils and Popes. In Octav, Price 12 d. Sold by H. (...) at the L^s and St^ ^


