Christian Conferences: DEMONSTRATING The TRUTH OF THE Christian Religion AND
MORALITY.

By F. MALEBRANCHE.

To which is Added His MEDITATIONS ON HUMILITY and REPENTANCE.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCV.

TO THE READER.
THE many pious Reflections which the Author of The Search after Truth makes in
that admirable Book, justly induced him to believe that they might be of use to
demonstrate the Truth of Christian Religion by evident Reasons. Those who
follow Des Carts will doubtless allow this to be true; for nothing is set down
there but what is plainly proved, or what is an axiom universally granted. Now
as it is of great importance to convince all sorts of Persons of the Conformity
of the Christian Religion with Reason, This Author judged that the following
Dialogues might be useful to that end; Since these Philosophers ought not to be
neglected. But it is also hoped that many others, not satisfied with the Proofs
deduced from old Philosophy, will be convinced by those that are given here;
provided these Dialogues be read with all the attention that is requisite to
understand a work of this Nature. This is all that is desired of them, for a
serious Application of the mind undoubtedly produces Light.

It may not be improper to answer a Thing which some Persons might think amiss
in the management of this Work; they might say that our young Erastus is too
learned and answers Theodorus with two much strength and Judgment, considering
his unripe Years which are represented to be between Fifteen and Twenty. But
these Gentlemen may observe that our Author supposes Erastus to be altogether
free from Prejudice; and this ought to be supposed, since Theodorus and
Aristarchus choose him Judge of their differences: They may also consider that
when Erastus speaks afterward above his Years, it is only some things which he
had read in The Search after Truth. And after all, the Design of Christian
Dialogues is not that of certain writings made only to indulge the Imagination,
but rather to instrust the Mind; and it is much better that Erastus should be
admired for saying Things seldom spoken by those of his Years, as they are now
Educated, than that he should give us occasion to laugh at his Childishness, or
at that Simplicity that so well expresses the Character of a young, raw Student.

There are some few Passages in these Dialogues where the Author, who is known
to be a Roman Catholic, has made his Interlocutors to speak like Men of that
Persuasion; But I did not think fit either to alter or omit any Thing; this
being a bare Translation which ought consequently to represent the Original as
much as Possible. Neither did did I think it necessary to confute those
Passages: For, the Arguments used by the Roman Catholics in behalf of their
particalar Doctrines are so inconsiderable, if compared with those which this
Author has offered to prove the Truth of the Christian Religion, that at this
Day, they do not deserve that Protestants should lose Time in confuting them.

As for the Translators Part, if you can pardon some few Faults of Print and
Gallicisms, of which such Works are seldom wholly Free, he dares assure you
that he has taken all imaginable Care to give here his Author's Sense just in
its full Extent, and as close and clear as it was possible in such abstracted
Notions.

The CONTENTS.
Dialogue I. THat their is a God, and that none but he really act in us, and
can make us Happy or Miserable Page 1. Dialogue II. Objections and Answers. p.
24. Dialogue III. Of the Order of Nature in the Creation of Man. p. 44.
Dialogue IV. Of the Disorder of Nature caused by Original Sin. p. 61. Dialogue
V. Of the Reparation of Nature by Jesus Christ. p. 83. Dialogue VI. The Truth
of the Christian Religion proved by other Reasons. p. 104. Dialogue VII. That
Christian Morality is very useful to the Perfection of the Understanding. p.
123. Dialogue VIII. That Christian Morality is absolutely necessary for the
Conversion of the Heart. p. 140. Dialogue IX. The same Subject continued. p.
159. Dialogue X. Reflections on the whole. p. 178.
Meditations concerning Humility and Repentance with Elevations of the Soul to
God. Of Man considered as a Creature. Of Man considered as the Son of a sinful
Father. Of Man considered as a Sinner.

CHRISTIAN DIALOGVES.
DIALOGUE I. That there is a God, and that none but him acts really in us, and
can make us happy or miserable.
Aristarchus. I Must let you know, my dear Theodorus, how little satisfaction
our late Conferences have yielded me: I have discoursed with you of my Travels,
and several adventures of my last Campaigns; you know them all, do not ask me
any more of them. You told me a word yesterday, which made such an impression
on me, that I am become insensible to all the things that have hitherto
extremely moved me: I find their Emptiness and their Vanity, and will have
solid Enjoyments and certain Truths.


Theodorus. Give thanks, Aristarchus, to your deliverer, to him that breaks
your bonds, and changes your heart. I have spoke a long time to your ears, but
at last he that put words into my mouth, has made you understand their
meaning. You have seen Truth, and you love it; you desire to see it more
plainly, that you may love it more fervently.

Think not, Aristarchus, that what enlightens, you and creates in you the
desire you feel now, is a word spoke in the air, which only affects the body,
or the sensible man, incapable of understanding. How many times have I told you
the same things, without convincing you of them? I spoke then to your ears, but
the light of truth did not shine in your mind: or rather, since that Light is
always within us, it did shine in your mind, but it did not enlighten it. Being
out of your self, you hearkened to a man who only spoke to the Body. You were
in Darkness, and would not turn your self toward him who alone can disperse it.

Learn then, my dear Aristarchus, to retire within your self, to be attentive
to Inward Truth; to ask, and receive the answers of our common Master; for
without it I assure you all my words will be barren, fruitless, and like all
those I have told you already, which you hardly can remember.


Aristarchus. I am willing to do my endeavor to follow you, but I fear I shall
not be able to do it; for I have much ado to understand well the things you
have told me now.


Theod. In the Passion that moves you now, you will not fail to give attention
to all the things I Will tell you, but you shall not always understand them, your
attention will hardly be pure enough, and your intention sufficiently free from
Interest, to be always rewarded with the clear and distinct sight of Truth.

The attention of the mind is the natural Prayer we make to Inward Truth, that
it may discover it self to us; but this Sovereign Truth does not always answer
our expectation, for we do not know how to make our addresses: We often ask it
questions without knowing what we ask; as when we go about to resolve
questions, whose terms we do not understand.

We ask it questions, and then leave it, not waiting for its answers; as when
Impatience seizes us, and our Imagination is displeased that we think on
things, that have no relation to the good of the body.

We ask it questions, and strive to corrupt it, as when our Passions move us,
and we will have its answers to agree with our opinions.

In short, we ask it questions, we hear its answers, and do not understand
them; as when our prejudices prepossess our mind, and it is filled with false
Ideas, and our Imagination is utterly spoiled by an infinite number of dark and
confused notions, that continually represent all things to us with respect to
our selves. Then God speaks and the body also, reason and imagination, the mind
and the senses; there arises a confused noise, and nothing can be heard.
Darkness mixes it self with Light, and nothing can be seen. For we cannot
always discern what God tells us Immediately, and through himself to unite us
to truth, from what he tells us through our body to unite us to sensible things.

The various Employments of your Life have filled your mind with a great number
of prejudices, that have imprinted on it a certain Character much esteemed in
the world, which is but as a Seal that fastens those prejudices on our minds.
You have read much the Books of certain Scepticks, who are proud of doubting of
all things, and yet speak of them peremptorily; and I fear that, like them, you
will have me hereafter prove you common notions, and receive as principles,
opinions altogether unknown to the greatest part of mankind.

It is also much to be feared, that your travels have too much dispersed your
thoughts, and given your mind too much of the Court-air, to let you hear with
attention some things altogether unknown amongst Travelers and Military men.

You do not believe at present that your Studies and Travels have corrupted
your reason, and prepossessed you with many unreasonable opinions. You have
some cause not to believe it, and I will not undertake to convince you of it
yet: But that hereafter we may reconcile our differences, let us take for a
third a young man, whom the conversation of the World has not yet spoilt, that
Nature alone may speak in him, and we may find who of us two is prepossessed.
Methinks Erastes who heard us the other day, would be very fit for this: I
observed by his countenance that he often consulted within himself to examine
our sentiments with those of his Conscience, and always approved of the most
reasonable; tho he used to stand as it were amazed and surpised, without
judging of any thing, when ever he heard you relate certain things which you
have read in Books.


Arist. You do him a great deal of honor at my cost, but I can find no fault
with it; that young man is so lovely, that besides the tie of blood, I have all
the reason in the world to be glad of the esteem you have of his Wit. I freely
consent: But here he comes in very good time.


Erastes. Gentlemen, will you be pleased to do me the same favor you did me
lately? Will you give me leave to stay here?


Arist. With all our hearts, Erastus; we were thinking to send for you.

I have just now told you my resolution, Theodorus, and you approve of it: Let
us Philosophize, I pray you, but let it be after a Christian and solid manner.
Instruct me of the Truths, that are essential and most capable of rendering us
happy.

How would you prove that there is a God, for I believe that it is by this we
ought to begin.


Theod. The Existence of God may be proved a thousand ways, for there is
nothing but may serve to demonstrate it; and I wonder how a person of your
parts, so well read in Antiquity, and so accomplished every way, seems not to be
convinced of it.


Arist. I am convinced of it by Faith, but I must confess I am not fully
convinced of it by Reason.


Theod. If you speak as you think, you are convinced of it neither by reason,
nor by Faith. For do you not know that the assurance of Faith comes from the
authority of a God that speaks, and who can never deceive us. If then you are
not convinced by reason that there is a God, how will you be convinced that he
has spoke? Can you know that he has spoke, without knowing that he is? And
can you know that the things which he has revealed us are true, without
knowing that he is Infallible, and never deceives us.


Arist. I do not examine things so narrowly; and the reason why I believe it,
is because I will believe it, and that I have been told so all my life. But let
us see your proofs.


Theod. Your Faith has much of the man in it, and your answers show much
Indifference. I designed to give you the most simple and natural proofs of the
Existence of God, but I find by the disposition of your mind, they would not be
the most convincing: You must have sensible proofs. Here are many things about
us; which of them shall I make use of to prove you that there is a God? Shall
it be this Fire that delights us? this Light that illuminates us? the nature of
Words, by whose means we discourse together? for, as I told you just now, there
is nothing but may serve to show the existence of its Author, provided we
consider it with all possible attention.

God acts incessantly in and by all his works: It Is he that illuminates us by
this outward light, that delights us by the warmth of this fire, and discourses
with us when we think we converse together. God neither produces nor preserves
any creature, but which may cause those to know him who make good use of their
reason. I will convince you of it presently: In the mean time, Erastus, take
heed that neither of us prepossess you.

Answer me, Aristarchus, What does Fire do in you?


Arist. It warms me.


Theod. Then Fire causes a pleasure in you?


Arist. I own it.


Theod. What causes in us some pleasure, makes us in some measure happy.


Arist. It is true.


Theod. Then what makes us in some manner happy, is in some manner our good;
and in some manner above us; and deserves in some manner love and veneration.
What think you of it, Erastus, is Fire in some manner above you? Can Fire act
in you? Can it cause in you a pleasure it has not, it feels not, it knows not,
and cause it in you, that is to say, in a Spirit, in a being infinitely above
it?


Erast. I do not think so.


Theod. See then, Aristarchus, what you have to answer.


Arist. You conclude too fast: And I see what you drive at. I distinguish, Fire
causes heat, but it does not cause pleasure. Pleasure is a sentiment of the
Soul, which the Soul causes in it self: When its body is well disposed, the
Soul rejoices at it, and its joy is its pleasure; but Fire causes the heat we
feel; for as it contains it in it self, it can disperse it without.


Theod. Can you conceive, Erastus, that your Soul causes in it self its
pleasure, and causes it when it knows its body is well disposed? Can you know
what changes happen now to your body? Does the pleasure you receive when you
warm your self, delay its coming, till you find out what passes in your hands?
Does it stay also for the orders of your Soul? and do you feel that this
depends from you as an effect depends from its cause? Do you also apprehend
well that Fire really contains this heat you feel? This heat you only feel when
your hands are out of the Fire; for whilst your hands are in the Fire, which
according to Aristarchus, contains heat, you do not feel it, but a very great
pain, which perhaps is not in the Fire.

When you retire within your self, to consult your Reason, do you well conceive
that Matter is capable of any modifications differing from Motion and Figure?
Do you believe that it is by heat that Fire separates the particles of Wood
when it burns it? That by heat it agitates the particles of Water when it makes
it boil? That by heat it purifies Metals when it melts them? Extracts Water out
of Mud when it drys it? Drives with violence Cannon-balls, and overthrows by
Mines the Walls of Cities, and the highest Towers? In short, have you ever
found in Fire some effect that may prove it is possessed of heat?


Erast. I confess I cannot easily understand how this heat I feel is capable of
producing any of the effects you have now mentioned: And I cannot even see any
relation between this heat, and any of the effects of Fire. I have sufficiently
experienced by its effects that Fire has motion, but I have not found yet that
it has heat.


Theod. You will do well, Aristarchus, to consider on what Erastus said now: In
the mean time hear the answers he will make me. If I held this Thorn hard upon
your hand, Erastus, what should I do to it?


Erast. As it is sharp, I imagine you would make a hole in it.


Theod. What else should I do to it?


Erast. If I ought to speak but what I know, you would do nothing else to it.


Theod. But what should you feel?


Erast. Perhaps I should feel some pain.


Theod. This Perhaps is very Judicious. But if I drew this Feather over your
Lips, what should I do to them?


Erast. You should move their fibers.


Theod. What else should I do to them?


Erast. Nothing else.


Theod. But what should you feel?


Erast. I don't know.


Theod. Try.


Erast. I feel a kind of a troublesome pleasure, which may be called
Titillation.


Theod. What think you, Aristarchus, of the answers of Erastus? Are they true?
Can any false consequence be directly deduced from them? He speaks but what he
understands from that Inward Master whom he faithfully consults. Mark how he
applys himself.

Let us go on, Erastus; What does this fire produce in your hand?


Erast. Hold, Sir, I have seen them lay much Wood in the Chimney, this Wood is
no more there; Then it is gone.


Arist. It Is burnt, it is annihilated.


Erast. That Is a story, annihilated -- I did not see it go out; it must then
have gone in invisible particles. It could not go from thence without changing
its place, that is to say without motion. The Wood then is continually divided,
and its particles move themselves from the Chimney toward my hands. Those
particles are bodies; they strike against my hands. I have it, Theodorus. Fire
without doubt moves the fibers of my hands.


Theod. Is that all Erastus?


Erast. It Is all I know. I say nothing but what I see. Am I to blame?


Theod. But, pray, do you feel nothing?


Erast. I feel some heat.


Theod. Come nearer the fire, yet nearer, a little more; what do you feel?


Erast. Some pain.


Theod. It Is enough. Whence proceeds this heat that pleases you, and this pain
that scorches you? This heat that makes you more pleased and more happy, this
pain that disturbs you, and makes you in some manner unhappy?


Erast. I do not know it.


Theod. Do you believe that fire is above you, and can make you happy or
miserable?


Erast. No certainly. I only believe here what I see. I see that Fire can move
variously the Fibers of my hand; for bodies may (methinks) act on bodies, but
they cannot communicate sensations which they have not. Can a Thorn infuse pain
by the little hole it makes in the flesh? Can a Feather spread titillation on
my Lips when it goes over them. No, Theodorus, I do not believe that any one of
all the bodies about me, is able to make me more happy or unhappy.


Theod. Well said, Erastus, I am sure you will never worship the Fire, nor even
the Sun, You are already wiser than those famous Chaldeans, illustrious
Brachmanes and ancient Druids who worshipped the Sun.


Erast. How! Were there ever men mad enough to esteem the Fire or the Sun as
Deities?


Theod. Yes, Erastus. Not some Men or some Nations, but almost all Nations, and
the most famous too, as the Greeks, the Persians, the Romans, and several
others. You may be informed by Aristarchus, who has read learned Books, he
will talk with you whole days together of the different manners in which
several Nations have worshipped Fire and the Sun.


Erast. I do not much care to know the follies of others. Be pleased to go on
with your Questions.


Theod. I will presently, Erastus. But by the way, Aristarchus, have you
compared your answers with those of Erastus? Have you observed how he applies
himself, how he consults the Master that teaches him in the deepest recess of
his reason, he never answers but after him, he warrants nothing but what he
sees; and for that reason I defy you to draw directly any false consequences
from his answers. But if you mind it, those that you made me before to the same
questions, may in a manner justify the Religion of those who place Fire, or
the Sun among the Gods. For if Fire or the Sun can reward and punish you, make
you happy or unhappy, they must be above you, they must have power over you,
and you ought to pay submission to them; for it is an inviolable Law that
inferior things shall be subservient to superior. I need tell you no more of
it: I only assure you, that the Pagans never reasoned like Erastus, and that in
all likelihood they argued like you, since we see by their Religion, that they
have followed the same thread of consequences I have drawn now from your Answers.

Observe it, Aristarchus, when God speaks, when inward Truth answers, there is
no creature but guides us to the Creator. You Will understand this well
hereafter. But when we judge rashly of things, without consulting any other
master than our imagination, or the doctrine of certain false-learned, it is
impossible for us to come near God.


Arist. I cannot express to you the pleasure I find in this new way of
Philosophising. I rejoice to see that Children and ignorant men are the most
capable of true wisdom; and I am charmed to learn from Erastus things on which
I had not so much as thought before. His answers instruct me more than the high
reasonings of our Philosophers; and methinks every word he speaks spreads in my
mind a pure Light that does not dazzle by its luster, and yet disperses all my
Darkness.


Theod. I will go on then with my questions to Erastus, since you are so well
pleased with hearing him. Hear me my dear Erastus, you told me just now, that
Fire can move variously the particles of your hand, because bodies can act on
bodies. You believe then that bodies have a power to move those they meet.


Erast. My Eyes tell me so, but my mind does not tell me so yet, for I have not
yet examined that question.


Theod. Well then, answer me; Has a body power to move it self?


Erast. I do not believe it.


Theod. Is then the power that moves bodies distinguished from these bodies?


Erast. I don't know.


Theod. Take notice, Erastus, that I do not speak of motion. The local motion
of a body is a kind of being of that body, with respect to those that are about
it: I do not speak of that, but of the power which causes it. I ask you if this
power is something that is corporeal, and if it is in the power of bodies to
communicate it?


Erast. I do not believe it, for if it were any thing corporeal, it would not
be able to move it self. No, Theodorus, I do not believe that bodies can
communicate to those they meet, a power which they have not themselves; a power
they could not communicate though they had it: In short, a power whose
diffusion and communication they could not be able to direct in a manner as
regular as is that which we see; since bodies do not even know either the
bigness or motion of those they meet. It seems to me, that an intelligent
being, and one and the same intelligent being, must produce and regulate all
the motions of matter, since the communication of the motion is always the same
in the same accidents. For all bodies or many intelligent beings, would not
easily agree together to act always after the same manner in the communication
of motions.


Arist. Methinks Erastus runs too fast and loses himself. For it seems to me,
that those things which are always done the same way, are not done by an
intelligent being, but by a blind action, caeco impetu naturae.


Theod. You mistake your self, Erastus is not out; and you ought not to
attribute to a blind impetuosity, that which comes from the immutability of the
author of nature. I see you do not know that it is the mark of an excellent
workman to produce admirable effects, by acting always after the same manner,
and by the most simple means. I will not undertake to lead you to God that way;
it is too difficult, and does not afford us a notion of God so useful to
morality. I would discover him to you as the Sole Author of the felicity of the
Just, and of the misery of the Wicked, and in a word as being alone able to act
in us. For I ought not only to demonstrate to you that he is, (which certainly
is but seldom doubted of) but I ought also to demonstrate to you that he is our
good in all respects, for that is a thing which is not sufficiently known.

I return to Erastus. You are persuaded, my dear Erastus, that neither Fire,
nor the Sun, nor any one of those bodies that surround you, are the true causes
of what you feel at their presence; and in this you are wiser than all those
who have worshipped Fire or the Sun. You do not even believe that bodies have
any natural power to move those they meet; and in that too you see more clearly
than those who worship the Heavens, the Elements, and all those bodies which
Aristotle called divine, because he believed they had in them a power to move
themselves, and to produce by this motion all the good or evils whereof men are
capable. But it is not sufficient to know that bodies do not act on you, you
must also discover the true cause of all that is produced in you. You feel
warmth and pain at the presence of Fire. Now Fire does not produce this warmth
and this pain in you. What must it be then Erastus?


Erast. I must confess to you that I know nothing of it.


Theod. Is it not your soul who acts on her self; who afflicts her self, when
Fire separates the particles of the body she loves? or who rejoices when the
same fire produces in her body a motion proper to keep you alive, and help the
circulation of the blood?


Erast. I do not believe it.


Theod. Why, Pray?


Erast. Because the soul does not know that the fire moves or separates the
fibers of the body. I felt heat and pain before I had learnt by the reflections
I made what fire is able to produce on my body: And do not believe that Clowns,
who know nothing of what fire does operate in them, are free from pain when
they are burnt. Besides, I do not know what is the motion that is proper to
keep me alive, and help the circulation of the blood. And if I were to feel no
heat till I knew it, perhaps I should never feel any. In short, when I happen
to burn my self by inadvertency, I feel pain before all things. I might perhaps
conclude, by the pain I feel, that there is in my body some motion at work
which offends it; but 'its evident that the knowledge of those motions neither
precede nor cause any pain.


Theod. Your Reasons, Erastus, are altogether sound. But what think you of them
Aristarchus?


Arist. They seem to me probable enough. However, Erastus, how can you tell but
that your soul has a certain knowledge of instinct, which discovers to her in
a moment all that happens in her body? Answer me, Erastus -- Answer me quickly
then. It Is a strange thing you never answer me readily.


Erast. I do not understand your meaning; but all that I can say to you is,
that when I know actually something, I am sure that I do know it, for I am not
distinguished from my self. If my soul had actually some knowledge of instinct,
or whatsoever other you please (for I don't understand that word very well) I
should know it. Yet now that I come near the fire, I do not know that I have
the knowledge of the motions that are actually produced in my hand, tho I feel
in it sometimes a pain, and sometimes a kind of pleasure or titillation. There
is not then actually in my soul a knowledge of instinct, nor any other. I
cannot tell if you are satisfied.


Arist. But little truly.


Theod. Shall I tell you why you are not well satisfied. It Is because Erastus
has made a clear and evident answer to an Objection that was not so. If you
clearly understood what you object, Erastus would answer you both clearly and
quickly. If hereafter you desire to receive from him more satisfaction than you
have had hitherto, consider well what you intend to ask him. He cannot answer
you speedily and clearly when he does not understand you, and you do not even
understand your self. He uses all his endeavors, not to answer but when he
has consulted inward truth, and had its answer, but it never answers him when
he does not know what he asks. Yet you would have him give you an answer, and
that speedy too. If he made you any he would deceive you; for it would be his
answer, and not Truths you should receive.

I will still put some questions to him, that you may observe the method I
think is proper to go about it, and that his answers may instruct you of the
Truth we seek.

I have obliged my self, Erastus, to prove the existence of God by the effects
which fire seems to produce in us; but to do it, it is of the greatest
consequence to know that it is not the soul that causes in her self her own
sensations. See if you have not still some other proof, I do not say more
solid, but more able to convince Aristarchus. Think on it -- Why do you
sometimes suffer a pain? Do you delight in it?


Erast. I understand you, Theodorus, I am not to my self the cause of my
happiness nor of my misery. If I was the cause of the pleasure I feel, seeing I
love it, I should always produce some in me. And on the contrary, if I was the
cause of the pain I suffer, seeing I hate it, I would never produce it in my
self. I perceive that there is a superior cause that acts on me, and may make
me happy or unhappy: Since I cannot act on my self, and that bodies produce not
in me the sensations which I feel, as we said just now.


Arist. You have it not right, Erastus, you love your Body; you either know or
feel that there happens some good or ill to it; you either rejoice or are
afflicted at it: The one is your pleasure, and the other your pain.


Erast. What ever Aristarchus says to me, puzzles me, and throws me into
darkness. I beg of you, Theodorus, to disperse it.


Theod. I do not wonder at it, Erastus. Whatever he tells you is false or full
of obscurity, yet seems probable enough.

Will you never retire within your self, Aristarchus? How can you conceive, I
pray you, that Erastus loves his body? Whatever is within Erastus that is able
to love, is better than the body of Erastus; Erastus knows it. His Body cannot
act on his Soul, he knows it; his Body cannot be his Good, he knows that too:
it cannot be properly said then that he loves it. But here lies the riddle,
Erastus loves pleasure more than his body; and he resents pleasure when his
body is well disposed: It Is that obliges him to mind his body, and to defend it
when any thing offends it. Do you think the Drunkards love their body, when
they gorge it with Wine? Do you think the Libertines love their body, when they
ruin their health? Is it not rather because they love the present pleasure? Do
those who mortify their body, love it when they tear it, or do you believe
they hate it? What is it then they love, but the pleasures they hope one day to
enjoy? What do they hate on the contrary, but the everlasting torments they
fear to suffer?

Thus you may see, that Erastus does not cause in himself his pleasure, because
he finds, or is sensible that the body he loves, is well disposed. For he does
not even know that his body is in a good state, by any other thing than by the
pleasure he has by it. It is true, that when we feel by pleasure or by pain
that our body is well or ill disposed, we are affected with joy or grief; but
if you think on it seriously, you will easily perceive that this grief and joy
that are the effects of our knowledge, differ mightily from those antecedent
pains and pleasures of which we speak. Therefore they must have some other
cause than our selves. Do you grant it?


Arist. I am now convinced of it.


Theod. Now this cause must be superior and always present to us, since it acts
within us. This cause can punish or reward us, make us happy or unhappy; since
pleasure delights us, and pain displeases and makes us uneasy. If then this
Cause were God, we should know that God does not only rule the motions of the
heavens: But that he has a hand in our concerns; rules whatsoever passes in
us; and that in order to our happiness, we ought to fear him, love him, and
follow his orders. For since he makes continual applications to us, he requires
something from us; and if we do not perform what he requires from us, it is not
likely that he should reward us, and make us happy.


Arist. I own it. But how would you prove that it is not some Angel or Demon
that has the Government of us, and acts on us? How would you prove that there
is a Being infinitely powerful, and who includes in his being all the
perfections imaginable? This seems to me very difficult.


Theod. It is difficult, by the method I have taken; but when we acknowledge a
superior power that acts in us, we have not much difficulty to consider him as
Sovereign, and to allow him all the perfections of which we have some idea.
Nevertheless I must endeavor to convince you fully. Mind me also Enastus.

As soon as we are pricked with a Thorn we feel pain. This pain does not
proceed from the Thorn nor from the Soul; you grant all this: it proceeds then
from a superior power. This power ought to know the moment when the Thorn
pricks our body, that he may in the same moment produce the pain in our soul.
But how shall he know it? Think on it -- He cannot know it from us; for we know
nothing of it yet. Nor from the Thorn; for the Thorn cannot act on the spirit
of that power, nor represent it self to him; for the Thorn is neither visible
nor intelligible by it self, there being no relation between bodies and
intelligent beings. Whence then shall this superior power learn the moment when
the Thorn pricks us? If you tell me that he shall know it from some other
intelligent being, I will ask you the same questions of the second intelligent
being, and if you fly to a third, you will get no more by it. Yet in the very
instant when we are pricked we feel pain. The superior cause must then have
learnt that the Thorn pricks us without the help of other intelligent beings ad
infinitum. For as you see he would not have so soon an answer, seeing it is no
easy matter to find an ultimate in an infinite. There must be then an
intelligent being that learns in himself and by its self in what moment the
thorn pricks us: And this intelligent being can be no other than God, that is
to say, a being whose power is infinite, and whose will alone is the cause of
things. For after all, there is none but him whose will is efficacious, that
can see in himself and by himself the existence and the motion of Bodies. For
it being impossible he should be ignorant of his own will, he only can discover
within himself the number, figure and situation of bodies, and generally
whatever happens to them. It follows then that all other intelligent beings are
enlightened by the Creator. And as you see, or as you will clearly see if you
think on it seriously; you should not know that you have a body, and that there
are others about you, if you had not learnt it of him who knows it by himself.
Do you understand these things, Erastus?


Erast. I do plainly, Theodorus. This is your argument. What causes pain is
neither the Soul that feels, nor the Thorn that pricks; but a superior power.
This power ought at least to know the moment when the thorn pricks; he cannot
know it from the thorn, seeing bodies cannot give any light to spirits, they
being neither visible nor intelligible by themselves, and no relation being to
be found between a body and a spirit. He can know it then but by himself, that
is to say, by the knowledge of his own will, which creates and moves the thorn,
and whose power is infinite, since it is able to create. There is then a God;
and if there was no God, I should not be pricked, I should feel nothing, see
nothing, and know nothing.


Theod. Very well. But what think you of these reasons, Aristarchus?


Arist. Think, I think that both you, and your echo Erastus, talk in the
clouds: The ground of your proof, is that that there is no relation between
bodies and spirits. From whence you conclude, that an Angel cannot see a body
immediately, and by himself. To which I answer, that that spirits may know
bodies, it is sufficient that they penetrate them.


Theod. What do you mean, by penetrating them? Certainly Erastus does not
understand you. But without asking you explications, that perhaps would puzzle
and displease you; does your soul penetrate your body, your heart, or your
brain the principal part where she resides?


Arist. I believe it does.


Theod. Pray tell me then how your brain is composed, or that principal part
wherein your soul resides?


Arist. I do not understand Anatomy.


Theod. How! You don't understand Anatomy: Must you search in Books, or in the
head of other men which you do not penetrate, to know how the brain which your
soul penetrates is composed? What signifies it then to a spirit to penetrate a
body?


Arist. I must confess I have nothing to answer. Yet methinks if a spirit
penetrates a body, he ought to know that body. But perhaps there is something
that hinders it, which I do not understand.


Theod. If it were so, Aristarchus, this something would be the God whom we
seek. I will lose no time to prove it to you: For I will not prove the
existence of God by imaginary effects. You may think on it at your leisure. But
I rather advise you to make a serious reflection on the things I have told you
now, and then I hope you will visibly find that there is a God, I mean a Being
whose Will is Power, and Power Infinite, since it is able to create. You will
find that this God does not walk about the Heavens as the Libertines will have
it, but that his providence extends it self to all things, and that he acts
incessantly in us. That it is he that gives us the pleasing and painful
sentiments we have of sensible objects; and that consequently he may make us
happy or miserable. In short, you will know God in the most useful manner for
morality. You will even confess that God has made nothing but may serve to
demonstrate his existence, though it is more conducing to morality, to
demonstrate it by something that passes within us.

One of the reasons why you are not easily brought to be of my mind, is that
you have perhaps never seriously thought on the things of which we have been
speaking: For I do not perceive that my proofs are remote, or hard to be
understood; I will be judged of it by Erastus. And I believe we ought to agree
on that point, that hereafter you may be prepared on the subjects on which we
shall treat.


Arist. It belongs to you, Theodorus, to set rules for every thing. For you
know that my resolution is to seek none but such truths as are essential, and
may make us wiser, and more happy. I need say no more to you.


Theod. To this effect, Aristarchus, I will tell you the course I intend to
keep in our Conferences: Observe it well, that you may think on it at leisure;
and prepare your self to make me all the Objections you can.

I believe I have sufficiently demonstrated that there is a God who acts
incessantly in us, and who may make us happy or unhappy by pleasure and by
pain, of which he alone is the true cause; and therefore I will bring no other
proofs of it, and will content my self with resolving your difficulties. But I
will prove to you that the design of God in creating man, has been that man
might know and love him; that God has preserved man but to that end: In short,
that that design is so unalterable, that sinners and the damned themselves
execute it in one sense, and that they shall sooner cease to be, than they
shall wholly cease to know and to love God.

When I have established as a principle, that since God acts always for himself,
we cannot be happy if we resist his will, nor unhappy if we obey it. I will
demonstrate how God will be known and be loved; how we can resist his orders;
and what is yet more ^trange, how we are capable to offend him.

I will show that our nature is corrupted, that sin dwells in us, that the
spirit is a slave to the flesh. In short, I will explain the cause and the
effects of the corruption of nature; how our disorders strange us from God and
make us his enemies, as also our want of a Mediator and Redeemer.

I will explain the qualities our Redeemer and Mediator ought to have to
reconcile us to God, and to satifie his justice; that Jesus Christ possesses
them all, and none but him. What may cure the blindness of the mind, and the
malice of our heart: That those remedies are to be found in the precepts of the
Gospel, and the grace of Jesus Christ. In fine I will show that none but a God
made man can restore, reconcile and save us: That nothing but the blood of
Christ can cleanse us; that nothing but his grace can strengthen us; that only
his precepts can conduct us to that wisdom and to that felicity you wish for;
and that all we have to do in this life is to study the moral of the Gospel, to
hear Jesus Christ, to love Jesus Christ, to follow and to imitate Jesus Christ;
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption; that according as it is written, he that glories, let him glory in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.30,31.


DIALOGUE II. Objections and Answers.
Aristarchus. WE longed with impatience to see you again, Theodorus, for we
wanted you almost as soon as we had left you. Erastus and I could not agree
about the things you told us yesterday; for there come into my mind some
difficulties which seem to me not to be overcome, and so we have done nothing
but disputed all the while; but at last Erastus says he does not understand
me, and that he has nothing else to answer me.


Theod. Nothing but truth can reconcile minds, and if you disagree, it is
because one of you does not consult it. I am very much afraid that you have
consulted your imagination more than your reason, and that you have lancht into
the deepest recess of your memory for some justificative evidence of your
prejudices. Tell me; is it not true, Aristarchus, that you have but little
meditated on the things I told you yesterday; and that whereas you should have
examined them by the light of truth, you have compared them with those things
of which the perusual of the Ancients has left you a tincture? Will you never
be brought to, and will you never understand that you have in your self a
faithful master ready to give you an answer at all times, if you ask it with
decency and submission; that is to say, in the calm of your senses and passions?

You tell me that you wanted me; but pray are you not ashamed to have recourse
to a man to be enlightened, and ought you not to know that if I am capable of
giving you some instruction, it is not by diffusing light into your mind, but
making you retire within your self, and turning you toward the light that
enlightens me? Why are we sometimes of the same mind, but because we both
retire within our selves, and harken to him of whom all mankind receives the
like answers? And why have you so much disputed with Erastus, but because you
told him things which the truth he consults did not tell him, nor had ever told
you? I beg of you then, Aristarchus, that we may have no more disputes; but let
truth be the supreme Judge amongst us, and use all your endeavors to make me
no objections but such as you understand clearly, and may also be understood by
Erastus.


Arist. Perhaps all the difficulty in the objections I made Erastus proceeded
from our ignorance of a great many things; and it may be, that not being much
used to meditate, I have proposed to him my ancient prejudices as so many new
truths, which presented themselves to me by the strength of meditation. But
really I have started to him some difficulties which seem to me grounded upon
evident Principles, and are received by all men: Here they are.

You have told us that none but God can act in our soul, and that all the
bodies which are about us are incapable of causing in us the sentiments we have
of them. But pray is not the Sun bright enough to be visible? Do you think I
can suffer my self to be imposed upon, by Philosophical Reasons to believe,
that it is not the Sun that gives me light after all the experiments I have of
it? And supposing you could persuade me that Fire does not cause the heat or
pain I feel when it is near me; Do you think you may conclude, that the Sun does
notdiffuse light, and say in general as you do now, that all the bodies that
surround us, are incapable of producing in us the sentiments we have of them.


Theod. Forbear to consult your senses, Aristarchus, if you desire to hear the
answers of Truth. It dwells in the deepest recess of Reason. Peruse at your
leisure the first Book of The inquiry after Truth, if you have a mind to be
fully instructed of the errors of our senses with respect to sensible
qualities; for I do not intend to make it my business to explain to you all the
difficulties of Philosophy which may puzzle you. The only thing that is
necessary at present is that you know there is a God, and he alone can cause in
you the pleasure and pain you feel by the intervention of Bodies. You believed
it yesterday, or I am mistaken; Do you believe it now?


Arist. I doubt of it for this Reason, that if God did cause in me the pleasure
I feel in the use of sensible things. It seems he would dispose me to love them
and to cleave to them as to my good: For pleasure is the character of good,
it is an instinct of nature which disposes us to love what produces or seems to
produce it. Yet faith teaches me that God will not have me to love bodies. Can
God draw me by pleasure to cleave to sensible things, and forbid me at the same
time to love them? This is my difficulty, judge of it now.


Theod. It is a solid one, and it is absolutely necessary to solve it; for from
its solution most of the true principles of morality may be deduced. This is my
system.

It is taken out of the fifth Chapter of the first Book of the Inquiry after
Truth. I have taken several things from that Book, and desire the Reader to
take notice of it once for all.
Being made up of spirit and body, we have two sorts of good to seek, spiritual
and corporal. We have likewise two ways to know if a thing is good or bad, viz.
the use of the mind alone, and the use of the mind jointly with the body. We
can know the good of the mind by an evident and clear knowledge of the mind
alone; and we can also discover the good of the body by a confused sentiment.
By the mind I know justice is to be beloved: and by the taste I assure my self
such a fruit is good. The beauty of justice cannot fall under our senses, for
it is unnecessary to the perfection of the body; and the goodness of the fruit
does not fall under our understanding, for a fruit cannot be useful to the
perfection of the mind.

The good of the body not deserving the application of the mind which God made
but for himself; and God not being willing that we should be taken up with it,
it is necessary that the mind do know it without examination, and by the short
and incontestable proof of sentiment. Bread is fit to nourish us, and Stones
are not: The proof of it is convincing, and taste alone has made all mankind
agree in that.

If the mind saw in bodies but what is in them, without having a sentiment of
what is not in them, their use would be very painful and inconvenient to us;
for who would take the pains to examine with care the nature of all things that
are about us, to cleave to, or leave them? What should tell us when we ought to
sit down to dinner, and when rise from it? What should place us at a reasonable
distance from the fire? And should we not often doubt whether we burnt or
warmed our selves? In short, would it not happen sometimes that we should be
the cause of our own death by Inadvertency, by Grief; or even out of desire of
making near discoveries in Anatomies.

Therefore it is most reasonable that God incline us to seek the good of the
body, and shun its contrary by the foregoing sensations of Pleasure, and Pain.
For after all, if men were obliged to examine the Configuration of a Fruit,
those of all the parts of their bodies, and the different relations which
result from the one to the other, to be able to judge if in the present heat of
their blood, and a thousand other dispositions of their body, this Fruit were
good to nourish them: it is obvious that such things as are altogether unworthy
of the application of their minds, would wholly fill its capacity; and that
also unprofitably enough, since they would not be able to preserve themselves
any considerable time by that only way.


Arist. I must confess, this conduct is very wise, and most worthy its Author:
But yet we feel some pleasure in the use of sensible things, why then must we
not love them?


Theod. Because they are not lovely, you are a rational creature, and your
reason does not represent to you bodies as your good. If sensible objects did
contain in themselves what you feel, when you use them, if they were the true
cause of your Pleasure and Grief; you might love and fear them; but your reason
does not tell you so, as I yesterday proved it to you. You may use them, but
not love them; you may eat of a fruit, but not settle your Love upon it:
Likewise you ought to avoid Fire or a Sword, but ought not to fear them.

See the 8th. Chapter of the 6th. Book of the Inquiry after Truth.
We must love and fear what is able to cause pleasure and pain, that is a common
notion which I do not contradict: But we must take heed not to confound the
true efficient cause with the occasional. I say it once more, we must love and
fear the efficient cause of pleasure and of pain, and we may seek or avoid
their occasional causes, provided we do not do it against the positive orders
of that efficient cause, and do not force it in consequence of its natural
Laws, to work in us what is against its precepts: And we must not imitate the
voluptuous, who make God an instument of their sensuality, and oblige him, in
consequence of his first will, to reward them with a sentiment of pleasure in
the very moment when they offend him; for that is the greatest Injustice can be
committed.

Believe me, Aristarchus, the good of the body cannot be beloved but by
Instinct; but the good of the mind can, and ought to be beloved by reason: The
good of the body can be beloved but by Instinct, and with a blind Love; because
the mind cannot even perceive so clearly, that the good of the body is a real
good; for the mind cannot see what is not: It cannot clearly perceive that
Bodies are above the Spirit, that they can act in it, punish, or reward it, and
render it more happy, and more perfect; but the good of the mind ought to be
loved by reason; God will be loved with a Love of choice, with a reasonable
Love, a meritorious Love, a Love worthy of him, and worthy of us; we see
clearly that God is our good, that he is above us, that he can act in us, that
he can reward us, and render us not only more happy, but also more perfect than
we are; is it not this sufficient to make a Spirit love God?

And thus we see, that God was not to make man love him, by the instinct of
Pleasure when he created him; he was not to make use of this kind of art, nor
implore any force against the Liberty of a reasonable creature, to lessen the
merit of his Love: For the first man ought to have adhered to God, and could do
it without the help of a preingaging pleasure, though now Pleasure is commonly
necessary to remedy the blindness which sin has brought upon us, and to
withstand the continual attacks of Concupiscence against our Reason.

I Will say it again, Aristarchus, that you may remember it. It was necessary
that the antecedent pleasure and not the light of reason, should incline us to
the good of the body; since reason cannot even represent to its self the bodies
that are about us, as a good. But there was no need that God should make use of
preingaging pleasure, as of a kind of art to cause himself to be beloved by the
first man; since it was sufficient that he should enlighten his reason, he
being the sole and only good of Spirits.


Arist. I grant all these things are very well imagined, but there is still in
your System a difficulty that puzzles me: For methinks you confound
Concupiscence with the institution of Nature, and making God the Author of the
pleasure we feel in the use of sensible things, you also make him Author of
Concupiscence, since it is nothing else but that pleasure, considered as
striving against our reason.


Theod. This institution of Nature is thus, Aristarchus.

God has made the Soul and the Body of man, and 'twas his pleasure, for the
preservation of his work, that as often as there should be in the body some
certain motions, there should result in the Soul some certain sentiments;
provided those motions did communicate themselves as far as a certain part of
the Brain, which I shall not specify, but because the will of God is
efficacious, there never happened any motions in that part of the Brain, but
there followed some sensations, and because the will of God is unchangeable,
this was not changed by the sin of the first man: Yet as before man had sinned,
and whilst all things were in perfect good order, it was not just that the body
should hinder the Spirit from thinking on what is desired; It follows that man
had necessarily such a power over his body that he did, as it were, separate
the principal part of his brain from the rest of his body, and did hinder its
usual communication with the sensitive Nerves, as often as he desired to apply
himself to truth, or to some other thing than the good of the body. And by
those means it was in Adam's power first to make use of his taste to discern
the things that were useful to the preservation of the body, and then to eat on
without taste and pleasure; because the pleasure be felt in the use of sensible
things never overruled his desires; it only modestly warned of what he was to
do for the good of his body: Adam therefore could think on what he would; and
one may say, that even when he slept his Spirit was awake: For after all it
cannot be believed that in the state of Original Righteousness, there should be
such a great disorder in the most admirable work of God, that the spirit should
be as slave to the body. This is the institution of Nature: Now you shall hear
its Corruption.

The first man, by degrees stranging himself from from the presence of God, by
suffering the capacity of his Spirit to be filled with sensible pleasures, or
the sentiments of his own excellency, or with some other Ideas which, by reason
of the narrowness of his Spirit, did blot out the remembrance of his Duty and
Dependence; fell at last into a disobedience to Gods command, and then lost the
power he had over his body. For it is not just that a Sinner should reign over
any thing, and that God should suspend the Laws of the Communication of motions
in favor of a wicked and rebellious man. I do not speak here of the
Concupiscence which consists in the difficulty we find to put our selves in the
presence of God, and in the unvoluntary inclination we have to think always
upon our selves.
For the motions of sensible Objects communicating themselves as far as the
brain, and also leaving there some deep Impressions, it is necessary according
to the first will of the Author of Nature that there should result in the Soul
some sentiments and motions which carry her even in spite of her self to
sensible things.


Arist. All this is very well; but why does God continue to be willing that the
impressions of the brain, and the agitations of the animal spirits should be
followed by sentiments and sensible motions; since that hinders us now from
loving him, and applying our selves to the Truth for which we are made.


Theod. But why, Aristarchus, will you have the will of God to depend from that
of the first man? You have seen that the institution of Nature is admirably
well ordered; and would you have this Institution altered, on the account of
the mutability of Adam's will? Do you not know that the inconstancy of the will
is a mark of a narrow Understanding, and that God is too just to repent. All
what God has willed, he wills it still; and because his will is efficacious he
does it. God had rather for some time be subservient to the injustice of men,
and even in one sense to reward them, by the pleasure they feel in their
Debaucheries, than to alter the order of things which he has most wisely
established. And men are so unworthy of God, after the rebellion of their first
Father, that it is just in one sense, that God remove them from him continually,
and in a manner reward them when they go from him; but it is a transitory
reward, a deceitful reward, the price of sin, that fattens the Victim for the
Sacrifice, and prepares sinners for the day of the Lord; for that day when the
Judge and Savior of the world will hurry the impious in the fire everlasting
to satisfy the divine justice; as he will raise with him the elect to an
Eternal Glory, to exalt the Goodness and Mercy of his Father.

Therefore, Aristarchus, the Will of God which forms and rules so wisely all
things, was not to depend from that of the first man. It was necessary that
this will should subsist, and that he whose wisdom has no bounds should
re-establish, in a manner worthy of himself, the order of things which
Free Will had overthrown. He has done it, Aristarchus, by his (...) Will,
which makes the order of Grace; by the (...) design of his Son's Incarnation,
by that great work of Mercy which surpasses all his other works, and (...) him
infinitely more honor, than all that (...) of Nature which is admired with so
much (...) and represents in so lively a manner the infinite wisdom of its
Author.


Erast. Give me leave, Theodorus, to offer to you the greatest difficulty I
find in all the things you have told us now. God is infinitely wise, he has
foreseen from all Eternity whatever was to fall out in the order of things he
was to establish; he has foreseen the sin of the first man, before he was
formed; why then did he make him? Or why did he make him free, or why did he
not bind and fasten him to his duty by preingaging Pleasures? In short, why did
he establish an order that was to be overthrown, and a Nature that was to grow
corrupt? I grant that he has repaired the corruption of Nature by the wisest
method imaginable, but would it not have been wiser to have made one incapable
of Corruption? I beg of you to tell me if these things may not justly make us
doubt, whither an infinite intelligent being rules all.


Theod. But supposing I did not give you an answer Erastus, what could you
directly infer from my silence, but that I do not know the designs of God? I
have evidently demonstrated to you, by arguing only upon clear Ideas, that
there is a God, and that none but him acts really in us. Believe what you have
seen, and do not wilfully blind your self by opposing to the light of truth,
some objections which can rise but from the darkness of our minds: When we see
evidently a thing we must not cease to believe it, as soon as some difficulty
we cannot solve is offered to us.

Nevertheless, Erastus, though I do not flatter my self to know God's designs,
I Will endeavor to satisfy you in few words, for I will not engage my self to
say to you, whatever may be thought upon that subject.

God made man because it was his will, and it was his will because man is
better than nothing, and that he is more capable of honoring him than nothing.

God made man free, because the will of man is made to love good; but man being
able to love but what he sees, if God had not made him free, or if God did
infallibly and necessarily carry him toward all that has the appearance of a
good, or toward all that man being apt to err, may consider as a good; it
might be said that God is the cause of sin, and of the disorderly motions of
the will.

God made man free, and left him to himself without determining him by
preingaging pleasure, because God will be loved by reason, since we are
rational Creatures: He will be loved with an Understanding Love, with a Love
worthy of him, and worthy of us; a meritorious Love, and which he may
remunerate, for other reasons which I have already told you. He foresaw that
man would cease to love him, I grant it, but he draws his glory from thence.
The shame of Freewill adds to Gods honor every way, and man being not able to
trust to his own strength, finds himself obliged by Justice, to give to God all
the Glory of his actions.

But how do you know after all, but that the first and the chief design of God
in the Creation of man, was the Incarnation of his Son; it may be, Erastus,
that the order of Nature is only the occasional cause of that of Grace, and
that God would not have made man, if the fall of man had not given lew to his
reparation. I grant that if man had not sinned the Word had not been made
flesh: But is it not certain that the Obedience and Sacrifice of the incarnate
Word, has pleased him more who orders all things according to his own
pleasure, than the rebellion of man has displeased him? Is it not reasonable
to believe that God has done all for his Son, since he has made all by his
Son, and that his chief intent in the disposition of his work, has been to
establish his Son Chief of his Church, and Sovereign Lord over all his
creatures. O certe necessarium Adae peccatum -- O felix culpa quae talem ac
tantum meruit habere Redemptorem.

Take notice of this, Erastus, God acts for his glory; and the chief of his
designs is that by which he gets most of it: But does he not receive more glory
from his Son than from all the rest of his works? He has in his Son an Adorer,
a Sacrificator, and a Victim of an infinite dignity, for his Son is a God that
worships him, a God that obey's him, a God that dies to honor his Holiness and
Justice. But supposing even no bounds to the world, what honor would accrue by
it to its Author? Supposing all creatures were incessantly employed to praise
him who gave them being; what proportion is there between the creature and the
Creator, between the praises of the blessed Spirits and the infinite greatness
of God; except it be that the praises of the Saints receive a kind of an
infinite greatness and dignity in Jesus Christ, through whom, as the Church
sings, Angels praise the Divine Majesty, Powers adore him, etc. For the Church
knows very well that it is only through Jesus Christ we can render to God an
honor worthy of him.

I will explain to you those things more at large at some other time. What I
have said now is sufficient, to let you judge that though God did foresee the
fall of man, he was not to change his design; since that fall has been the
occasion of that great work so worthy the greatness, and mercy of God, and so
admirable all manner of ways.

Yet though what I have told you were not certain, you ought not to believe
easily that God ought to have altered his design because he foresaw the sin of
the first man, and the disorder of Nature. Can you think, Erastus, that if god
only designed to make a man he would make a Monster? I mean that he would make
him with two heads, one of which would be useless, and only troublesome to him,
or make him with an useless Arm sprouting our of his forehead, and dangling
continually over his face? Can you imagine that such a Creature would be a work
worthy of an Intelligence infinitely wise and powerful? Yet there are Monsters,
and I do not believe that those small disorders of Nature ought to lessen the
esteem you have of its Author; not only because those Monsters, however
imperfect in themselves, do not make the world imperfect: But chiefly because
those monsters are the consequences of the communication which is between the
imagination of the Mother, and the fruit she bears in her Womb, and that this
communication is very wisely established for the formation or increasing of the
Child.

God did well foresee that this communication would sometimes cause some
disorder, but seeing it would be of an infinitely greater use toward the,
accomplishment of his work, than this small disorder, he ought not to have
altered his desing. It Is true that God could have remedied it, by establishing
for these particular cases some new Laws of motion: But God does not multiply
his will thus, it is a point of his greatness and his wisdom to act always by
the most simple ways, and to make use of a very small number of Natural Laws to
produce a very great number of admirable works.

Neither do I believe, that we ought always to imagine that God has other ways
to produce his work, as simple and perfect as those of whom he has made use,
whereby he could make it more perfect than it is, and such as we would have it
to be; for this perhaps may not be. It Is likely that God acts in the manner the
most worthy of him that may be, I mean that his work is as perfect as it can be
by relation to the methods which he uses to produce it: and if we imagine that
we discover some faults in it, besides our natural disposition to be frequently
mistaken, it may proceed from the simplicity of the means of which he has made
use to form this work, and from the union which all bodies have with one
another. Could you imagine Erastus that God, though all wise and all mighty,
cannot fill entirely with small round balls the least space that we can
determine? Yet if you think on it seriously you will easily find that this
cannot be done; and that the balls touching one another, and leavinga
triangular space, there must be something besides balls to fill it. But from
whence proceeds this impossibility? it is not from any want of wisdom, nor power
in the cause; but from the relation which bodies have with one another. There
is such a Concatenation in all the parts which make up the world, that we have
some reason to believe that perhaps it impylteh contradiction that man should
be more perfect than he is, by relation to the bodies that surround him, and
that perhaps it is not possible for him to have wings, and be at the same time
as well composed as he is by relation to the wants of this present Life.

And thus, Erastus, as you must not think that God ought to have abandoned his
design of forming men by the usual way of generation, because men seem to be
imperfect, and monsters are sometimes generated that way: So you ought not to
imagine that God foreseeing the sin of man, ought to have taken another design;
tho he had not even repaired the disorder of nature, by a way as worthy of his
wisdom as is the incarnation of his Son.


Erast. I confess, Theodorus, that what you say is very reasonable, and that
those want both strength and firmness of judgment who abandon evident truths,
when some difficulties which they cannot solve are offered to them, though those
difficulties have no other ground than the ignorance and weakness of humane
mind. And this persuades me that most of those whom the world call men of great
sense, such as are some that were here some days ago, have not so much strength
of understanding as Aristarchus imagins.


Theod. You are not mistaken, Erastus; those men of mighty sense are commonly
diminutive Wits, who have more pride than knowledge; their understanding being
but small, they neither embrace nor retain easily the proofs of even the most
common truths, and yet their pride makes them decide some questions which it is
absolutely impossible to solve. Take heed that you never be frighted as they
are by the little difficulties which they raise to themselves against the
existence of God and the immortality of the Soul, and that you never suffer
your self to be stunned by the outward method of their rash decisions. Hearken
to Reason, and follow its light, but never yield to the sensible attempt which
the imagination of others makes upon your mind. Do you understand me well
Erastus?


Erast. Very well: You would not have me think, or live by opinion, but think
and live by reason; and shun carefully the contagion of minds, which
communicates it self by the ways and manners of those who speak to us. I
endeavor it as much as I can, and am not afraid that any of our pretended men
of mighty sense, will shake me by whatever they can say against the proofs of
the existence of God, which you have explained to us.


Theod. And you, Aristarchus, are you fully convinced that there is a cause
superior to you, infinitely wise and powerful? have you any more reasonable
doubts to propose to me? I am sensible that you are not yet freed from the
Pannick fear, which your Heroes have inspired in you, and that you are always
moved by some Ideas, and confused sentiments that will disturb your imagination
a long time, to justify the reasonings of your pretended men of sense: But is
your reason enlightened? Is the light that spreads it self in it, according as
you give attention to my words, a pure light that persuades by evidence? Has
it not some dazzling and glittering luster which convinces you by impression?
For as I am thoroughly persuaded of what I tell you, I am afraid lest the air
and manner of my speaking to you, do some violence on your mind, and instead of
consulting inward truth, you come out of your self to hearken to me, and so you
may happen to be persuaded when I speak to you, and to doubt as soon as I shall
have done speaking.


Arist. You have told me several things that have seemed solid to me; but I do
not allow them to be such, because I have not thought enough on them, I will do
it and --


Theod. Very well, Aristarchus, but observe that there is no necessity that all
the things I have told you be incon^table, that my demonstration of the
existence of God may subsist. I have too slightly explained them to pretend
that you may not find some difficulty in them: And I was not to enlarge any
more upon them, for only speaking them in answer to your objections, I was not
obliged to establish their certitude, but only to show their possibility. It
may be I will convince you of them hereafter. Nevertheless if you are well
persuaded of their possibility, you ought to believe that your objection does
not destroy the proofs I have brought for the existence of a being infinitely
wise and powerful, and who acts incessantly in us.


Arist. When I think on all the things you told us yesterday, I cannot doubt of
the existence of God. But when I consider that some ingenious men doubt of it,
and that Mr. --, and several other learned and very witty persons have assured
me, they have need of faith to believe it, I still abour under some
apprehension lest your proofs be not certain; I will consult Mr. -- to know his
mind on it.


Theod. You will consult the God of Accaron, instead of consulting the God of
Israel; are you not satisfied with the clear and visible proofs which inward
truth gives you? Why will you again consult this unhappy friend? He has
already darkened your reason, he will do it again, his air is infectious, his
imagination prevalent, and imposing, and if you do not take great care --


Arist. I will stand upon my guard, and methinks I shall convert him.


Theod. You convert him, Aristarchus! I wish it. But do you think that God
speaks to him as he does to you? Or rather do you think he retires like you
within himself to hear him? He has stopped his Ears so long that he is become
Deaf. You will speak to his Ears, but you will not speak to his mind. Do you
not know that he is held by too many things, and that his passions whose
motions he blindly follows, have made him slave to whatever is about him? Does
not his Court air, his desire of being esteemed a wit his insolent and
slighting way of discoursing about Religious matters, sufficiently show you
that he incessantly receives the secret inspirations of the Spirit of Pride?
While you will be speaking to him, he will laugh at your simplicity, he will
dazzle you by a language of imagination, and you will see your self shamefully
thrown at his feet; and truth unworthily used by that small society of his
admirers who applaud him in whatever he says.

If you are resolved to attempt his Conversion, I advise you to take him by
himself, to speak to him without being daunted, to put questions to him
continually as having need of his light, and to make him retire within himself
by insensible degrees, that he may hearken to truth without being interrupted
by his passions. When we design to convince men, we must always see their
Self-love, and instruct them by such a method as may make them imagine that
they school us. We must take the air of Disciples, and ask them questions with
art and an ingenious plainness, that taking a pleasure to instruct us they may
retire within themselves to receive the answers that we ask them; but when we
have received from them the answers they have strove to find out for us, we
must lay them before them every moment; for having only sought those answers
for us, they think no more on them, as soon as they have eased themselves of
them.

Truth is a very unnecessary lumber to most men; it is only cumbersome to them.
But when it is of their own finding out, and that by this title it belongs to
them, self-love suffers it willingly; and they find in it I know not what
charm, that wins them in spite of the inconveniency they receive by it. So
when you shall have received a good answer to some one of the several questions
you had asked your friend, you may make use of it to convince him, he will not
disown it, except you vex him; and it may be that his self-love happily
betraying his sleeping passions, he will rejoice at the sight of a truth he
could not bear a little while before.


Arist. I give you thanks for this advice, Theodorus, and will certainly make
good use of it; the Impatience which is excited within me, by the hopes of
being serviceable to my friend, obliges me to break off our Conversation: I
must satisfy my self.


Theod. I commend your zeal, and the sincerity of your friendship; be of good
heart, Aristarchus; I wish you may return satisfied -- and you Erastus be
careful to have in your mind the things that we have said, and to discourse
about them with Aristarchus, as soon as he comes back.


DIALOGUE III. Of the Order of Nature in the Creation of Man.
Theod. WEll Aristarchus, you have converted your man; Erastus told me just now
all that past between you and him. I even know that he desires to be your
Disciple, and to have an account of our following conferences. Be pleased then
for his sake to apply your self so that you may demonstrate all things to him
with some exactness.


Arist. You take the right way to engage me, for I am extremely sensible to
friendship; and methinks my desire to know truth, is doubled by the design I
have to impart it to my friend. Let us go on then I beseech you. I am persuaded
that there is a God, that is to say, a Being infinitely perfect, whose wisdom
and power have no bounds, and whose providence extends it self not only to us,
but even to the atoms of matter. I remember your proofs, and am convinced of
them.


Theod. I can demonstrate nothing of true Religion, nor of true Morality, till
I know what God designs in the creation and preservation of our being.


Arist. You must seek some other principle, Theodorus: My friend is a
Cartesian, his Philosophy does not admit final causes; and tho he is now
convinced that there is a God, he will not fail to tell me that we ought not to
presume so much of our selves, as to believe that God has been pleased to make
us privy to his counsels.


Theod. Your friend will never say this to you, if he be a good Cartesian. The
knowledge of final Causes is of little or no use in Natural Philosophy, as
Descartes pretends: But it is absolutely necessry in Religion. Can you obey
God, if you do not know his will? and can you hope to please him, and that he
will make you happy, except you be obedient to him? ^ may be you imagine that
we can know nothing of Gods design on men, by Reason, but you are mistaken. Do
not think too much on your friend. Pray think on what I am going to tell you.

You are persuaded that God is wise, and ascribe to him all the perfections
whereof you have some Idea. God therefore, loves most what is most lovely; and
so must love himself more than all things: and be to himself the end of all his
actions. And by consequence the end of the Creation, and preservation of our
being. It follows then that the faculty by which we know, that is to say, our
Mind, and that whereby we love, which is our will, (...) made and pre^ved to
know and to love God; supposing (as you do not doubt it) they have been made to
know and to love. Do you find any darkness in what I have told you? Pray think
on it, it is the ground of all we shall ^ay hereafter.


Arist. All this seems to me as evident as the most certain principles of
Natural Philosophy.


Theod. It has even more certainty: the communication of motion is certain, as
experience teaches us; nevertheless this communication might not be, and it
will in all likelihood cease after the resurrection, that our bodies may be
incorruptible; but it shall never cease to be the will of God that we know and
love him. Since then this seems to be plain to you, how can it happen that
there be men that neither know nor love God, since God preserves them but to
know and love him? Do you think it possible to resist God, and that God has
any love for Spirits who have no knowledge of him nor any love for him? Do you
think God preserves them; and do you not know that if God should cease to love
them, they should be no more?


Arist. I begin to doubt of your principle, for you draw some very sad
consequences from it.


Theod. It Is very strange, Aristarchus, you should doubt of things of which you
have an evidence. Will you always forget that light ought to be preferred to
darkness, and that clear truths are not to be forsaken, because we find some
difficulty in clearing some dark objections. Learn to distinguish truth from
what seems to be so; and observe that what I objected to you just now, is true
in one sense and false in another. For there is no man but knows and loves God
in one sense, as you will see it hereafter.

Therefore stick firmly to this truth; that God has made and preserves
spirits, but to know and love him: And this truth being granted, since it is
evident, endeavor to discover how it may be conceived that all spirits know
and love God, for that is of the greatest consequence, I will put some
questions to Erastus that I may insensibly lead you to that truth.

Do you think, Erastus, that Spirits can see Bodies? Or rather do you think
that this material and sensible world can be the immediate object of the mind?
Do you think that bodies can act in the mind, make themselves visible to the
mind, or enlighten it?


Erast. I do not think it.


Theod. What then do you see immediately when you see the material and visible
world?


Erast. I see, If I may say so, the Intelligible World.


Theod. How! when you look upon the Stars, do you not see the Stars?


Erast. When I look upon the Stars I see the Stars; when I look upon the Stars
of the material world, I see the Stars of the intelligible world, and judge
that those material Stars are like those of the intelligible world I see. For
the Sun that I see, is sometimes bigger and sometimes less, and is never bigger
than an intelligible Circle of two or three foot diameter; but the material Sun
is always the same; and according to the sentiment of some Astronomers about
thirty thousand times bigger than the Earth: it is not then this Sun I see, when
I am looking upon it.


Theod. But, Erastus, where is this intelligible world which you see? Do you
think to include it within your self? Do you think your soul comprehends in an
intelligible manner all the beings that God can make, and you can see? Can your
Soul, whose bounds are too narrow, whose perfections are finite, and who
certainly does not include all things, see all things by reflecting on herself?


Erast. I do not think it; but I dare not tell you my opinion. I imagine that
there is none but God that includes the intelligible world, and that we see in
God whatever we see.


Theod. But why are you afraid to tell freely what you think of it, Erastus? Is
there any danger or folly in saying that God alone is our light? That he alone
is the perfection and nourishment of the mind, and that we depend from him all
manner of ways, not only that we may become more happy, but also more
understanding and perfect.


Erast. I am afraid that Aristarchus will say I am full of fantastic notions
if I say that I see all things in God, as if I affirmed that one may see God
even in this life, because whatever is in God is God.


Theod. There is a difference between seeing the essence of God, and seeing the
essence of things in God. For though we see nothing but God when we see the
essence of things in God, we see God but by relation to Creatures, we see the
perfections of God but as they represent another thing than God. So that though
we see God, and can see nothing but him, since he preserves spirits for himself
only, it may in one sense be said that we see nothing but the Creatures. For
tho God sees nothing but himself, it is certain that he sees the Creatures when
he sees what is in himself that represents them: Thus though we see God but by
an immediate and direct sight we see in God that which represents them, for the
Creatures are invisible in themselves.

There is no corpore^ nor spiritual Creature can act immediately in the soul,
and cause it self to be seen by it. God shows us whatever we see, but it is in
his substance that he shows it us; for the Divine Substance alone can give us
life, enlighten and make us happy. We are made to be nourished with that
substance and to live by it; and if the spirit has some life, I mean if it
has some knowledge (for the knowledge of truth is the life of the soul, it
receives it from, and in that substance.

Whatever God has done, Erastus, he has done it after his Image, or according
to his Image; he has made the Animals, Plants, and even the Insects according
to the Image, or living Idea he has of them. For he has made all things by
his Son, by his Word, according to the uncreated Wisdom, in which all things
live. But he has not only made man according to his Image or Wisdom; but also
for his Wisdom, and to contemplate the Eternal Wisdom that includes the Ideas
of all things.

An Impertinent Philosopher, Averrois.
found this fault in the Religion of Christians, that they Eat him whom they
adore, condemning our Communion with the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, whom
we receive after we have Worshipped him. Pontificius Loquitur.
He did not know that the Wisdom of the Father, the Word that enlightens and
nourishes our Spirit, desired to teach us in a sensible manner, and by the real
Manducation of his Body, that he is really our Life and Nourishment, and that
he has made our Spirit to know and to love him: For our Spirit ought to love,
but what gives it Life, nourishes, makes it more perfect, and is above it,
since only this can be his true good.

If it is certain that our thinking faculty comes from God, it is certain that
it is made for God, since God Acts only for himself, as Aristarchus owns. But
if we do not see things in God, how can it be said that God has only made, and
does only preserve us for himself; for after all, if Bodies are the immediate
object of our Knowledge, our Spirit is partly made to see them: In what sense
can it also be said that God preserves the spirits of Devils and the Damned but
for himself, if the spirit of those wretches does not see God in some manner?
You will tell me they are Dead; and that is true in some sense, but they
perhaps know some truth, and if the knowledge of truth is the life of the Soul,
they are not entirely dead, nor annihilated, they have yet some union with the
eternal Wisdom, whose light penetrates into the very abyss. They nourish
themselves with the word if they have some life left, because he alone is life;
but they are not the happier for it, for they wish themselves dead. They
nourish themselves with a truth they do not relish; they seek darkness, and
annihilation; and wish that this remainder of union with God that enlightens
and preserves them, maybreak and dissolve it self for ever.


Arist. What do you tell us here; Theodore: Does the spirit see nothing but
God? What! Do we see Error in God? Do the Philosophers see all their Chymera's
in God? And does the Father of lies receive from God --.


Theod. Error cannot be seen Aristarchus, It Is neither visible nor
intelligible. Truth, is a relation that is; And what is, may be seen. There is
a relation of equality between two times two and four, and this relation may be
seen because it is. There is a relation of inequality between two times two and
five, and this relation of inequality may be seen because it is. So truth is
visible or intelligible; but error is not. One cannot see that two times two
is five, or a relation of equality between two times two and five, for there is
no such relation of equality. One cannot see that two times two is not four,
nor a relation of inequality between two times two and four, for there is no
such relation of inequality. And thus when men mistake themselves, they do not
see the relations which they suppose they see. When a man mistakes himself, he
may well see things in God, though after an imperfect manner, but he does not
see the relations that are between things; for those things are, and those
relations are not. I will not here explain the cause of our error, and our
different ways of falling into it. It has been done already.


Erast. I own, Theodorus, that we see in God the eternal truths and immutable
laws of Morality. A finite and changeable spirit cannot see in himself the
eternity of those truths, nor the immutability of those laws, it is in God, he
sees them. But he cannot see in God transitory truths and corruptible things,
since there is nothing in God but what is Immutable and Incorruptible.


Theod. Yet, Erastus, God sees all the changes that happen in the world, and
it is in himself only he sees them: It follows then that he sees in himself
whatever is subject to change or corruption, though there is nothing in him but
is perfectly Immutable and Incorruptible. But all this may be explained thus.

God has in himself the Idea (for example) of Extent, since he sees it, and
has made it; and this Idea in Incorruptible. 'Twas his will there should be
extended beings, and those beings were produced. 'Twas also his will that those
extended parts should be incessantly moved, and communicate naturally their
motions to one another. Now this communication of motions which cannot be
unknown to God, it being impossible he should not know his will that causes it,
is the principle of the mutability, corruption, and generation of all different
bodies. Thus God sees in himself the corruption of all things, though he is
incorruptible, for whilst he sees in his wisdom the incorruptible Ideas, he
sees in his will all corruptible things; since nothing happens but is done by
him.

Now I will tell you how we see all those things in God. All ideas and
immutable truths we see in him. As for transitory truths, we do not know them
in the will of God, as God himself does, for his will is unknown to us: But we
know them by the sentiment God causes in us at their presence. Thus when I see
the Sun I see the Idea of a circle in God, and have in my self the sentiment of
light which denotes to me that this Idea represents something that is created,
and actually extent: But I have this sentiment from none but God who certainly
can cause it in me, since he is Almighty, and sees in the Idea he has of my
Soul, that I am capable of sentiment.

Thus in all our sensible knowledge of corruptible things, there is pure Idea,
and sentiment; the Idea is in God, the Sentiment in us, but God alone is the
true Cause of both. The Idea represents the Essence of the thing, and the
sentiment only makes us believe that it exists, since it disposes us to believe
that the thing causes it in us, because it is then present to our mind, and not
the will of God, which alone causes that sentiment in us.


Arist. I own that God can enlighten us, and show us in himself all the Ideas
we have of things. But why should you have your recourse to this last refuge?
At least explode the sentiments of Philosophers upon that subject, that I may
the better convince my friend; for without doubt I shall find him prepossessed
with some opinion or other differing from yours.


Theod. It has been done already by the Author of the Inquiry after Truth.
Lib. 3.
But if your friend finds fault with me for having a recourse to God and the
first cause, to explain some certain things, you may tell him that there are
two kinds of natural effects: The Particular, and the General: it is ridiculous
to have recourse to the general cause to explain particular effects; but it is
as much amiss to seek some particular cause to explain the general.

For example, if I am asked why Linen becomes dry when it is exposed to fire: I
will not answer like a Philosopher, if I say that God will have it so; for it is
sufficiently known that whatever happens, is by his will. It Is not the general
cause is demanded, but the particular cause of a particular effect. I ought
then to say that the small particles of the fire, or the agitated wood striking
against the linen impart their motion to the particles of water that are in
it, and loosen them from the linen; and I shall have given the particular
cause of the particular effect. But if one asked me, why the particles of the
wood agitate those of the water, or why bodies communicate their motion to
those they meet: I should not be a Philosopher, did I seek some particular
cause of that general effect; I ought to have recourse to the general cause,
that is to the Will of God, and not to some particular faculties or qualities.

Now it is acknowledged that the effect is general, and that consequently we
must have recourse to the general cause, when the same effect has no necessary
connection with what seems to be its cause, as it happens in the communication
of motion; for the mind sees no necessity why a body, that presses upon
another, should push it forwards rather then recoil it self: If then your
friend pretends to explain to you the nature and original of Ideas by the
scientific terms of innate or visible species of external or internal senses,
of the common apprehensions of the active or passible intellect, you may let
him know that when a body changes its situation or figure, there is no
necessity that there be a new thought in a spirit; And that therefore we must
go to the general cause which alone can reconcile things that have no necessary
relation with one another. I will lose no time in solving all the difficulties
you or your friend may find concerning what I have told you now. You will
perhaps find them solved in the third book of the Inquiry after Truth. Let us
come to the will of man. I will explain it to you.

God only making and preserving us for himself, incessantly moves us toward
him, that is to say toward good in general, or toward what we conceive to
include all good. He even moves us toward particular good without removing us
from himself; because he includes that good in the infinity of his being: For
as spirits see none but him, in the sense that I have explained, he may incline
us toward whatever we see, though he has made us for himself alone. But we
ought to observe that he inclines us invincibly and necessarily toward good in
general, because as the love of good in general can never be bad, it was not to
be free: But as the love of particular good, though good in it self, may be
bad, it was to be in our power to consent to or withstand its motion.


Arist. But how can the love of particular good be bad, Theodorus? We only love
what we see, we see nothing but God, therefore we love nothing but God when it
seems we love the Creatures; how then can our love be bad?


Theod. We love nothing but God, Aristarchus, for God preserves us only to love
him: But our love is bad when it is not regulated: Or rather our love is always
good absolutely and in it self, but it is not relatively good. Our love is
always good in it self, for we can never love what seems bad to us: We can love
but what we believe to be good and lovely, since it is God that makes us love,
and that we love none but him, because we love nothing but what we see in him.
But our love is bad relatively, because we love too much those things that are
least lovely; in short, because instead of loving God in himself, we love him
with relation to his Works, for loving only what we see, we love God, but only
as he represents a vile creature, and not according to what he is in himself.

God allows us to love what is in him that represents a creature, for that is
good; but he will not have us to fix there the motion of our love: He would
have us to love whatever he includes. He would be beloved according to the Idea
of Being in general, of Being infinitely perfect, and soveraignly lovely; which
Idea has no relation but to himself, and represents nothing that is out of
him. Nothing but the Idea of the infinite good ought to stop the motion of our
love; and we are so free in the love of finite good that we even feel the
secret reproaches of our reason, when we fix our selves on it: Because he that
made us for himself speaks to us, that we may turn to him, and give no bounds
to the motion of love which he incessantly produces in us. All the motion that
the soul has toward good, comes from God, and God only acting for himself,
all the motion of the soul has no other end nor bound than God in the
Institution of Nature. God presenting to spirits no other Idea but himself,
since he has made spirits for himself; All the motion of our wills is toward
him, since wills move themselves toward those things only which the spirit
perceives. But men thinking that they see creatures in themselves, the consent
they give to the motion that God imprints in them, ends in the creatures; and
it may be said with a great deal of truth that the free will of men, or their
consent to the motion they receive from God, tends to the creatures, though the
natural motion of their love can tend only to God.

By this you see Aristarchus, that God preserves spirits for himself only; that
the faculties they enjoy, to know and love, know and love none but him; that
sinners do not overturn the laws of nature; that they are inviolable; and that
this general principle of Religion and Morality, viz. That God has made us for
himself, is undeniable.


Arist. But if the order of nature is that we know and love God; and if we
cannot resist that order, since the motion of our love for the creatures tends
of necessity toward the Creator; how can it be said that we really offend God?


Theod. It may be said for many reasons.

God incessantly moves spirits toward good either general or particular; for
all good is to be beloved. He invincibly moves them toward general good, but
it is otherwise with the impression he gives them toward particular good. God
does not limit toward that good the act which he produces in them: For if we
observe it duly, we sufficiently perceive that in the very time when we fix on
some finite good, we have some motion to go further if we will. So we offend
God by stopping his act, and not letting him act in us according to the full
extent of his act.

The reason why God moves us toward good is because it moves us toward him;
and he moves us toward himself because he loves himself. It Is then the love of
God to himself that produces our love in us, Therefore our love ought to be
like to that which God bears to himself: But it is not like it when it
concenters in a particular good; it is then unworthy of the cause that has
produced it, and it may be said to be displeasing to him.

Order is certainly the essential and necessary Will of God, according to
which, and by which he wills whatever he wills, for God loves order, he wills
nothing but order, his will always follows order: But a creature who loves more
those things that are less lovely, thwarts order, withdraws himself from it,
and even overthrows it as much as he is capable of it. He resists then to the
will of God, and so deserves to come into the order of his justice, since he
leaves that of his goodness which is the first and most natural.

God alone can act in the soul and cause in her some pleasure: And by his
decree or general will that makes the order of nature, 'twas his desire that
pleasure should attend certain motions in the body. So those that produce in
their body these motions without reason and even against the secret reproaches
of their reason, oblige God in consequence of his general will to renumerate
them by pleasing sentiments, even in the very time when they ought to be
punished. They therefore use violence against his justice, and offend him. But
they only use this violence, by the love they have for particular good: So this
love offends God. For all those who love their pleasure, without minding the
true cause that produces it, offend that cause: since God never causes pleasure
with an intent that we should fix on it; but rather that we may love the cause
that produces the pleasure, and that we may unite with the thing that
determines that cause to produce it.

You see therefore, Aristarchus, that God is offended when we fix the motion of
love he causes in us, on particular good. But though you might not see it, you
cannot doubt but it is so; for when we confine our love to some particular
good, we feel an inward check in the secret of our reason, and a just check is
a mark of infidelity against him that causes it, those checks or reproaches can
proceed but from a general cause, since they are generally to be found in all
mankind, and must therefore be just, since they are caused by a just God; and
this just God is offended when we confine our love to particular good. This
single Argument is sufficient, for it is unnecessary to seek metaphysical proofs
of a thing whereof we are convined by inward sentiments, that is, by a light
which strikes through the blindest, and by a punishment that stings the most
hardened sinners.


Arist. I believe all this, and I pray you to go on.


Theod. If you believe all this, Aristarchus, you may see your friend, ask him
at first if he desires to be happy. Show him that none but God can act, and
cause in him that pleasure he loves so much, and that renders him the more
happy the greater it is: Let him know that God is just, that he will be obeyed,
that it cannot be conceived he should make truly happy those who do not follow
his orders, nor unhappy those that follow them; that so we ought to use all our
endeavors to know the Will of God, and ought to obey it with all the fidelity
imaginable. You are sensible that men must be either stupid or out of their
senses, not to see those things, and that those that see them and are not
affected with them must either be mad or desperate; but do not tell him so;
take heed above all things you do not awaken his passions, and principally his
pride; for he would conceive nothing of what you might tell him; make him
understand as much as you can, that God acts only for himself; That he has
made our spirit only for himself; That he has given some motion to our heart,
only to incline it toward him; That therefore we ought not to make an ill use
of the motion of love which God causes in us, by loving any thing besides him,
or without relation to him.

Make him understand that God is his true good, not only by being alone capable
to make him happy, but also because none but God can make him more perfect; not
only as he is the cause of pleasure, but also as he is the original of light.

Endeavor to persuade him that God alone is the life and nourishment of the
soul; That all bodies are invisible by themselves, and altogether incapable of
producing any sentiment in our souls; That all good is included in God in an
intelligible manner, in a manner fit to act into the mind, to show it self, and
cause it self to be felt by it; In short, that God alone is the true good of
the mind all manner of ways, and that we ought to love and adore none but him.

Raise in him a desire to hear you, by things on which perhaps he never
thought, and such as may by their novelty stir up in him a salutary curiosity.
But above all things, endeavor to make him very sensible of his unjustice
toward God, whilst he follows his passions: And that being a sinner, and
consequently unworthy of being rewarded by the delightful sentiments of
pleasure, he obliges God in consequence of his immutable orders to affect him
with delight in the very moment he offends him: Death shall corrupt his body,
and then God remaining unchangeable in his decrees, will avenge during a whole
eternity the wrongs he shall have done him, by compelling him, in a manner not
only to be subservient to his disorders, but even to reward him for his
disobedience.

In short, make him sensible of the necessity there is to repent, and strive to
inspire in him a saultary horror of all those criminal pleasures that bewitch
the senses, and corrupt the heart and reason: That retiring within himself, the
confused noise of his passions may not hinder him from harkening to the secret
checks of inward truth, and thus he may understand what you shall tell him
afterward.


DIALOGUE IV. Of the Disorder of Nature caused by Original Sin.
Theod. WELL what satisfaction have you had of your last visit to your Friend?


Arist. None at all. My Friend becomes ill-humoured when ever I speak to him:
nay, sometimes he grows angry, and flies out in a passion. This troubles me
very much.


Theod. But does he laugh no more at what you say?


Arist. No.


Theod. Be of good heart then; your Friend mends, and, I hope, will recover. He
begins now to feel his wounds, since he laughs no more when they are dressed.

Should you wonder to see a man grow ill-humoured and angry if another filled
him with wounds, confusion and shame: why then would you have your Friend
insensible? You have told him perhaps some truths that oblige him to leave his
pleasure, to shake off the Old Man, to be in a disposition to repent, and
appear full of confusion and shame in the sense of his unfortunate Friends, who
will laugh at his change. He has had a prospect of all those things within
himself, and they have scared him. If he be vexed, it is because you have wounded
him; and I believe that you have offended him, by Convincing him. Can any thing
grieve and mortify a worldly man more, than the thoughts of being obliged to
change altogether his way of living, and approve by his own example a manner of
life which his Friends ridicule, and he himself has laughed at with them all
his lifetime? Perhaps your Friend finds himself obliged to this. He is willing
to breakhis bonds, but he tears himself to pieces: his heartis divided, and you
wonder at his pain and impatience.

Know, my dear Aristarchus, that if your Friend heard you without being moved,
it would show that he is not affected with your words; that they do not reach
his heart; that he is not convinced by that conviction which stirs us to
action, begins our conversion, and makes us suffer, because it strips us of the
Old Man. So, I would have you be joyful, not because you have filled your
Friend with sadness, but because his sadness is in all likelihood the sadness
that inclines us to repentance.


Arist. You revive me extremely. Let us go on I pray you in our conferences,
that I may strengthen my self in the knowledge of the proofs of Religion and
Morality to convince my Friend fully.

You proved me the other day that God has made us to know and love him. Pray
what consequence do you draw from that principle? For I grant that God will not
have us to fix on particular good the motion of Love that he incessantly causes
in us, that we may love him incessantly, not with respect to his works, which
being below us, are unworthy of our Love, but in himself, and according to the
idea we have of him, as a Being infinitely perfect.


Theod. All the Precepts of Christian Morals depend upon that Principle. You
believe it already, but you shall see it clearly, when I shall make use of it
to justify the counsels which the Eternal Wisdom has given us in the Gospel.

I will show you now that this principle is the ground of the Christian
Religion, that owns the need of a Restorer, and Lawgiver, able to illuminate
the Spirit, and give a new strength to the Soul; of a Mediator between God and
Men, who may offer a Sacrifice, and establish a Worship worthy of God, and able
to satisfy his justice.

You own that God will be loved with all our strength, that is to say, that all
the motion of love he creates in us, end toward him, and that we love
creatures only for him, and not him with respect to creatures. But do you love
him always after that manner? do you find no difficulty in the practice of his
Love? do you feel no pain to follow this motion to its utmost, or no pleasure
to stop it. In short, do you not find often that the ways of virtue are hard
and painful, and those of vice smooth and pleasing?


Arist. I am not more perfect than St. Paul. I sometimes delight in the love of
God according to the inward man, but I feel in my body another law that fights
against the law of my spirit. I suffer when I practice virtue: I receive some
pleasure in the enjoyment of sensible things in spite of all my opposition;
and am so much a slave to my body, that I cannot even apply my self without
pain and reluctance to things that have no relation to the body.


Theod. But whence proceeds this pain you resent in doing well, and this
pleasure you have in doing ill? You are not the cause of your own pleasure nor
pain, for if you were, seeing you love your self, you would never produce pain
in your self, and would still be enjoying some pleasure. Neither is it your
body, not those that are about you; for all bodies are below you, and it cannot
be conceived that they may act in you, or make you happy or unhappy. None but
God can act in the Soul. But do you think that God afflicts you when you do
well, or that he rewards you when you do ill? Do you think that God who
desires that you may love him with all your strength, throws you back when you
run after him? But when you cease to follow him, and stop at some particular
good, do you think that he fixes you on it by the pleasure you find in it.


Erast. What are you afraid of, Aristarchus? Is it not plain that God alone
can act in us? has not Theodorus demonstrated it to you? why do you hesitate?
will you already leave Principles plainly demonstrated for an objection you
cannot solve? will you prefer darkness to light? Yes it is God --


Theod. Softly, Erastus, I esteem the firmness of your mind, but I like the
disposition wherein I find Aristarchus better in this case: he fears to fail in
point of respect toward God, and that there may be something hard and violent
in the consequence I would draw.


Erast. I have thought on your System, Theodore, and can explain all this
without saying any thing hard or displeasing. What you just now did object to
Aristarchus plainly evinces original sin, the disorder of nature, the enmity
that is between God and man, the necessity of a Mediator, Lawgiver and
Restorer; in short, it seems to me that I have a glimpse of the Christian
Religion in that Principle.


Arist. You go very fast, Erastus. I pray you, Theodore, demonstrate that the
proof of original sin is to be found (as Erastus pretends) in those things you
told me just now.


Theod. How, Aristarchus, do you not see it? Do you not remember the system
which I explained to you two days ago? But it is no matter. I ask you; Is it not
a disorder, that a spirit who is made for none but God, should suffer when he
loves God?


Arist. But you say, that it is God that makes him suffer.


Theod. I own it; But is it not a disorder, that God who has made spirits for
none but himself, and gives them no motion but toward himself should repel
them from him, push them back, and use them ill when they come near him, and
cause in them sentiments of pleasure when they turn from him, and fix on some
particular good?


Arist. This is not only a disorder, but a contradiction. This cannot be. God
does not contradict, nor oppose himself.


Theod. But, Aristarchus, Is it not certain that God makes, and preserves us
for none but himself? Is it not also most certain that God alone acts in the
Soul, and gives her sensations of pleasure or pain, when she cleaves to bodies,
or when she deprives her self of them. Is it not God that moves us to love him?
and also to love bodies, if the pleasure we feel at their appearance may be
reckoned a sufficient reason for a rensonable spirit to love then.


Arist. It is true. But how?


Theod. I have already explained it to you. But yet can this disorder, this
fight of God against himself (give me leave to use these expressions for a
while) this want of uniformity we imagine to be in Gods Actions, proceed from
God? God made man for himself, and even preserves him for himself only; but
when a man quits the body to unite himself to God by the force of meditation,
when a man walks in the ways of virtue to come near God he feels pain, and this
pain proceeds from none but God? Does not this show that God is angry with us,
and that we have displeased him? If God will have us to run after him and to
follow and seek him, is it possible he can reject and push us back, and make us
resent pain when we really follow him, unless at the same time there be some
Enmity between us and him? Why does he repel us when we follow him, but because
we are unworthy to come near him? And how are we unworthy to come near him,
since he is the end of our Creation, unless it be because we are no more such
as God had made us, and he does not care for us as we are now, and we want a
Restorer and a Mediator.


Arist. I doubt you have not well demonstrated yet the Enmity which you believe
to be between God and men. You say that God repels us when we would come near
him, because he makes us have a sense of pain in the practice of virtue and the
inquiry after truth.

But I have two things to object to you; First that if it seems that God repess
and molests us by Sentiments of pain, on the other side he comforts us in the
deepest recess of our reason; for we feel an inward joy in the practice of
virtue which makes us know sufficiently that God is our good; and if God did
not desire we should love him, he would not reward us with this inward comfort;
nor create in us those bitter checks and reproaches that make us uneasy in the
enjoyment of sensible good.


Secondly, God does not repel and thrust us from him when we run after him; he
only gives us notice by sentiments of pain to seek somewhere else than in him
the good of the body. And as meditation is not conducible to our health, we
ought to feel some pain in its practice, that we may leave it off; for all
sensible pleasures or pains, are only warnings to the body: and you ought not
to think that God will have us love or hate any thing for the sake of the
pleasures or pains we receive in the use of them; God will have us to seek or
avoid them, for the preservation of the Body, as you said two days ago, but he
will not have us love or fear them.


Theod. Whatever you have said now is true, Aristarchus, but it does not
overthrow what I had established before. I own that God comforts us by an inward
joy when we love him, and that he torments us by knawing checks when we love
the good of the body. After all, what does this prove? nothing else but that
God will have us to love him, and that he has made us for himself. It is a
certain mark that the enmity between God and men is not full and general; but
it is not a sure sign of a perfect friendship.

Sinners have offended God, there is enmity between them and God, you do not
doubt it; and yet God recalls them to him by checks and reproaches: Yet this
does not show that he loves them perfectly, but only that the enmity is not
entire and absolute, for it cannot be such, without causing their destruction.
And do not imagine that these checks alone, such as the Heathens felt them,
could make them come back, reconcile and rejoin themselves to their principle.
This call was only to justify God's conduct, and condemn that of Sinners. For
in all likelihood it is to be found even amongst the Damned, who will be
eternally recalled, and eternally repelled and condemned; those checks being a
condemnation of their malice. None return but such as are called back in Jesus
Christ; for nothing but his grace can make this Call efficacious: without the
grace of Christ, sensible attractions have a greater power than this inward
call. God pushes us back more than he draws us to him, and if he will have us
because he made us, he will not have us such as we have made our selves; far
from this, as such he cannot suffer us near him, and always removes us from him.

Yet, Aristarchus, it is true that God is too just, and loves himself too much
not to desire to be beloved, and to remove positively from him creatures whom
he only made for himself; for sensible pleasure or pain removes from God but
indirectly and by our own fault: First, because being able to find out by
reason that bodies are incapable of creating in us either pleasure or pain, we
ought neither to fear nor love them, but God alone who has power to cause
these sensations in us.

When something wounds us we ought to fear God; and when our senses are any
ways pleased we ought to think on him, and fear and love him in all things: For
it is a common notion, that the true cause of pleasure and of pain ought to be
loved and feared. But our ignorance of the actual presence and continual
operation of this true cause of our sensations makes us love and fear bodies,
imagining them to be capable to act in us.

Now this ignorance is not something positive, caused in us by God: it is
nothing. It is true that not to love or fear bodies, it is absolutely necessary
we should have a very clear and lively knowledge of the presence and continual
operation of God upon us; for the knowledge which Philosophy gives us of him
does not strongly enough dispose us to cleave incessantly to him.

But what can be concluded from God's not causing himself to be known enough
without his grace, to be Loved and feared in all things, but that men have
offended and displeased him.

God does not therefore remove us positively from him, when he causes some
pleasure or pain in us by the means of bodies, since we ought and may then think
on him rather than on those bodies. Now I come to the second reason.

Seeing we have a body, it is necessary we should have notice of what passes in
it. It is necessary that at the appearance of objects we have sentiments moving
us to cleave to, or shun them. It is also necessary that these sentiments be
preingaging for some reasons that I have mentioned elsewhere.

So God does not positively remove us from him, when he causes in us our
sentiments, since on the contrary it is the shortest means to warn us of the
things that are necessary for the preservation of life without turning us away
from him.

But those preingaging Sentiments ought not to disturb us, nor oppose our
Reason; and seeing they do, it is evident, as I have already said it, 2d. Dial.
That Man does not deserve God should interrupt the Law of the communication of
motions for his sake: but this does not imply, that God really pushes us back
from him.

In short, men see all things in God; their immediate object is the
intelligible world, and the very substance of God; but they not thinking on him
at the appearance of sensible objects, imagine that some outward being
altogether like the Idea they have of it, acts in them: Thus God moves them
only toward himself, since he only moves them toward what they see, and not
toward those things which they imagine to be external, and it is only
indirectly and through a mistake that they love the creatures which are neither
so lovely, nor such as they imagine them to be.


Erast. You are much in the right Theodorus, when you believe that the first
cause of our disorders, is our not having God always present to our minds; and
not seeing or rather not feeling him in all things. For did we plainly and
sensibly see, that none but God really acts in us when bodies are present to
our senses; methinks we would fear and love none but him, since we love or fear
nothing but what acts in us.

How then could Adam estrange himself from God? for he could see God in all
things, and had all the knowledge, that was necessary to remain united to him.
If you do not explain how he could fall into sin; perhaps Aristarchus will
believe that the first man was made such as we are, and that concupiscence is
not so much a punishment for sin, as the first institution of Nature.


Theod. You need not fear it, Erastus, he knows now that we ought not to leave
a demonstrated Truth, because we cannot solve some difficult Points; he now
sticks to what he sees. But I understand what you mean, and answer you thus.

The first man did clearly see God in all things; he evidently knew that bodies
could not be his true good, nor properly make him in the least happy or
unhappy, he was fully convinced of God's continual operation on him; but his
was no sensible conviction, he knew this but did not feel it: on the contrary
he could feel that bodies acted on him, tho he could not know that they did it.
It is true that being endowed with reason, he ought to have followed his light
and not his sentiment; and that he could easily have done it, seeing he could
stop his sentiments when he pleased, being free from concupiscence. However
deferring too much to his senses, and suffering himself by degrees to hearken
to them more willingly than to God himself, by reason that the senses always
move pleasingly, and God did not move him to hear him by preingaging pleasures,
which must have lessened his Freedom; you easily conceive how he came to remove
himself so far from God, as to lose sight of him, to adjoyn in will to a
creature by whose means he received some satisfaction: and which he might then
confusedly imagine to be capable of making him as happy, as the Serpent assured
Eve, it would. For tho Adam was not attackt, nor seduced by the Serpent, as Eve
was. And Adam was not deceived, 1 Timothy 2.14. Yet what God said after Adam's
fall, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, Genesis 3.22.
Sufficiently shows that he had some hopes of becoming happy by the means of the
forbidden Fruit. Now to determine us to do a thing, there is no absolute
necessity that we be fully persuaded that our Motive is just and reasonable.
The hopes of a great benefit, tho never so small, are capable of making us do
much. So we may suppose that Adam was so strongly applied to sensible Objects,
and, consequently, so far removed out of God's presence, that the least hope,
the slightest doubt, and the most confused sentiment of so great an advantage
as that of being like God, has been capable of moving him to do a thing, which
he did not, perhaps, think very sinful at the time of his Fall.

All finite Spirits must be subject to Error and Sin, principally if they
resent preingaging pleasures, which incline them to seek things that they ought
not to love, and to shun what they ought not to fear. For no finite Spirit can
actually resent pleasure, without actually dividing the capacity he has to
think, and lessning the knowledge of his duty, without being removed by it out
of God's presence, in short, without weakening by little and little his love and
his fear, insomuch that actual pleasure seems a Reason, or sufficient Motive to
love what is not worthy of our love.

Adam ought to have remained fixed and unmovable in the presence of God, and
not have suffered the capacity of his spirit to be divided by all those
pleasures that were in perfect subjection to his Will, and used only to warn
him of what he was to do for the preservation of his life; and as he should, so
he could have done it. And had he made a good use of his Free Will, during the
time prescribed for a Reward, he should have been confirmed in his
Righteousness, not only by a more clear knowledge of God's continual operation
on him, but by a sensible knowledge which invincibly fixes on God, all Spirits
naturally desiring to be happy. For the Saints do not only see by a
Far-fetched, and Metaphysical Sight, that God alone is capable of acting in
them, and making them happy: But they also feel it by an ^nspeakable comfort
which God diffuses in them, which ^enetrates them, and unites them with him so
strongly, that they cannot forsake him to love any thing else.

I speak of those things according to the present ^nowledge of human
understanding; and do not pre^end always to certify the truth or existence of
things, when I answer to what may be objected to me; my ^tmost Design is to
prove their Possibility.


Arist. This is sufficient Theodore; But how would ^ou explain the Transmission
of Original Sin, and the ^eneral Disorder of human Nature? For it is our Soul
that has sinned, and is corrupt. How comes it to ^e possible, that coming from
the hands of God, they ^row corrupt as soon as they are united to Bodies?


Theod. Our Soul is made to love God. She keeps ^n the Order of her Creation
when she loves him; that ^s to say, when the motion which God gives her,
carries ^er toward him in the Sense that I explained it to you yesterday. On
the contrary, she strays from the Order, when having a motion sufficient to
reach to God, she stops at some particular good, and thus hinders God's Act in
her. I do not believe it can be conceived, that she can be orderly or
disorderly another way. If then I demonstrate, that by reason of the Union
which Children have with their Mother, the Soul of Children is by necessity
turned toward Bodies, that their Soul loves only Bodies, and all her motion
confines it self to some sensible thing from the moment she is formed; I shall
have demonstrated the cause of the general disorder of Nature, and how we are
all born in Sin.

I prove it thus. There is no Woman but has in her Brain some Impression that
represents to her sensible things; either because she actually sees Bodies, or
receives her nourishment from them. You do not doubt of this; for, after all,
we must at least eat to live; and we cannot eat, but our Brain receives some
Impression of it, since we remember it. There happens also no Impression in the
Brain, without being followed by some Emotion in the Spirits, which does
incline the Soul to the love of the thing that is present to the mind at the
time of that Impression; that is to say, to the love of this or that Body: for
Bodies only can act on the Brain. See the 7th Chapter of the 2d Book of the
Inquiry after Truth.
In short, there is no Woman but has in her Brain some steps and vestiges or
some motion of Spirits which makes her think, and carries her to sensible
things. Now when the Child is in his Mother's Womb, he feels the same
Impression and Emotion of Spirits with his Mother; therefore in that state he
knows and loves Bodies. The daily Instances we have of Children that fear or
abhor those things that frighted their Mother whilst they were with Child,
sufficiently shows, that they have had the same Impression, and consequently
the same Idea's and Passions as their Mothers; since they sometimes never saw
since they were born those things which they so much abhor. And those Instances
even show us, that the Impressions and Agitations are greater, and consequently
the Idea's and Passions more lively in Children, than in their Mothers, since
they remain affected with them, and oftentimes their Mothers no more remember
it.

I perceive, Erastus, that you wonder to hear me say that Children see, imagine,
and desire the same things with their Mothers.


Erast. I must own, that this amazes me, but it seems to me demonstrated,
however there being holy Women, and full of the love of God, how come their
Children to be Sinners?


Theod. It is because the love of God does not communicate itself like the love
of Bodies; the reason whereof is, that God is not sensible; and that there are
no steps in the Brain, that by the institution of Nature do represent God, nor
any of those things that are purely intelligible.

A Woman may well represent to herself God in the Form of a Reverend old Man:
but whilst she thinks on God, her Child shall think on an old Man; when she
loves God, her Child will love old Men; and this love of old Men does not a
justify. All the Vestiges in the Brains of Mothers communicate themselves to
Children: But the Idea's that are joined to those Vestiges, by the Will of Man,
or by the Identity of Time, and not by Nature, do not communicate themselves to
them; for Children in the Womb are not as knowing and holy as their Mothers.


Erast. But, Theodore, Children are not free: I own, they love Bodies; but they
cannot hinder themselves from loving them. How then are they Sinners? How are
they corrupt?


Theod. Their Sin is not of their own choosing, nor free and voluntary; yet they
are corrupt. For all Spirits that are averse from God, and inclined toward
corporeal Beings, do not follow God's Orders, if it be true that God will be
loved more than Bodies.

Concupiscence is not a Sin in virtuous persons, because there is in them a
love of choice that opposes it. Concupiscence does not reign in them, but it
reigns in Children; their natural love is bad, and they have no other.

When two sorts of loves are to be found in a heart, God regards only that love
which is free; so Dreams are not sinful in pious Men, because the love of
choice that went before, leaves in the Soul a disposition that carries and
turns her toward God. But in a Child, who was never turned toward God,
nothing but his Nature, and what God has fixed in him by the Decree of his first
Will can be good; he is a Child of wrath, and must of necessity be damned: For
it cannot be conceived that God will ever reward the disposition of his heart,
except you also conceive that God rewards disorder.


Era. But, Theodore, Was not what you call Disorder put into the Child by God
himself? Since it is by the Decree of his Will, that upon certain motions of
the Brain, certain thoughts should result in the Soul, and the communication
that is between the Brain of the Mother, and that of the Child, was established
by God.


The. I own it, Erastus, however it is not amiss: It was requisite that the
Vestiges in the Brain, and the motions of the Spirits, should be attended with
the thoughts and agitations of the Soul, for the Reasons I have already told
you, the chief whereof is, That Bodies do not deserve the application of a
Spirit that is made for none but God. It was necessary that Adam should be told
by preingaging Sentiments, by short and unquestionable Proofs, that such and
such things were good for his Body. It was fit also, that the impressions on
the Mother's Brain should communicate themselves to that of the Child, for the
full conformation of his Body. Those things are most wisely established;
Disorder is only found in Desire.

It is good that there result in the Soul certain thoughts, when certain
impressions form themselves in the Brain; but it is not good that those
impressions prompt us to the love of sensible things, and do not vanish when we
desire it, or that our Body be not submitted to us. Now the Sin of the first
Man has caused this; for he became unworthy by his Sin, that God should
suspend the communication of motions for his sake: so not being able to hinder
the impression of the Bodies that act on us, from reaching as far as the chief
part of the Brain, which is the seat of the Soul, we have of necessity the
sentiments and motions of Concupiscence, tho God does nothing else in us but
deprive us of the power to hinder the natural communications of motions, that
is to say, without acting in us. For Concupiscence precisely as such is
nothing; it is in us only a want of power over our Body, which want proceeds
from our Sin only, since it would be just without it that our Body were
submitted to us.


Erast. I perceive plainly, Theodorus, that the union of our Spirit with our
Body proceeds from God, and that our being Slaves to our Body, proceeds from
Sin. All that is plain. But you, Aristarchus, are you persuaded of the
Sentiments and Proofs of Theodorus?


Arist. I dare not assent to them, for I fear to be mistaken.


Erast. Perhaps it is because Theodorus speaks of the transmission of original
Sin, as of a thing not impossible to be explained, and you have hitherto
believed it to be unexplainable; this may have prepossessed you: Or it may be
your Skeptical Friends have so often laughed at the simplicity of those that
believe what the Church teaches, that your imagination has been formerly
somewhat spoilt by it. For my part I remember that some time ago I was half
stunned by the reflection of the amazement that appeared in the looks of one of
those false learned, at the appearance of an imaginary difficulty. But
remembering what Theodorus tells me continually, not to suffer my self to be
imposed upon by the Air and sensible impression of Men, I retired within my
self, and could not help laughing at my pannick fear.


Arist. Do you think, Erastus, that I am so much a Fool as to let my self be
imposed on.


Erast. You are too wise to do so, Aristarchus; but you are not yet wise enough
not to receive some impression by the bold way and commanding Air of so many
People that come to see you. It is impossible to be always upon our guard, and
compare incessantly Men's words with the answers of inward truth; and you shall
give me leave to tell you, that I even observed but two days ago by your
countenance, that you are a Man born for company; that you are very full of
complaisance, and very easily embrace the Sentiments of others: yet the
business was of moment.


Arist. I remember it, it is true I was moved, that person spoke to me in a
very strong and lively manner, but I soon came to my self.


Theod. Perhaps it is because the thing nearly concerned you, and you were not
then about a Philosophical Question, or certain Points of Religion that have
nothing common with the Senses.


Arist. It is true, but really I will no longer believe Men upon their word.


Theod. No, you do not believe them upon their word, for words being arbitrary,
persuade only as far as they enlighten the mind; but the Air persuades
naturally, and by impression: It persuades insensibly, and without letting us
even know what it is that we are persuaded of; for all it can do by it self is
to agitate and trouble. I say it to you, Aristarchus, you confusedly believe
above a million of things which you do not know, and which the Commerce you
have with the World has heapt on your memory. But be not vexed at it, there is
no man but has a very great number of those confused Notions, for we are all
sensible. There is no man made for Society, but is fastened to other men, and
receives in his brain the same impressions as those who speak to him with some
emotion and force; and those impressions are attended by those confused
judgments whereof I am speaking.

Do not imagine that none but Children see and desire what their Mother sees
and desires, as I told you just now, when I explained to you the propagation of
original Sin. All men live by opinion, they commonly see and desire things, as
those they converse with, proportionately to the need they have of their help.
Children are so strongly united with their Mothers, that they see nothing but
what she sees. But men are capable to see and think of themselves, they are not
so narrowly united to other men, seeing they can live alone, they can think
alone; but seeing they cannot live conveniently out of Society, they never
think easily, and without pain, but when they suffer themselves to be persuaded
by the air and way of those who speak to them.

Is it not true, Aristarchus, that there are some Persons who have prepossessed
you against what I have said to you now of original Sin; not as Erastus thinks,
by laughing at those things, for you are too well converted to have still any
deference for the silly banters of the false learned; but rather gravely and
piously inspiring you with a secret aversion for some Sentiments that seem new,
and are too clear for such as are not used to see the light.

I know it, Aristarchus, and plainly perceive, that nothing but the disorder
which they have caused in your mind by the darkness of their terms, and the
decisive and scientific air of their quality, hinders you from assenting to
what I have told you now. But let not this make you uneasy, there is a great
number of others distinguished by the same outward marks of Piety and Learning,
that approve what your Friends condemn. If I thought it fitter to convince you
by Authority than by Reason, I would let you see them; but you ought to
convince your self by such Proofs as may be acceptable to the Person whom you
design to convert. The most honest men are not infallible, even all those who
seem so, are not such. But however it be, it is better to be sensible to light,
than to the most pious and most sanctified Air; because God always enlightens,
and oftentimes the Way and Air imposes and seduces.


Arist. This is true, Theodorus, but I fear that your Sentiment is not
conformable to that of the holy Fathers.


Theod. But what occasion have you to fear it? Have you ever read any thing
contrary to it in the Fathers? I see you have been told so gravely, and you
have believed it in the simplicity of your heart.

Has not St. Austin, who best understood the corruption of Nature, explained
the propagation of Original Sin, by the example of hereditary Diseases? By that
of gouty Parents, who beget Children subject to the Gout. And of the sick
Trees, which yield a corrupted Seed, that produces nothing but bad Trees? For
he knew that Original Sin can only communicate itself by the body, because its
principle is in the body, and that in some sense it dwells in the body, as St.
Paul says.

As for the other Fathers that lived before St. Austin, they never undertook to
make a particular discussion of the manner in which the transmission of that
Sin could be explained. Their Age was neither so incredulous nor malicious as
ours; and it was not then necessary to give probable explications of our
mysteries, to make those who called themselves Christians believe them.

No, Aristarchus, I could never find that the Fathers were against what I have
told you now: But I wonder to see that you who formerly used to treat the
Churches Authority with so much indifference, are now so full of Veneration for
the Fathers, as to be afraid without cause of dissenting from them, by
admitting some explications wherein we are not always obliged to follow them,
provided we keep with them to the Faith and Doctrine of the Church.

You are too credulous, and your apprehensions are not just; you do not
meditate enough; you are like those Children who walk by night without a light,
that are afraid of all things, because they see nothing.

Whilst you did lead a careless sort of life, the air of the Libertines used to
persuade you; and now you suffer your self to be convinced by the air of piety
and gravity of certain persons, who have not always as much light and charity,
as opinion and false zeal. You are less in danger of being mistaken, but yet
you are not in the way of truth. You ought to believe what must be believed,
but you ought to see what may, and consequently what must, be seen. I hope that
if you make serious Reflections on the things, I have told you, without
troubling your self with what your Friends think of it, your Uncertainties will
be cleared, and you will no more suffer your self to be scared by a sort of Men
who assume an unjust power over the mind of others, instead of bringing them to
Reason by light and evidence.

I leave you, with Erastus, to confer together upon those things I have said to
you, meditate with him, and endeavor either to convince your self, or to offer
to me (that is) in a clear and evident manner, the Reasons that hinder you from
doing it.


DIALOGUE V. Of the Reparation of Nature by Jesus Christ.
Arist. WE have made many Reflections, Erastus, and I, upon Original Sin, and
the Contagion that spreads itself in Spirits: And have even found that Original
Sin is transmitted into Children in some manner, as the Sentiments and Passions
of passionate men communicate themselves to those that are in their presence.
For as the union that is between men for the benefit of Society, is the cause
why a man by the air of his Face stamps on the brain of such as are touched by
it, the same impressions which the Passion that moves him forms within him; See
the 7th Chapter of the 2d Book of the Inquiry after Truth.
so the union of the Mother with her Child being very strict, and the Child's
wants very great, the Child's imagination must needs be sullied by all the
impressions and emotions of mind that incline the Mother to sensible things.


Theod. Thus, Aristarchus, those that live in the hurry of the world, that are
held by too many things, that never consult their reason, but suffer themselves
to be convinced, moved and run down by every one that has some strength of
imagination, and whose air being lively, is consequently insectious, those
civil men of the Town, born for Company, who are always so ready to receive
their Friends Sentiments; in a word, Aristarchus, those Persons that are such
as you have been till now, for you are the civilest and most complaisant
Gentleman I ever knew, those Persons, I say, that are like you, have a double
portion of Original Sin, that which they received from their Mother when they
were in her womb, and that which they have sucked in by the commerce of the
world.

You are happy, Aristarchus, in being able to withstand the impression of those
two Sins. How indebted are you not to inward truth for calling you back so
loudly as to be heard by you in spite of the confused noise of your senses and
passions! You retire, sometimes within your self, as if your Reason was not
corrupted, and the concupiscence of original Sin had not been strengthened, nor
increased by a concupiscence of thirty years standing. You are so much altered
to day from what you were yesterday, that I believe you will no longer find any
considerable difficulty in our following Conferences. For all that hindered you
from apprehending my sentiments, proceeded from the obscurity and disorder
wherein the converse of the world had thrown you: so that being delivered from
that disorder, and resolved to retire incessantly within your self, you will
hearken to the decisions of that truth that presides to all spirits.


Arist. Yes, Theodorus, I renounce all the impressions that used to prejudice
me. I plainly see that all manner of union to sensible things, estrangeth and
removes us from truth: that the union which I had in my Mother's womb, made me
a Sinner: that the union which I have had with my Relations, has only given me
a knowledge of the world, useful indeed to unite me with it, and make my self
considerable in it, but altogether unprofitable to the inquiry after truth. In
short, that the union which I have had with my Friends and other Men, has
filled me with a very great number of most dangerous prejudices, which you know
better than I. I have hitherto lived by Opinion, I desire now to live by
Reason. I will believe nothing but what Faith and Charity oblige me to believe;
in all other things I will consult inward truth, and believe only what it shall
tell me. I mistrust all Men, and even you Theodorus: you may speak as much as
you please, I will not believe you the sooner for it, if truth does not speak
as well as you. Your way of speaking is able to impose upon Men, your Air is
that of a Man persuaded of what he says, and that Air is persuasive; you ought
to be feared as well as others. I honor and love you, but I honor and love
truth more than you; and only love you so much the more, as I find you more
united to that truth I love, than a world of others.


Theod. You are now in the best disposition of a true Philosopher, and a true
Friend; for there is nothing but truth that enlightens true Philosophers, and
unites true Friends. I desire you to observe and love in me nothing but truth.
I speak to you, but I do not enlighten you. I am not your light, nor your good,
therefore do not believe me. If my Air and way of expression make an impression
on your imagination, I would have you to know that it is not with a design to
impose upon you. I have no design in it, I speak naturally; and if I have some
design, it is only that of awakening your attention, by something that may
penetrate you.


Arist. I believe it, Theodorus; and as you would be sorry to deceive me, you
will not take it ill if I am aware of you, and do not believe you upon your
word. But go on, I pray you. I am inwardly convinced of the matters which you
proved to me yesterday, and even of your way of explaining the transmission of
Original Sin.


Theod. I told you yesterday some things that are not absolutely necessary for
what will follow. There is no necessity of your being persuaded of the manner
how Adam could happen to fall, nor how his Sin could transmit it self into his
Offspring. It is enough that you know that Men are born in Sin and Corruption;
that there is an enmity between God and them; that their body is not under
their subjection; and that consequently their mind is in darkness, and their
heart in sin and disorder.

You cannot doubt of these things, if you are persuaded of what I told you
yesterday, or make some reflections on the struggling that you feel within you
of your self against your self, of the law of your mind against that of your
body, of your self after the inward man, against your self after the outward
and sensible man.

You believe, Aristarchus, that the order of things is reversed, it must
therefore be re-establisht. But how shall that be done? Shall it be by the
Heathens Philosophy? They are ignorant of our Ills, and cannot cure them. Shall
it be by the Religion of the Deists? They will not admit of a Mediator. Shall
it be by the Law of Mahomet? it increases Concupiscence. Shall it be then by
the Law of Moses? it is just and holy, I own it; but who shall keep it? It
shows us Sin, it makes us sensible of the decease, it makes us know the want of
the Physician, and the need of Grace, that there must be a Mediator to
reconcile Mankind to God; but it does not give us that Mediator: it promises,
represents and gives us an image of him, but it does not possess him. Moses
himself has need of an Intercessor to God; and if he was a Mediator and
Intercessor between God and his People, it was only as a Type of the true
Mediator between God and men. His Mediation was only to obtain for them a long
life upon earth, and temporal enjoyments, for he does not promise them Heaven:
he does not reunite them to God: he does not merit them Charity. In fine, he
does not send them the Holy Ghost, that alone removes the fear of Slaves, and
alone gives right to the inheritance of Children.

None but Christ is capable to make peace between God and men: for none but him
can atone the justice of God, by the excellency of his Sacrifice; intercede to
God, by the dignity of his Priesthood; obtain all things, and send us the Holy
Ghost, by the quality of his Person. None but him that came down from Heaven,
can take us thither with him; and none but him that is united to God by an
union of substance, can reunite us to God by a supernatural union; none but the
true Son of God can entitle us to his Adoption.

God having made all things by his Son, and for him, it was just he should
repair all things by him, and establish him Head of his Church, Judge over his
People, and Sovereign Lord of all the Creation.

Who but God-man could retribute to God an honor worthy of him, have a
fellow-suffering of our miseries, and sanctify them in his Person? Who but him
could be predestined before the beginning of time, as a work worthy of God,
represented in all Ages as the end of the Law, and wished for by all Nations,
as the only Person able to deliver them from their misery?

Man being become sensible and carnal, it was necessary that the Word should be
made Man, that the intelligible Light should make himself sensible, and that he
who enlightens all Men in the deepest recess of their reason, should instruct
them likewise by their Senses, by Miracles, Parables, and familiar Comparisons.

United as we are to all corporeal Beings, and having a dependence upon
whatsoever we are united to, it was necessary that we should be taught
Self-denial, Privation and Repentance, and strengthened by the cherishing
delights of Grace, as also comforted by the sweetness of Hope.

The Christian Religion does whatever ought to be done: and Christian Morality
teaches whatsoever ought to be known. But I must prove to you more at large,
and by a method that may convince your Friend, that none but the Christian
Religion can reestablish the Order that Sin has reversed.

I begin with those things that concern Religion, and then will come to
Morality.

I pray you therefore to be attentive, Aristarchus. Do you believe that God is
merciful?


Arist. Can I not believe it?


Theod. And do you believe that he is just?


Arist. Yes certainly.


Theod. This Work being chiefly against such as have but little deference to
the Authority of the Fathers, I do not quote them to prove my Assertions, though
I give their Arguments, when I judge them proper for my design. When I quoted
The Inquiry after Truth, the Reason was, that the Reader may see in that Book
the things that I have not sufficiently explained in this. However, it is easy
to perceive, that I do not pretend to convince any one by the Authority of that
Book, I quote it as Geometricians do Euclid and Apollonius.
You must believe then that it is impossible that Sin can remain unpunished, and
that God must needs revenge himself on such as offend him, and that it is
necessary that he satisfy himself, by atoning his Justice.


Arist. I don't know that Theodorus, for being merciful, he can pardon when he
pleases.


Theod. But can he be willing to do it?


Arist. What a Question that is! Men themselves can do that.


Theod. Men can forgive when they are offended: they ought not to revenge
themselves, nor have they power to do it. As they love themselves to excess,
they would be sure to exceed; being Sinners, they would condemn themselves; and
whatsoever offends them being ordained by God, they would be guilty of
Rebellion. For the only thing wherein God has no hand, to wit, the inward
malice of their Enemies, does them no harm: they have no right to oblige others
to love them, neither can they take any revenge for want of that love that does
not belong to them.

But if Men had received the sovereign wisdom and power to judge and punish, if
their essential Will was the Order, if they could not act against that Order,
might they not punish such Crimes as would be committed against God, or pardon
Sin and Disorder, and yet not offend the Law and Order?

But supposing they could, do you think they might also secure to Sinners the
means of attaining Felicity?

They would certainly make an ill use of their power, and by overthrowing the
order of Justice, prove themselves Sinners, and thereby be altogether destitute
of either love to God, or zeal for his glory.

Do you think God can reverse the essential order of things, or fight against
himself? Do you imagine it is possible he should not love himself, or forbear
his own satisfaction, by neglecting his Justice, and that mercy which you
conceive to be a virtue in us; to be a perfection in God?

No, Aristarchus, God is not merciful in the same manner as we are; that
Clemency would be contrary to his Justice. That Sinners be happy, implies
contradiction, if not on the part of Sinners, at least on that of him that is
omnipotent, and cannot act against the essential order of things, on the part,
I say, of him that is essentially just. God must punish Sin, and if he has a
mind to spare those that commit it, for the end that he proposed to himself in
the construction of his work, it is necessary that a Sacrifice more worthy of
his greatness and justice than they are, should receive the blow that was to
make them eternally miserable. Thus God may be merciful.

Things being thus, you easily see what need we stand in of Christ's
satisfaction. That the Mediator of the Arians and Socinians, is a Mediator who
can never atone for them, nor reconcile them to God: And that none but those
who believe that Jesus Christ is really God, because none but a God can
justify and save us, in a word that none but those who call upon Christ by
that name which the Scripture gives him, that expresses so well his qualities,
Jehovah Justitia nostra, God our Righteousness, can have a full assurance in
his Sacrifice.

Observe, Aristarchus, that God does whatever he ought to do.


Arist. But God lies under no obligation to any one.


Theod. I own it. But God does whatever he is obliged to for his own sake. Men
offend and oppose him, and overturn the order of things: ought not he then to
revenge himself, satisfy his Justice, and punish those that offend him? For I
grant that, as for our sakes, God is obliged to do no more than he pleases:
But he is obliged to do something for himself, and that being granted, it is
just to believe that he will not omit to do it; for he loves himself, and is
willing to do whatever he ought to do for himself. I own that there is no Law
that constrains him, but that he is to himself his own Law. However he is to
himself inviolably a Law, and must of necessity love himself, though nothing
forces him to love himself, but himself.


Arist. But, Theodorus, will you dive into God's Councels, and give Bounds to
his Wisdom and Power? Do you think that God could not satisfy his Justice
otherwise, than by the death of his Son? If it be so --


Theod. I understand you, Aristarchus, God's Justice could have been satisfied
by a thousand other means. The least Suffering; the least Action of God-Man
could fully satisfy God's Justice for all our Crimes; for the merit of it is
infinite, by the dignity of the Person. But God could not be fully satisfied by
any other Satisfaction, than that of a Divine Person. Nothing is worthy of God,
but God himself. All manner of offense against God is infinitely criminal, and
there is nothing Infinite but God. He cannot therefore be satisfied without
having a hand in it: such is the Immensity of his greatness.

Though God had sacrificed all the Creation to his wrath, and annihilated all his
Works, that Sacrifice would still have been unworthy of him. But God had not
made the world to annihilate it, he had made it for him that has restored it;
for his Son was predestined before all Ages, to be the Chief of it. He is the
Firstborn of all Creatures, the Beginning of the Lord's Ways, the Beginning,
End and Perfection of all the Works of God; for whatever God has made, is only
perfectly worthy of God, through Christ.

I don't know, Aristarchus, whether your thoughts follow mine, perhaps I run
too fast: But, pray, what is it you would say to me?


Arist. I Will tell you. God being infinitely wise and powerful: why could he not
form a Creature sufficiently noble, and raised above Sinners, to atone for them?


Theod. How! Aristarchus, Shall a Creature undertake to reconcile Sinners?
Plead for them? Show any love for them? That is, for the damned. (For if we are
not ranked with the damned, it is because we are made free in Christ.) But,
supposing with you, that a Creature could do all this, satisfy for us, and
free us by his satisfaction, it follows that we are indebted to that Creature
and his Slaves: that our obligations to him ought to divide our love between
God and him; and that our Restoration being perhaps a greater good to us than
our Creation, we ought to love him better than God himself, if we ought to love
most the things that do us most good.

Yet God requires that we should love him in all things, and that all the
motion of love which he causes in us, tend toward him: and he will not only be
esteemed by us as the first Cause and Being, but also beloved in all things, as
the only true cause of whatever the Creatures seem to produce in us.

This is the order of things. Now it would be reversed, and even its
overturning justified, should your Notion of God's design to give us another
Restorer than himself, subsist. For that design would in some manner justify a
Love not solely tending toward God; since that design proposes to us another
than God for an Object of our Love, when it proposes to us a Creature endowed
with an excellency sufficient to oblige us really, and by himself.


Arist. But are we not under some Obligation to other Men that pray for us?
Pontificii Loquuntur.
to the Saints in Heaven that intercede for us?


Theod. Yes, Aristarchus, but that Obligation ought not in reason to divide our
Love. All the good will that other Men have toward us is unefficacious: they
cannot do us the least good through themselves.

You do not doubt that all other Men merit but in and through Christ; for
Christ himself does only merit our Salvation, and duly satisfies his Father as
he is his Son: so that there being nothing really and in it self capable to do
us good without God, all our life ought to tend toward him. This is the order
of things, he has established that order at our Creation; for he has only
made us with a prospect of the beauty of that order, having only made us to
love him. How can it then be imagined that he would destroy that order? But let
us suppose that a Creature so excellent in his nature were made, and would
satisfy for us, and sacrifice for our sakes himself, and what ever he has;
his Sacrifice would still be unworthy of God's Justice, and his Satisfaction
unequal to the immensity of our offenses, since any offense committed against
God is infinite, by reason of his infinite dignity.

To strike our Sovereign on the Face, is a greater Crime than to kill our
Slave, the offense growing proportionably to the dignity of the offended party,
above that of the offender.

This being granted, it follows that God would not be fully satisfied by that
Creature, and therefore it cannot be supposed that he would ever make such a
Creature to satisfy his Justice, if he would be fully satisfied. But do you not
think, Aristarchus, that God, who loves himself perfectly, is obliged to do
himself right, by being willing to satisfy himself fully.

But still supposing with you, that God might have taken another Method for the
restoration of his work, than his Sons Incarnation, what Religion assures us
that he has done so? Where is a Creature that introduces us to God, or a
Religion that teaches this Mystery of our Reconciliation with God? If it be the
Religion of the Chinese, or that of the Tartars, perhaps it may not be amiss
to follow it: But there is no other Religion but the Christian, that
acknowledges Original Sin, and the general depravation of Nature, much less
does any other acknowledge a Creature raised above Mankind, by the excellency of
his Nature, to be their Victim.

For, after all, if the Jews invoke Abraham, Moses, and their Prophets, still
they believe them to be Men, and such whose principal greatness consists, in
being the shadow and figure of their Messiah, and our Redeemer. Therefore there
can be no other Religion than the Christian, nor any other Mediator than
Christ; neither can there be any Religion so excellent, nor so worthy of God,
as that we profess; for there is no other way so worthy of God, whereby he
could have repaired his work, as is that we believe he has taken. In fine,
God's work repaired is even much more worthy of God, by the holiness of its
Restorer, than it was in its natural perfection.


Erast. What you tell us, seems to me very true: If God had not known that the
reparation of his work would yield him more glory than its first construction,
it seems plain to me, that he would not have suffered it to grow corrupt. For,
after all, God was not surprised at Adam's disobedience: he has foreseen his
Fall before his Creation, and also the corruption that Fall was to spread over
all his work.


Theod. You are in the right, Erastus, God's first design has been the
Incarnation of his Son. We were made for him, though he took Flesh for us. We
were made after his own Image, for he is Man in God's intent before Mankind was
produced. God has chosen us in him before the Creation of the World; and made
all things by him, and for him. For Christ is the Man for whom God has made
all things. He was predestined to be the chief of Angels and Saints, even of
the Angels that are before the Saints. But he was before all things in God's
design, for the members are made for the head, and not the head for the members.

As I said it to you, Dialog. 2.
it is through the Incarnation of the Son, that the Father is worshipped as he
ought to be. For what signify the veneration of Men and Angels, if not offered
through Christ? But if it be certain that God will be worshipped as he ought to
be, it is as certain that he will be worshipped through his Son; and therefore
it is sure that God's chief end is the Incarnation of his Son, and that the
Creation of Men and Angels enters into his design, only on the account of his
Son; he having made them for no other end, but that he might receive their
adorations through his Son, and suffered Adam's Sin, and the corruption of
Nature, to make way for the Incarnation of his Son; that is, to make it
necessary, or be its occasion.

All this seems most certain to me, but pray, Aristarchus, what think you of it?


Arist. I don't know yet what to think on it.


Erast. How! Sir, can you still be in doubt about it? I Will convince you
presently.

A Workman that makes a piece of Workmanship for his own private use, and
surely foresees that if he expose it in the way, some one or other will
certainly break it, does not act prudently, if he does not lay it in a safe
place.


Arist. I own it.


Erast. Very well. But if a Workman foresees, that laying his Work where he
ought to lay it, and where it will be broken, he shall be paid infinitely more
for it than it is worth; do you think he ought to hide it, or lay it in an
improper place to preserve it, principally if he can without the least trouble
to himself make such a piece of workmanship.


Arist. In that case, Erastus, he ought to place it in its true and right
place, and not alter his design, but, on the contrary, make an end of his work;
if not that it may be broken, at least that he may be paid for it more than it
is worth, and lay hold on the accident that will befall his work, as on a
favorable opportunity of enriching himself: for I suppose that this same
workman thinks more on himself, and growing rich, than on any thing else.


Erast. Observe me then. God is that Workman who works for himself, and minds
nothing but his own glory. All the pure Creatures cannot honor him as he
deserves, neither can all his works enrich him. Do you conceive then that he
will make them?

Besides, if he makes Man, and leaves him to himself, if he does not hinder his
freedom, and will be loved by him with a love of choice, an understanding love,
perfectly worthy a reasonable Creature; in a word, if he places Man at first in
the state he ought to be in, yet foresees that Man shall cease to love him, and
shall dishonor him, do you conceive that he will make him? Yet, Aristarchus,
we are made, and God is wise. He has made us to honor him, and the honor we
can pay unto him, is not worthy of him. But besides this, in stead of honoring
him as much as we can, we dishonor and disobey him, and prefer the love of the
body to the love of God: he has foreseen the corruption of our heart before
its formation. Where lies then his wisdom? How will you justify it? What think
you of a Workman, who working for himself, makes a work that is of no use to
him? Remember what you said of a Workman, who makes a piece of work, and
exposes it, tho he knows that some one or other will break it. God is wise,
Aristarchus, but what has he done? This he has done; he has predestined
Jesus Christ from all Eternity to be the head of his works, that Christ, and
all Creatures through him, may pay to him an honor worthy of him. He has
placed Man in the state he ought to be placed in, for the Reasons that have
been told you. Dialog. 2.
He has foreseen his Fall, and permitted it, that it might advance his great
End. Thus his Wisdom is justified; and he becomes, if I may say so, more rich
and powerful than he was. He commands his Son who is his equal, and judges and
punishes him for us; he fully revenges and satisfies himself for our sins. But
he receives from him, and from us through him, such honors as are worthy of
his greatness and majesty. Now what do you think of what Theodorus said to you?


Arist. Methinks he proves well enough his Assertion. However, all he has said
now, supposes in God a plurality of persons; for no one does pay an honor or
an atonement to his own self.


Theod. You mistake the Point utterly, Aristarchus, far from this, because no
one does pay an honor or an atonement to his own self, I prove, and do not
suppose in God a plurality of persons. To convince you of it, there needs only
to reassume what Erastus said.

God acts only for his glory, but all the Creation cannot pay him an honor
worthy of him; it cannot therefore be supposed that he will make any Creatures,
unless it be to declare that a pure Creature can yield him some glory. It
follows then, that since he has been pleased to make us, he has done it in
order to his glory. But we cannot contribute to it, unless he join with us:
Now, as you have well observed it, a person cannot honor himself; therefore
there is in God a plurality of persons. It is then necessary that a Divine
Person, and principally that by whom all things were made, sanctify by his
dignity all other Creatures.

The Son ought to offer to the Father a Kingdom over which the Father may reign
with honor; the Son ought to erect to him a Temple, whereof he himself is the
Chief Stone; establish a Priesthood, whereof he himself is the High Priest; and
assemble a Church, whereof he is the Head. In a word, he ought to make his work
worthy of him, for whose honor he has made it: And if we suppose that God
(who never acts but for his glory) resolved to produce something out of
himself, seeing no one can honor his own self, we must admit in God plurality
of persons.

Besides, God has from all Eternity foreseen the disorder that was to arise in
his Work; he could have prevented it, yet has not done it. Then the reparation
of his Work must needs be a greater honor to him than its first Creation,
since God's rule and motive in his operations is always his own glory. However,
the disorder of Nature, and the shame of Sin, dishonor God much more than the
punishment and satisfaction of Creatures honor him, the offense of Sinners
being infinite, by the dignity of the person that is offended; and it being
impossible that God can be satisfied, unless he be our own Mediator. But, as
you have wisely said, none can pay an atonement to themselves, and therefore
there must be a plurality of persons in God. It is necessary that a Divine
person, and chiefly that person by whom God made all things, repair the
disorder that is happened in his work, and satisfy God for that same work, if God
will preserve it. For, after all, God who suffered Sin for his glory, must have
designed a Sacrifice capable of yielding him more honor, than Sin can bring
him dishonor. So we must conclude, that there is in God a plurality of
persons, since he has not made Creatures capable of honoring him as he
deserves, and especially since he suffers such Crimes as no Creature can
expiate.


Erast. But, pray, what do you think of the damned, they cannot satisfy God's
Justice, and yet he does not annihilate them?


Theod. It is true, Erastus, God did not make them to be annihilated; but he
would not have made them, or would not keep them in being without Christ: for
their punishment, though eternal, is still too slight to satisfy the Justice of a
revenging God. The damned should suffer at least according to their whole
capacity, yet they do not; for there are degrees of pain among them, though their
Souls being equal, their capacity to suffer must be equal: But Christ by his
quality bears what is wanting to honor perfectly the Divine Justice, and in
the deformity which those miserable Wretches cause in the beauty of the
Universe, there is this order at least, that the inequality of their punishment
bears a proportion with that of their offenses. However, it would be better for
them not to be, than to have such a miserable being; it is plain that Christ,
who merits the conservation of their existence, and upholds them in the order
of his Justice, is rather their Judge than their Savior. Thus, Erastus, all
things subsist in Christ, he preserves his work after he has cleansed it from
the filthiness of sin, and reconciles, through his blood, all Creatures with
God, as to what concerns the preservation of their being: But if he gives peace
to Heaven and Earth, he no less kindles an everlasting War in Hell.

Thus you see, Aristarchus, how all the several parts of Religion prove and
maintain one another. What I have told you, is not a Circle without Principles;
for my Principles are that we are made, that Nature is corrupt, and that God
acts only for his glory: You do not deny them.


Arist. No, Theodorus, I am convinced; But I have some reluctance to do it, for
what you tell me, seems new to me.


Theod. Yes, Aristarchus, what I tell you is new to the generality of Mankind,
and to such Christians as do not sufficiently understand the mystery of the
Religion they profess.

Christ is not known among worldly Men, they do not think on his greatness,
neither do they know how he is the beginning and end of all things. Those holy
persons that read the Scripture with an intention to find Christ, never fail to
find him there, for he is in every place of it: But they have not the spirit of
this world, but that of God, whereby they know the greatness of the Gift that
God has imparted to them. The outward and sensible Man is not capable of the
things which the Divine Spirit teaches us; for the eye has not seen, the ear
has not heard, nor the heart of man ever understood what God has prepared for
those that love him.

I do not only speak of those false learned who deny the corruption of Nature,
the necessity of Grace, and the Divinity of Christ, yet assume the quality of
Christians. I also speak of those who live in the bosom of the Church, but have
little love for Religion. It is impossible they should be very well learned in
the knowledge of Christ, seeing they do not love him, and do not study the
Scriptures, professing the Christian Religion, perhaps only, because it is that
of their Parents.


Arist. You have told us a great many things both to day and yesterday, since I
have seen my Friend; I imagine that he wants me, as I do, to know what he will
think of these things: I must leave you to go to him.


Theod. Do, Aristarchus, make him sensible of the general corruption of Nature,
and the enmity that is between God and man; and endeavor to demonstrate plainly
to him, the necessity of Christ's satisfaction.

If you find that he receives your Sentiments as he ought, and is willing to be
instructed, immediately fall on the praises of our Redeemer, and stir him up to
the love of his Savior, by the consideration of the chief obligations he has
to him.

Tell him, That Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: That he is our
intelligible light, that enlightens us in the deepest recess of our Reason; and
our sensible light, that instructs us by Miracles, by Parables, and Faith: That
he alone is the food of the Soul: That his light is the sole producer of
Charity, and that none but him can give us the holy Spirit, whereby we become
the children of God. Tell him, that he has been predestined before all time
to be our King and Chief, our Pastor and Lawgiver: That God receives our
Prayers through him only: That we are made clean only by his blood, and enter
into the Holy of Holies, only through his Sacrifice. In short, That Christ is
all things to us; that in him we are new creatures, and new men, that have not
been condemned in Adam; that without Christ we are nothing, have right to
nothing, but are sold to Sin, Slaves to the Devils, and the eternal objects of
God's wrath.

Use all your endeavors to make him think on Christ, to unite him to, and make
him esteem and love Christ; and conclude with these words of St Paul at the end
of one of his Epistles, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16.22.


DIALOGUE VI. The Truth of the Christian Religion proved by other Reasons.
Arist. AH! Theodorus, how unsatisfied am I in my Friend!


Theod. Yes, Aristarchus, I can easily see it; the Air of your Countenance does
not rejoice those that examine it, it is not an Air of Triumph, or of Victory,
that might please those who take part of it: But how could he resist you?


Arist. As I was well persuaded of the truth of the Christian Religion, by the
proofs of original Sin, and the necessity of a Mediator; so I imagined I could
convince him, by proposing the same proofs; but I know not to what I should
attribute the ill success of my words: when I spoke to him, instead of
persuading him, I provoked him, and he rejected all that I proposed to him with
a kind of scorn; he would not so much as agree with me in common Notions, but
continually said, that my Reasons were the Reasons of Philosophy.

Such Answers grieved me; I strove to convince him, and continued to repeat the
same things, hoping that at last he would reflect, but all my Efforts were
entirely lost.

It Is something strange, Theodorus, that a Man cannot convince others of the
same thing that he himself is fully convinced of; for it appears to me, that
all Men ought to see the same things.


Theod. If all Men were equally attentive to inward truth, they would all
equally see the same things; but your Friend is not like you, he is taken up
with a multitude of things, and his pride has now for many years kept him
unconversant even with himself: so that abstracted proofs and reasonings built
upon Notions, which have no dependence of the senses, persuade him not, because
these proofs don't touch him, and because he has many confused reasons which
hinder his application to them.

When a Man has discovered a Geometrical Demonstration, he can convince all Men
of it, to whom he clearly proposes it, because that these things are sensible,
that they freely apply themselves to them, that there is no reason why they
should not believe them, that they are not prepossessed by the authority of Men
that deny them, and that when they see these kinds of truth, they see them
after a sensible manner: But it is not the same with certain truths which are
contrary to our inclinations, there we think not seriously, and we have many
reasons not to believe them.

It Is necessary, Aristarchus, that I demonstrate to you the truth of the
Christian Religion, by more sensible proofs than those of our preceding
Conferences, it may be your Friend will more willingly hearken to them.

Do you take his place, and object whatever you can imagine against what I shall
offer, I only suppose that God has made our Souls to know and love him: It Is
what your Friend assents to.

You have heard, Aristarchus, of one Moses, the famous Legislator of the Jews,
to whom God gave the Ten Commandments upon Mount Sinai; Do you believe what the
Scripture says of him?


Arist. But what if he was a Cheat, an Impostor?


Theod. Very well, Aristarchus, you suppose your self under your Friend's
character; but you know that he must have an excessive bold spirit, I would
say, the most ignorant and most transported of bold spirits, who dares say,
that Moses was a Cheat; you do much honor to your Friend.


Arist. I know what I say.


Theod. Well then, if you know him so well, speak for him, I will engage him in
your person. You have reason, Aristarchus, and ought not to oppose a Sentiment
that is universally received by all reasonable persons, unless you have good
proofs that they are deceived.


Arist. There is much prejudice --


Theod. Right, but this common Reason does not justify you, nor will it
justify the most extravagant doubts that may be raised; but, I may tell you,
that there was never any Man that could be more unreasonably accused of
Imposture than Moses.

It Is one essential quality of a Cheat to avoid the Light; but the Miracles of
Moses were wrought before all the people, in the sight of Six hundred thousand
fighting Men, there was a great number of them, and some were repeated every
day for many years together: But not to stay upon these unprofitable proofs,
let us reflect upon the manner how the Israelites were nourished in the
Wilderness forty years, every morning the Earth was covered with Manna, except
the Sabbath day; when it was kept till the next day, it was corrupted, and full
of Worms, except the Sabbath day. This Manna ceased to fall, when the
Israelites had once eaten of the fruits of the Land of Canaan, and from that
time they never saw it ^ll.

Can one doubt of a Fact which was continued Forty years? Or can one attribute
to a natural Cause this Rain or Dew which fell but for Forty years, which
ceased to fall every Saturday, and which could not be kept without corruption
but upon Saturdays? Is Saturdays Air or Sun different from that of other days?
Did the first Repast which the Israelites had in the Land of Canaan, change the
face of Heaven, or the situation of the Stars, which caused it to rain Manna?
Is It not evident by these Circumstances, that this Rain was not Natural?


Arist. But what proofs have you that the Pentateuch, Joshua, and other Books
from whence you borrow what is spoken of Manna, are true? If they were Fabulous
--


Theod. If they were Fabulous, Aristarchus, the Jews were Men of a different
nature from us, they were Fools, and stupid, to a very improbable degree.

Think you, Aristarchus, that Men who have but a little of common Sense, would
without Reason or Examination receive Books as authentic, and as a Rule of
their Faith and Conduct. I Will explain my self. --

Think you, that a whole Nation would submit to a Law, so very severe and
painful, by the force of Arms, or some reason of Interest, without being
compelled thereto, as 'twere, by Divine Authority?

Think you, that upon a Fabulous History, derived from our Ancestors, we should
be so stupid and insensible, blindly to submit our selves to a Ceremony so
shameful and incommodious as is that of Circumcision? How can it be imagined
that the Jews received the Law which they observe, and the Books which they
call Canonical, without consideration? These Books flatter them not, they
continually menace and reproach them with the stupidity, infidelity and malice
of their Ancestors.

The Jews were not obliged by force of Arms to receive these authentic Books,
wherefore do they receive them? wherefore do they preserve them so carefully?
wherefore are there no Men so constant as they to the Religion of their
Fathers? It Is, without doubt, either because the Jews are not Men as we are, or
rather because their Religion and Books have all the possible characters of
truth.

But, Aristarchus, you believe that God has made us to know and love him, and
to make use of the most reasonable Religion; for there must be an outward
worship for Men that make use of their senses, and who live in society. We must
then, of all Books that treat of Religion, believe those that have the greatest
appearance of truth; but there are none comparable to the Scripture, for the
Reasons I have told you, as also for innumerable other Reasons. We ought then
to look upon these Books as our Rule, and there to search the Religion which we
ought to sollow. And if we deceive our selves in the choice of these Books, our
Error would only depend on this, that there would be no mark to discern sacred
Books from profane; or rather from this, that there would be neither sacred
Books nor Religion which were pleasing to God.


Arist. What you say, Theodorus, is highly reasonable; but my Friend will
rashly tell me, that Mahomet was a Prophet, and that the Alcoran is a Divine
Book, how would you have me to answer him?


Theod. Compare the Miracles of Moses, with those of that Impostor, and show
him what difference there is betwixt his making a tame Pigeon whisper in his
Ear before all the people, or making a famisht Bull bring him a Book through
the multitude, or attributing a The Falling Sickness.
Disease shameful enough to the apparition and dazzling luster of the Angel
Gabriel, and the Miracles which confirm the mission of Moses, or the covering
the Earth with Insects, changing Water into Blood, filling the Air with thick
darkness, agitating it by Thunder, inflaming it by Lightning, making it to rain
celestial Food for forty years, to be conducted by a Cloud in the daytime, and
Fire by night, both of them in form of a Pillar; I pass over many other
Miracles that God performed by Moses in the sight of all Egypt, and all the
people of Israel.

The Alcoran relates no such Miracles in favor of Mahomet, it does not so much
as mention those which I have already spoken of, which are such gross cheats
Chap. of the Cow, of Women, and other things, of the version of Du Rier.
; and it is well known that many Men despised the false Prophet which is the
Author of them, because he did no Miracle.

But, Aristarchus, let us not insist altogether upon this; the Alcoran destroys
itself by itself, as well as Judaism, as you shall see presently. I Will suppose
that Mahomet was a Prophet, and that his Book is as authentic as the Old
Testament; grant to me that there is at least an equal Authority to two Books
so different, and let us first see which is the Religion that the holy
Scripture propounds to us.


Arist. How, Theodorus, will you be a Jew?


Theod. Yes certainly, Aristarchus, if Judaism be the Law which the holy
Scripture proposes to us as capable of making most perfect and happy; as for
me, I look upon holy Scripture as a Divine Book, but perhaps Judaism, as to the
Letter, is not the end of the Law.

Take heed, Aristarchus, think you that Beasts have a Soul? I mean a Substance
which animates or informs their Body, and which is more noble than it.


Arist. To what purpose?


Theod. Only answer.


Arist. Yes, I believe that Beasts have a Soul, and that their Soul is more
noble than their Body.


Theod. I Will prove that you are mistaken; what is the end, the good or
happiness of Beasts? think you that Beasts have any other natural Felicity,
than the enjoyment of their Bodies?


Arist. No, I believe the end of Beasts is to eat and drink.


Theod. Then God has made the Soul of Beasts for the enjoyment of their Body,
but the Soul of Beasts is more noble than their Body. Then God has not well
ordered his work, nor proposed to Beasts an end worthy of them, if that which
makes them more happy and perfect, must be more noble than that which receives
its happiness and perfection. Thus you ought to observe, that God has not given
to Beasts a Soul distinct from their body, or more noble than it; or else you
ought to begin again, and say, that Beasts have some other Felicity than that
of drinking and eating, and of enjoying their Body.


Arist. This Reason convinces me, but what would you conclude from thence?


Theod. Thus, Aristarchus, you believe that the Jews were Men as we are, and
that they had a Soul, I would say a Substance which thinks, perceives, wills,
and reasons, and is distinct from the Body; your Friend, whose place you take,
being a Cartesian, does not doubt of this.


Arist. It Is true, he proves demonstratively, that the Existence of the Soul is
more certain than that of the Body.


Theod. This being granted, Aristarchus, I say that Judaism, as to the Letter,
is not a Religion which God has established for Men; and that it could not
render the Jews either more perfect, or more happy, because Moses propounded no
other Felicity to the Jews, than the enjoyment of the Body; and that this sort
of happiness is only proper for Beasts, if it is true that Beasts have a Soul.

After Moses had propounded this carnal and ceremonial Law to the Jews, which
was a shadow of things to come, Deuteronomy. 28.
he promised that if they would observe it, their Land should be fruitful; that
they should have great Families, and numerous Flocks; that they should be
Masters over their Enemies; and that God would preserve them as a People which
he had chosen: But if they would not observe it, he told them that they should
want all the necessaries of life, and foretold those temporal Evils which are
come upon them. In fine, he promised no other recompense or punishment, no
other happiness or misery, than the enjoyment or privation of Bodies; it seems
there was no Hell, no Paradise, no Eternity for the Jews.


Arist. But whence comes that? It Is certain the Jews were very gross and carnal.


Theod. It Is not, Aristarchus, that the Jews were gross and carnal, but because
Moses being only the Figure, could only promise good things in a Figure, and
could not bring them into the inheritance of Children. The chief Priests,
according to the Law of Moses, entered into the Sanctuary made with hands,
which was only a Figure of the true one. They entered there with the blood of
He-Goats and Calves, which could not purify the Conscience; therefore the Law
of Moses could not justify men, it gave them no part in eternal happiness;
therefore Moses was not to promise them any such thing; that was the propriety
of Jesus Christ, who is entered with his own blood into Heaven, the true
Sanctuary, and who has purchased eternal Salvation, as being the only
High Priest of good things to come.

Can you think that the Jews were more carnal than the Heathens? Can you imagine
that Moses was more gross than Poets, who make mention of their gods after so
unworthy a manner? But the Heathens thought of another life. The Poets speak of
the Elizian Fields, and of Hell, as places destined for the recompense of
Virtue, and the punishment of Vice.

There is no Motive more strong, no Idea more terrible, no Recompense more
agreeable than that of Eternity; and the most barbarous Nations are capable of
being smitten, shaken, and carried on to the exercise of Virtue by this
thought, that they would be eternally rewarded for it; yet Moses reckons a
great number of Blessings and Cursings, without mentioning Eternity.


Arist. It Is because he did not believe there were Spirits; he believed not the
Immortality of the Soul.


Theod. This Consequence is very just, and did I not know that the Law of the
Jews, and their Covenant with God, was a Figvre of the New Covenant, I perhaps
might think my self obliged, by the deference I owe to the Books of Moses, to
be of the sentiment of the Sadducees; for only this Party appears reasonable,
as I have already said, for I have not yet spoken any thing that overthrows it.
But as your Friend is a Cartesian, he is too much convinced of the Immortality
of the Soul, and that Beings which think, are distinguished from matter that
cannot think, to draw the same Consequences as you do.


Arist. It Is true, this must convince him.


Theod. Nevertheless he was not convicted of it. I could wish that the Body
were our true happiness; but is this happiness capable of recempencing those
who fulfill the precept of loving God with all their heart, with all their soul,
and with all their might? This might, perhaps, be a sufficient reward to the
Roman Virtue, for happiness must be proportionable to its Virtue. But is this
worthy of God? Is this sufficient to make those truly happy, who truly love
him? You see plainly, Aristarchus, that they are not. Why then did Moses enjoin
us to love God with all our might? And why did he only promise us the
enjoyments of our Bodies, for the recompense of this love, unless it be that
the love of God is indispensibly above all things, and that Moses was not to
promise the happiness he could not give?

This seems to me sufficient, to convince you, that Judaism was but the shadow
and figure of Christianity; that the Old Covenant only represented the true
reconciliation of God with Men; and that the Priests, (according to Aaron's
Order) the Sacrifices, and Ceremonies of the Law, ought to be abrogated by the
Sacrifice of the Lamb without spot, which takes away the sins of the world;
which worthily satisfies the Justice of God, which introduces us into the Holy
of Holies, and promises the true happiness to all those who are members of that
Body, whereof he is the Head.

Thus you see that I have no design to become a Jew, unless you believe me
stupid enough to look upon the Body as my proper good; the Body, I say, which
cannot be the happiness of Brutes, if they have a Soul distinct from their Body,
and more Noble than it.

But as for you, Aristarchus, you have now a design to turn Turk, (I speak to
you, as you take upon you the character of your Friend) you are for a Paradise,
where you would always be indulging your self in sensual pleasure, you would
have many Women to satisfy those Passions which are even here below called
brutish, and shameful Chap. of Order. Chap. of Judgment. Chap. of Mercy, etc.
; the great Mahomet promises them as fair as new laid Eggs, and as beautiful as
Oriental Pearls; they shall have black rolling Eyes --


Arist. Enough, Theodorus, the Turkish Religion is certainly unworthy of
reasonable Men, it is even unworthy of Beasts, if they have a Soul more Noble
than their Body: And I acknowledge that the Alcoran destroys itself by its own
Principles, as well as Judaism does in the Letter. For, in fine, it is certain
that the enjoyments of the Body are not worthy of the Soul: That those who love
them, become not thereby more perfect. That those who enjoy them, are thereby
often ashamed: And that the promises of Moses (not to mention those of Mahomet)
are unworthy of Mankind; for even the Heathen Philosophers themselves went thus
far. Christ would have us despise these Goods, although the Law promises them;
and he declares those to be happy who are deprived of them, and who are
miserable and cursed according to the Law.

Thus, I am satisfied, that the promises of the Law were only figures; for
those amongst the Jews who had Charity, could not desire the accomplishment of
these promises as their true good, but, perhaps, the Law in it self was good.


Theod. You perceive not that there must be a relation betwixt the good which
the Law promises, and the Law itself; and that if the Law justifies really, and
by itself, the recompenses of the Law must be good in themselves, and make a
truly just Man happy: But Men cannot be just themselves, and only desire these
Rewards. The just then could not trust in the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the
Law, they were to expect the Messiah, that could promise them such a happiness
as they might lawfully wish it.

There were two sorts of Jews under the Law; Jews after the Spirit, and Jews
after the Letter. Those who had the Spirit of the Law were Christians, for
Christ is the end of the Law; and those were circumcised with the circumcision
of the heart, and had put off the old man; explaining the whole Law, its
Ceremonies and Promises, by their relation to the Messiah, and that eternal
happiness which they expected from him.

They were not scandalized when Isaiah spoke on the behalf of God to the Jews
according to the flesh, Isa. 1.10,11. Hear the word of the Lord, ye Princes of
Sodom; hearken to the Law of our God, ye People of Gomorrah. What have I to do
with this multitude of Sacrifices chat ye offer to me, says the Lord? All this
is an abomination to me, I love not the sacrifice of your Rams, nor the fat of
your Flocks, nor the blood of Beeves, Lambs and He-Goats.

They sung with joy in the same Spirit with Christians, Psalm. 50. For thou
desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it, thou delightest not in
burnt-offerings. -- Lord, do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou
the walls of Jerusalem, then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness, with burnt-offerings, and whole burnt-offerings, then shall they
offer bullocks upon thine Altar. In fine, they sighed incessantly toward
Heaven, to draw down the true Messiah, who was to deliver them from their sins.

But the Jews according to the flesh, gloried in the shameful signature of the
circumcision of their bodies; they were uncircumcised in heart, they had a vail
which hid the end of the Law from them. They placed their confidence in their
Sacrifices and Ceremonies in the Ark, and in the Temple of the Lord; in Moses,
Abraham, and their other Patriarchs. They were full of Zeal and Fury against
the true Israelites, and continually persecuted the Prophets which had the
Spirit of the Law, and which reproved their Vices.

The Jews after the Spirit were true Christians, they were always ready to
acknowledge and receive Jesus Christ whenever he should come; for the Moral of
the New Testament is wholly conformable to the disposition of their heart,
since they acknowledge that the goods of the senses were unworthy of their love.
And as they explained not holy Scripture according to the Letter, but according
to the mystical Sense, and with relation to the Messiah, whom they expected; so
the proofs which the Apostles took out of the Old Testament to justify the
quality of Christ, were entirely conformable to their Spirit.

Thus Christ and his Apostles were heard by those amongst the Jews who were
moved by Charity, but the carnal Jews who had their heart veiled, could not,
nay, even would not comprehend the proofs which the Apostles gave of the Truth
they preached.


Arist. But must it not be confessed, that the proofs which the Apostles drew
from the Old Testament to confirm the New, were very weak?


Theod. They were no proofs, or at best extravagant ones to the carnal Jews;
and those who know not distinctly that the Old Testament is only for the use of
the New; that Abraham, Joseph, Joshua, David, Solomon, are only in the
Scripture because of CHRIST; and that whatever happened to the Jews, were but
figures of things to come.

Yes, Aristarchus, if the literal Sense of the Scripture is the chief end, then
St Paul and the Apostles prove nothing; nay, they are mad Men, and fanatical.
But he must be the most stupid and rash of all Men, who can imagine that St Paul
had not common Sense; that he would render himself so very ridiculous to wrest
passages of Scripture, to convince the Jews how unprofitable their Sacrifices
and Ceremonies were.

For, after all, if we cannot believe that the Letter of the Law rather
administers death than life, after what I have already said; I see not, but
that we must believe at least that there were some Men amongst the Jews who
searched into the Law for another Sense besides the literal, since St Paul does
not make use of the literal Sense to convince them of the Messiah's coming. Do
not you know that even the Jewish Commentators, who are the declared Enemies of
CHRIST, refer most of the passages to the Messiah, which the Apostles do to
CHRIST; although these passages might often be understood of David, Solomon, or
others: for, as the truth is, we must consider these persons as figures of
CHRIST.

The Letter of the Scripture does, by Divine Providence, contain so many things
which appear unworthy of God, and even contrary to Reason; that those who are
not entirely stupid, find themselves obliged to abandon it. I have proved this
to you, by the Rewards which Moses proposed to the Jews, which, as you your
self have freely granted, are not only unworthy of such who love God above all
things, but in general of all other Beings which are more noble than Bodies.

Thus we cannot reasonably doubt, but that the Jews, who from the times of the
Apostles expected the Messiah, and who believed him near at hand, were very
much disposed to receive him in that capacity which the Apostles had described
to them, provided the love of sensible things hindered them not from following
him.

God always disposes things after such a manner, that those who love him, do
always find him; he leaves such footsteps after him, that those who feel the
inward motions of Charity, do highly acknowledge him. And if false Prophets back
their Lies with Miracles, it is because God tempts Men, to discern those who
love him; for those who love him are not deceived.

CHRIST is so concealed in the Scriptures, that those who love him not, do not
find him there. He is not only come to enlighten the blind, but also to blind
the wise. He is come to reprove the glory of the world, for this is an
abomination before God. In fine, he is come to preach the Gospel to the poor,
the simple and ignorant; and to pass by those who content themselves with their
own riches and wisdom.

There are many obscurities in the Scripture, but there are also many things
that are extremely clear; good Men rest upon what is clear, and pay a deference
to what is obscure, as their reason directs them. The pretended wise Men and
the wicked, who are angry to see what they hate, endeavor to obscure the light
by darkness; they endeavor to blind their own eyes, and are but too successful
in their attempt.

If CHRIST had come in splendour, as he will at his second appearance, if the
Prophecies had been so evident that it had been impossible not to have received
them. In fine, if the Christian Religion had been such, as that its truth might
have been acknowledged without any application of the mind, and without any
love for God, then the negligent and wicked would have received a grace which
they did not deserve. God only gives himself to those who love him; the truth
is only discovered to those who seek after it; for if it be just to apply one's
self to a Problem to find out its resolution, it is necessary that the Sovereign
Good, which is the greatest truth, should be such, that it may not be
discovered without carefully seeking after it.

Men little esteem that which they acquire without labor, they have but a mean
love for that which they have not desired: Thus it was necessary CHRIST, whom
we have so much need of, should cause himself to be desired and sought after,
before he would be found; and it is our happiness that he is hid after such a
manner that he cannot be sought after without being found.

Certainly all the obscurities which are in the Prophecies cannot hinder, but
that we may evidently observe that the Messiah is come. It Is now so many Ages
since, that the time prefixed is past over, that there is now no more need of
Miracles: For if Miracles were necessary when the Apostles preached JESUS
CHRIST, it is because the time of the Messiah's coming was not so precisely
fixed, but that one might yet expect him.

If in the Life of CHRIST are found things which appear something strange; if,
for instance, his condemnation to death by the chief Priests, seems unworthy of
the Messiah, even these very things should make him to be received, because
they were foretold, and being strange, they can only relate to him.

If all the Jews had received Jesus Christ when he appeared, perhaps the modern
Jews, the Mahometans, and the Pagans, might have had reason to doubt whether he
was the true Messiah, they might believe the Scriptures were corrupted; but the
Jews being always opposed to Jesus Christ, are credible Witnesses. And we cannot
reasonably imagine that the Books which the Jews received were corrupted in
favor of us.

But if Holy Writ is not corrupted in Essentials, if it is certain that it is a
Book whose authority was not established by the force of Arms, or doubtful
Miracles; if we are sure that the literal Sense is not the chief point of it,
then we cannot doubt the truth of the Christian Religion, because CHRIST is
found there all along, even when there was no Jew; I would say, when there was
no love for sensible good things, and when there was no formal opposition to
receive CHRIST.

There Is nothing, Aristarchus, more comfortable to a Man that desires true
happiness, who meanly looks upon himself here below as in a strange Land, who
continually reflects upon his inward misery, and the War that his domestic
Enemies wage against him; there is nothing, I say, more comfortable, nothing
more instructive altogether for a Christian, than to read the sacred Books; for
all that is written, was written for our instruction, that our hope should be
strengthened by the patience and comfort which the Scripture affords us.

Men find themselves in it every where described as they are either under sin
or punishment, but God, according to his pure mercy, always remembering the
promise which he made to Abraham, saves his people, although they deserve it not;
for he has sworn it by himself: he redeems them out of the bondage of Pharaoh,
and brings them into the promised Land; but does not utterly destroy the
Canaanites, 'til the day that King Solomon becomes Master of all the Enemies of
Israel. Who is ignorant of the signification of these things?

I cannot particularly explain to you the Prophecies and Figures of the Old
Testament, for the confirmation of the New. I don't pretend to deprive you of
the satisfaction of discovering them your self; what I said is sufficient to
induce you to read the Scriptures as a devout Christian, and I desire no more.
It Is enough that if you read them, you will understand so much as will be
necessary to confirm you in the truth of Religion, and to persuade your Friend,
if he is willing to be instructed.

I Am certain that Erastus will be pleased to join with you in this Study. I Am
satisfied that he has a love for Religion, and it is high time that he wholly
apply himself to things which are only capable to make him as happy as he can
be in this life. There can be no true happiness but in the enjoyment of real
good: But in this life we can only possess it through hope. We cannot therefore
be happy in this life, but in avoiding every thing that weakens this hope, and
in seeking after every thing which strengthens it.

Thus those are miserable that are united to the Body, and by its enjoyments
weaken their hope: But Erastus is happy if he contemns it; and if by the study
of Religion and Christian Morality he increases his hope, so that future
happiness appears to him as if it were present; and a foretaste of eternal good
things is more agreeable to him, than the relish of momentary pleasures.


DIALOGUE VII. That Christian Morality is very useful to the Perfection of the
Understanding.
Arist. I Waited for you, Theodorus, to give you an account of my Joy; for I
have, at last, found a means to make my Friend hear me. I no longer speak to
his Ears, I, as it were, speak now to his Heart. I have made him understand
most of the things whereof we have discoursed, and he seems to be very well
satisfied about them.

I must tell you how things passed betwixt us. I had been so offended at his
Stupidity and Brutishness when I met him last, that as I went home, I often
repeated to my self the words of Christ, Mat. 7.6. Do not cast your Pearls
before Swine, etc. This did comfort me with a Consolation somewhat sensible,
Indignation and Revenge having some share in it; for I must confess that I was
somewhat angry, and already began to be concerned for having loved so much a
person who seemed to be out of his senses. Having therefore very much reflected
on that saying of our Savior, I no sooner saw my Friend again, but it was
present to my mind; and I do not know how I came to persuade my self that I
should be guilty of want of respect toward the words of the Gospel, should I
speak any more to him about the Truths of Religion, so that I stood before him
without saying any thing. But if my mind did not express itself by the sound of
my voice, my heart spoke sufficiently by the air of my face; and my Friend
might well imagine that I was not come to see him so early, merely to bid him
good morrow.

On the other side, he being in the main a Man of a civil and mild disposition,
I cannot doubt but that he repented himself of the Answers he had made me, and
had pondered on those things which I had told him, with a strength and
plainness sufficient, as I thought, to convince him, if he had any ways
reflected. Withal seeing me so early come to see him, after the many
expressions he had used, which ought to have made me decline his Society for a
long time, being of the temper that I have mentioned, he could not help being
moved by my zeal, and sorry for his want of attention.

In short, whether he was shaken by my former Reasons, or touched by some
sentiments of Friendship and Gratitude, he began, after he had been some
moments silent, with an acknowledgment of his fault and of his sorrow. After
this, he prayed me to repeat once more the proofs that I had offered to him of
the Christian Religion, assuring me that he had thought on them seriously, and
that he had found much solidity and light in them, how imperfectly soever he
remembered them. I at first was somewhat unwilling to comply with his desire,
still remembering the words of Christ; but seeing him persist in his demand with
heat and eagerness, I believed that he was disposed to hear me: Accordingly I
gave him the satisfaction he desired, and he has received, without difficulty,
the same things that he had rejected with scorn.


Theod. You see even by this, Aristarchus, that it was convenient that Christ
should cause himself to be expected during many Centuries, and hide himself in
the Scriptures for those who do not care to find him.

We easily receive what we desire, and find with pleasure what we seek with
passion. Your Friend could not see two days ago that Truth which you proposed
to him, because he did not seek it: but he has discovered it, because he
desired it; and has found it with pleasure, if he has sought it with
eagerness.

If Men do not know God, it is because they do not care to know him; and if they
do not see the truth of the Christian Religion, it is because the love of
sensible things prepossesses them, and makes them hate a Religion that destroys
it.

All our Passions justify themselves, and speak incessantly for their
conservation; and those that hearken to the dictates of their Passions, find
themselves so strongly moved with compassion toward them, that for their sakes
they despise the Laws which condemn those Criminals to death. For indeed
nothing is more despicable than the Christian Religion, if we believe our
Passions, The Gospel has nothing that appears pleasing, it preaches nothing to
us but self-denial; and Christ does by the example of his life and death,
condemn the conduct of those who fix their minds on sensible things.

Those therefore who esteem nothing besides the objects of their Senses, who
blindly follow the motions of their Passions, voluptuous Men, or, to use the
words of Christ, Swine are incapable of understanding the truth of Religion,
and enjoying true happiness. The Kingdom of God is a Pearl, for which they will
not sell all what they possess; they do not know the value of it.

Therefore Christ will not have us to propose future happiness to those
Wretches, nor explain sacred Mysteries to them, they being incapable and
unworthy of them. We are only to threaten them in the Name of God, and make
them afraid by the Idea of Eternity, or even by the fear of temporal Ills. But
when they grow penitent, deprive themselves of worldly pleasures, and cease to
be Swine, it is necessary we should explain to them the Mysteries of Religion,
and the Secrets of the Gospel; for being then become Sheep they hear, and can
discern the voice of the true Pastor of their Souls.

For this Reason, and several others, which you will perhaps understand by the
Sequel of our Discourses, I did not much approve of the design you had to
relate all things to your Friend; I was asraid for you, and had no hopes of
him: But God, who disposes of our hearts, has rewarded your Charity and Zeal,
and you ought to return your thanks to him for it.

We have hitherto discoursed of the Proofs that concern the Truth of Religion;
and I believe that what I have said, is sufficient to persuade reasonable
persons, that there is no other Religion in the world besides the Christian,
able to re-establish the Order which Sin has reversed; that none besides
God-man could satisfy God's Justice, reconcile us, and give us an access to
him, and in a word, pay to God a worship worthy of him.

It is time to show you that Christian Morality is perfectly conformable to
Reason, and that in the state to which Sin has reduced us, nothing more useful
to re-establish the order of things can be prescribed, than the precepts and
counsels of Christ concerning Prayer, and the privation of sensible things; for
I suppose no others.

I entreat you to observe carefully whatever we shall speak of hereafter; for
you ought rather to instruct your Friend in those things which respect the
government of our manners, than in such speculative truths as are above the
capacity of a carnal and sensible Man.

I will put some Questions to Erastus, for I have not said any thing to him
this good while.

Do you remember, Erastus, what we have said concerning the End and Order which
God proposed to himself when he created Man, and are you convinced of it?


Erast. I remember it, and am convinced of it. I believe that God acts for none
but himself: that when he makes a Spirit, it is that this Spirit may know him;
and that when he makes a Will, it is that this Will may love him.

This Order seems to me so necessary, that I do not believe that God preserves
any Spirit, but what in some manner knows and loves him. I believe that the
Union which Spirits have with God by their knowledge and love, cannot altogether
be dissolved without annihilating them.

For what kind of being were that Spirit that should know and love nothing? But
all Spirit that knows and loves, knows and loves only by the means of the Union
which he has with God; since he is not to himself his light, and that the
motion which he has toward good in general, and which makes him capable of
loving private good, does not proceed from himself, nor from any thing below
him.


Theod. That Is true, Erastus, all Spirits are essentially united to God, nor
can they be entirely separated from him without ceasing to be. But what ought
to be their Union with God, that they may be as happy and perfect as it is
possible for them to be?


Erast. It is plain that this Union ought to be the narrowest that can be, for
none but God is the sovereign good of Spirits.


Theod. Thus, Erastus, we become more perfect the greater and the stronger the
Union, which we have with God, is. The damned have but just so much Union with
God, as is necessary to keep them in being: But the blessed are united to God
in so perfect a manner, that they do not only receive from him a being, but
also its perfection. Let us see therefore, Erastus, wherein consists this kind
of Union with God, whereby we receive all the perfection whereof we are capable
in this life?


Erast. I have learned in the Conferences which I have had with you, and by the
perusal of the Book of the Inquiry after Truth, Chap. 8. of the last Book.
that God alone is the true cause and true mover as well of Bodies as of
Spirits, and that natural causes are only occasional causes which determine the
true cause to act in consequence of his eternal Will.

I am persuaded that I can be united to the Bodies that are about me, and to
that which I animate and move, only because I am united to God; Dialog. 1.
for all Bodies cannot by themselves act in my Soul, nor make themselves
visible to her, as she likewise has not by herself the strength to move any
Body, since she does not even know what must be done to stir an Arm. Thus,
Theodorus, if I speak to you, and understand you; if my Spirit unites itself to
yours, or my Body to your Body, God alone is the true cause of it, he is the
Bond of all the Unions which I am able to have with all his Works. I can be
immediately united to none but him, since none but he can immediately act in
me, and I only act through his means.

But, Theodorus, I may be united to God, and fix my self to him, and in that
have no relation to any other but him; and I may also be united to God, with
relation to some other thing but God: For when I think on abstracted Idea's of
things, I am united to God by my thought, since I see those things only through
the means of the Union that I have with God. Dial. 3.
But this Union does not bind me to Creatures. On the other side, when I feel
sensible good, it is only by the Union that I have with God, and because he
acts in me: Dial. 2.
For all Bodies are insensible by themselves; but this second Union which I
have with God, fastens me to sensible things, for God unites among themselves
all his Works, and he alone can be the Bond of all Unions.

I therefore believe, that our Union with God upholds our Being, and that we
should not exist without it. But I am persuaded, that the Union which fastens
us to none but God, and has relation to none but him, is that which gives the
utmost perfection of which we are capable.


Theod. Do you not remember, Erastus, that the Author of the Book of the
Inquiry after Truth, demonstrates, That our Senses never represent things to us
as they are in themselves, but only according to their relation to our selves;
and that therefore all sensible knowledge is useful for the preservation and
convenience of our lise, but altogether unprofitable for the perfection of the
Mind, and the knowledge of Truth?


Erast. I do remember it, Theodorus, and shall never forget it; for it was that
which persuaded me, that of all our Knowledge and Notions, none but those that
are purely intellectual make us more perfect; and, indeed, we can be said to
see in God things as they are only through those forts of Notions.

When we have a sentiment of things, we do not see them in themselves, we have
no knowledge of them, and even in reality they are not the sensible Objects that
we do feel, but our very selves; for our Sensations belong to us, and not to
those Objects to which we generally use to attribute them. How then could our
Senses lead us to the knowledge of Truth, since we do not know Truth, but when
we see things such as they are?


Theod. If you remember also what that Book says of the Errors of our
Imagination and Passions, you ought to grant that not only the Imagination and
Senses hinder us from discovering Truth, but also that our Passions carry and
remove us from the true Good. In a word, that all the thoughts and motions of
the Soul, that excite themselves in us, by reason of some changes that happen
in our Body, disunite us from God, to unite us to Bodies. For, after all, it is
necessary that the Soul, who ought to mind the preservation of her Body, be
warned to think on it when some new Accident happens to it.


Erast. I grant all these things.


Theod. Let us suppose then that there never happens any change in the Brain,
but that the Soul receives some thought which takes it off from the light of
truth, and the love of true good, and disunites her from God, to unite her to
Bodies. If it is certain that the perfection of the mind consists in the
knowledge of truth, and in the love of true good, in one word, in an Union with
God which has relation to none but him, I ask you: In the state which we are
in, wherein we cannot hinder the communication of motion, nor the bodies that
are about us from penetrating and agitating ours, what are we to do, to tend
continually toward our perfection? do not consult the Gospel now, consult only
your reason.


Erast. It is plain that we ought by flight to avoid being acted by those
Bodies that are about us, that we ought to mortify our Senses, and keep shut as
much as we can all the passages at which sensible Objects come in, and disturb
our Reason.

When we cannot stay the motion of those Bodies that are capable of offending
us, we never fail to step aside to avoid being struck by them: Thus, when we
are not able to stop the action of sensible Objects, we ought to avoid them by
flight, in the same manner as we use to preserve our selves from contagious
distempers by change of Air.

Let an Insect but prick us, we immediately lose sight of the most solid
truths; let a Fly but buz in our Ears, and our mind will be presently filled
with darkness. What shall we do then to hold this truth which still gets away,
and preserve this light which vanishes from us? Must we kill all the Insects,
and drive away all the Flies? this can never be. We must then remove somewhere
else; for, after all, it is impossible that the Sensations that divide your
thinking Faculty, should not hinder us from discovering Truth.


Theod. You begin perhaps, Aristarchus, to discover by what we have said, and
by this last Answer of Erastus, that what Christ has preached about the
mortification of our Senses, is the best method that can be to reunite us to
God by the knowledge of Truth.


Arist. It is true: But I am afraid that you attribute to the Doctrine of the
Gospel some perfection that Christ never designed to give it. For, in all
likelihood, Christ never intended to give us any Precepts to direct our minds
in the inquiry of certain Truths, which are not absolutely necessary to us in
the World.


Theod. I own, Aristarchus, that Christ's principal design was not to instruct
us in certain speculative Truths, which do not by themselves conduce to the
knowledge and love of sovereign Truth. But the Precepts of the Gospel are so
useful, that they extend to all the things that may in some manner add to the
perfection of the mind; for they are directly opposed to the cause of our
disorders, and remedy our diseases in their beginning. And thus they tend to
give us all the perfection whereof we are capable, since to deprive our selves
of sensible things, is not only a necessary thing to help the conversion of our
hearts, but also for the perfecting our understandings, as you will see it
better hereafter.

Do you think, Erastus, that nothing besides actual Sentiments can hinder the
mind from applying itself to Truth, and that a Man who has for some years
enjoyed the pleasures of the World is able, when he leaves them, to unite
himself to intellectual things, with as much force and light, as those who have
during all their Lives been careful to purify their Imaginations?


Erast. No, certainly, none can enjoy worldly pleasure with impunity. When the
Imagination has been touched by some sensible thing, the impression of it
remains; and the enjoyment of worldly pleasures makes it easily Slaves to them.
There remains in our Brain some impressions that always represent to the mind
the pleasures that it has enjoyed, and that often hinder it from applying
itself to such things as have no sensible attraction.

Therefore when the Imagination is sullied, the Mind is filled with darkness,
because Concupiscence, which of itself takes off the Mind from the sight of
Truth, is strengthened and increased by this new Concupiscence that is acquired
by the use of sensible things.


Theod. What must we do then, Erastus, to become capable of attaining that
perfection of understanding which consists in the knowledge of Truth?


Erast. It appears plainly, that we must with all imaginable care avoid
whatever is able to make any deep impression in our Brain; we must (give me
leave to use your expression) strictly take care to purify our Imaginations.


Arist. But then, Theodorus, we ought not to do Penance; for painful Sensations
as much divide our thinking Faculty as those that are pleasing.


Theod. A Man ought not to mortify himself with an intent to find the Solution
of a Problem, such an Action does not enlighten the Mind. None can actually
seel Pain, and see Truth actually at the same time. But Sufferings, how
unuseful soever for the knowledge of certain Truths, are very useful to take us
off from sensible things; Pontificius loquitur.
to satisfy God's Justice, being joined to those of our Savior; to merit us
the sight of that sovereign Truth which dissipates all our darkness; and even
to teach us some certain moral Truths, on which we do not think when we feel
nothing.

But, Aristarchus, do you not see that the impressions of Sufferings that
remain in the Memory, do not darken it, like the impressions of Pleasures? Do
you not see that they never provoke Lust, never disturb the Mind, never divide
its Attention, and that things being thus, they do not hinder it from
discovering Truth? We easily cease to think on Pain, as soon as we cease to
suffer it, and have no cause to fear it, because Pain has nothing that is
pleasing in itself. But the same does not happen when ever we have tasted of
any Pleasures, their vestiges or impressions remain strongly printed in our
Brains, and do each moment excite some troublesome desires that disturb the
peace of the mind; and those desires renewing those impressions, Concupiscence,
which is the Spring of all our Ills, and consequently of the want of
application of the mind to Truth, as well as the corruption of the heart,
incessantly receives new strength.


Arist. You are in the right: But yet we see that many learned Men have spent
their whole Lives in Debauchery, abandoning themselves continually to all sorts
of Pleasures.


Theod. Not so many as you may think, Aristarchus, for the number of the false
learned is very great. A Man must see Truth clearly and distinctly, to be truly
learned. It is not enough to have read much; for the Mind knows nothing, if it
sees nothing. Pleasure, unless it be excessive, does not hinder a Man from
reading, none but violent Pleasures darken the memory and imagination, but the
least thing in the World can darken the sight of the Mind. The Learned of whom
you were speaking, make more use of their memory, and of their imagination,
than they do of their understanding; and I every day perceive that those whom
you esteem most for their Learning are a sort of Men whose understanding is so
small, so dark, so dissipated, that they are not capable of having the least
apprehension of many Truths which Erastus very easily comprehends.

There is much difference between that Learning which depends upon the
largeness of the Memory, and the force of the Imagination; and that Learning
which consists in a sight purely intellectual, wherein the Imagination has no
share, unless it be indirectly.

All pure Idea's vanish, and dissipate themselves at the appearance of sensible
Idea's. We do not hear the voice of Truth, when our Senses and our Imagination
speak to us; for we had much rather confusedly know the relations that things
have with us, than clearly to know what relations they have between themselves.
We are in so great a dependence under Bodies, and so little united to God, that
the least thing separates us from him.

But sensible knowledge, and the sight of the imagination being strengthened by
the vestiges or impressions of the Brain, may withstand contrary Sentiments;
the Idea's of that knowledge have, if I may use that expression, a Body, and
cannot be so easily dissipated. Thus Retirement, and a privation from all
Pleasure, is not absolutely necessary to gain all the knowledge wherein we make
a greater use of the Senses and Imagination, than of Reason.

If Mr. Des Carts came to be so learned in Geometry, Physics, and other parts
of Philosophy, it is, because he passed 25 years in a Retirement; it is because
he has perfectly discovered the errors of our Senses, that he has with care
avoided their impression, and oftener meditated than read. In a word, it is
because being held by few things, he could unite himself to God, in a manner
close enough to receive from him all the necessary lights. This made him
extremely learned.

Had he still disengaged himself more from his Senses, less immersed himself in
the World, and yet more carefully applied himself to seek after Truth, it is
certain that he would have carried the Sciences of which he has treated much
further, and his Metaphysics would not be such as he has left them to us in
his Writings.


Arist. But, Theodorus, now that so many able Men have wrote of Philosophy,
Mathematics, and other Learning, methinks it is enough if we read their Works.
Those learned Persons whereof I was just now speaking to you, know Des Carts
as well as Des Carts could know himself. My Friend whom I have a mind to
convert, understands him so thoroughly, that nothing can be mentioned out of
that Author but is known by him; nay, and the very place where it lies: yet he
never meditates, reads a Book in three days, and knows it all. Therefore I judge
that Retirement is not necessary for Learning.


Theod. Not for that Learning which resides in Memory, and does not enlighten
the Mind. Do you think that those Persons who so easily remember other Men's
Opinions, can see the truth of them? Do you think that your Friend knows Des
Carts, or rather do you think that he sees what Des Carts saw? If you do, you
are much mistaken. I will grant to you, that your Friend knows all the words
which Des Carts has used, better than Des Carts himself did; or that he can
better relate Des Cartes's Opinion, than Des Carts himself could have done it.
In short, I will believe, if you will, that he is fitter to make a Man a
Cartesian, to enlighten the minds of those that hear him, and make them receive
Des Cartes's Sentiments, than Des Carts himself was: yet, for all this, I do
not believe that he truly knows Des Carts.

Des Cartes's Philosophy is in his memory and imagination, and for that Reason
he speaks pertinently of it: but I do not believe that it is in his mind, and
for that Reason he neither sees nor approves those Sentiments that are the
necessary Consequences of it.

It seems as a Paradox, that a Man who does not know a Truth, should sometimes
be more capable of persuading another of it, than he who exactly knows it, and
discovered it himself; yet if you consider that we instruct others only by
Words, you will easily perceive that those that have any force of imagination,
and a happy memory, often can, remembering what they have read, explain
themselves more clearly, than those who are accustomed to meditation, and who
discover Truth by themselves.

Thus, Aristarchus, do not imagine that those who speak pertinently to you
concerning some certain Truths, see them perfectly, for it is not always so:
many times this happens, yet those Truths are only in their memory, or else
they see them by an imaginary sight, for that sight furnishes expressions
lively, and that seem to signify much, though they signify nothing distinct, only
to those whom they move to retire within themselves.

There is much difference between seeing and seeing; between seeing after
having read, and seeing after having meditated: And to find out those that see
distinctly and perfectly possess a Truth, from those who do not possess it,
there needs truly to propose to them some question that depends from it; for
then those that see clearly speak clearly, but the others always speak in such
a manner as discovers their want of light.

Examine your learned Men, Aristarchus, according to this method, and you will
find that the most learned are the most ignorant; that they have the less
penetration, and the greatest rashness; that they cannot so much as discern
Truth from what seems to be such; that they speak without conceiving what they
say; and that often in the very instant that you admire them, what is most to
be admired in them, is nothing but an effect of that memory which, like a
Watch, goes of itself, and whose springs unbend themselves by the action of the
imagination.

In short, you will see after all, that almost all their knowledge is destitute
of light and evidence, of that intellectual light and evidence that is darkened
by the slightest sensation, and dissipated by the smallest motion; and that
therefore Retirement, a privation of sensible things, the mortification of the
senses and passions are absolutely necessary for the perfection of the
understanding, as also for the conversion of the heart.

But this does not justify the Morals of the Gospel, for Christ did not come to
teach us the Mathematics, Philosophy, and such other Truths, which by
themselves are unuseful enough for our Salvation.

All knowledge of Truth rendering the mind in some manner more perfect, it was
necessary that Christ's directions should be proper to purchase it. But the
true perfection of the mind, and the shortest way to learn generally all
Sciences, being an Union with God (not the natural Union, which is incessantly
interrupted by the motions of Concupiscence, but the Union which a clear sight,
and a continual love make indissolvable,) It was necessary that Christ's
Precepts should put us in the way, whereby we may attain to that Union.

You will see at our next Interview, that the Christian Religion alone can lead
us to it. In the mean time I leave you with Erastus, to meditate on the things
which we have said now.


DIALOGUE VIII. That Christian Morality is absolutely necessary for the
Conversion of the Heart.
Theod. WEll, Aristarchus, are you convinced that Retirement from Business, a
Privation of Pleasures; in a word, that a mortification of the Senses and
Passions, is absolutely necessary for the discovery of secret, abstracted, and
sound Truths, whose knowledge puffs not up the Heart? For I well know, that the
Commerce of the World engages the Mind in the Study of such Sciences as render
a Man famous, and that Concupiscence gives us a Passion for all Truths which
are useful to make a Man considerable in the World.


Arist. Yes, Theodorus, I am convinced. Truth in itself appears so mean a thing
to Men tossed with Passion, or joined to some sensible Object, that they cannot
but despise it; and though there are many that seek after it, it is, I confess,
out of design, and hope to draw some advantage from it. The brightness and
glory which environs the Learned, sparkles and dazles us, our secret Pride
awakes and stirs us up: But the pure light of Truth is not lively enough to
make us perceive it, when we are preingaged with other things.


Erast. I have known some Men, who probably read in the Morning, for a matter
of Talk in the Afternoon; for as soon as they had left the little Company that
applauded them, they have had such an horror for Books, and every thing called
Learning, that they could not abide to hear it spoke of. You remember Mr. F.
for three years, he doubtless took great pleasure to teach three or four of us
young Men who came to hear him, since he would fatigue himself every Morning,
to repeat the miserable Reasons which he plundered out of Aristotle's Problems.
Now he reads no more; for we hearing him no longer with admiration, he speaks
no more with pleasure. He even has much aversion for all Discourses of
Learning; and as he is a little troublesome, we have found out the secret to get
rid of his Company, by proposing some Question to him to have it resolved.


Theod. This Example, Erastus, was not needful to convince us that Persons who
are wedded to some sensible thing, do not search after Truth for its sake. You
see that we are well enough convinced of it. You may observe the weakness of
other Men, and how their Vanity renders 'em miserable, provided that you
suppose your self in their person, for we are all very near one as the other.
But, Erastus, we never ought to inspire into any one a Contempt of, or
Estrangement from a Person, unless we are certain, I say certain, that he is
dangerous and contagious. Otherwise we must speak in general terms. You would,
perhaps, by your judicious Reflection, give us to understand that you are
witty; we already know it, but we knew not that you would have it known. It Is a
hard thing to accuse others of Vanity, without condemning one's self of the
same thing, or something else equivalent. Thus, Erastus, you may constantly
observe, continually criticize, but think and correct your self, and if you
would not condemn your self, hold your peace.

You freely grant, Aristarchus, that the Councels of JESUS CHRIST are necessary
to acquire that perfection of the Mind which consists in the knowledge of Truth.
Nevertheless JESUS CHRIST came not to make us Philosophers, his Councels, as I
told you yesterday, tend only indirectly, and by reason of their universality
to make us wise. But if he gave not to his Disciples many Precepts of Logic to
reason justly, yet he taught them all necessary Rules to live well, and gave
them also all necessary power to follow them. It Is for this end that JESUS
CHRIST is come, his design is to remedy the disorder of Sin, to reunite us to
God, by separating us from the Body, to save us, and raise us up to himself in
Heaven.

We shall eternally remain such, as we shall be in the moment that our Soul
shall leave our Body. If we love God in this moment, we shall love him always;
for the motion of Spirits is only unconstant, and meritorious for this life:
But all human Sciences are in themselves unprofitable, to regulate this moment,
upon which depends our Eternity; they merit us not the Assistances of Heaven
for this moment, they incline not our hearts toward God. Thus JESUS CHRIST was
not to guide us directly to this perfection of the Mind which is barren for
Eternity, and which ceases at the moment of Death; he was to recommend to us a
privation from sensible Good, to the end that our hearts may be filled with his
love, being empty of every thing else; and to the end that adhering to nothing
in the moment that commences Eternity, our love may carry us toward God who is
the source of all happiness.

Let us not then any more consider the Councels of JESUS CHRIST, with respect
to the knowledge of Truth, but with respect to this perfection of Mind, which
consists in the love of real Good, in Charity which remains for ever, which
alone merits Eternity, and without which all Virtues are but imaginary.

Let us examine the Morality of the Gospel with relation to the Rule of Manners,
but let us examine it with all possible strictness, that there may be no Subject
for a second Enquiry; let us not be convinced less of our Duties by Reason,
than we are by Faith.

Certainly if the things which I have proved concerning JESUS CHRIST in the
preceding Conferences are true, there remains no doubt about the truths of
Morality; we must renounce our own Wills, we must bear his Cross, we must weep,
fast and suffer. JESUS CHRIST has said it. If he is God, if he is Wise, it is
evident that his Councels are very advantageous to us. But because we cannot be
too much convinced of the truth of these Propositions, which are so
incommodious, and which offend us so sensibly, we must endeavor to discover by
our own Reason that there is no other remedy for our Evils.

Perhaps we shall do like those that are dangerously hurt, who, to preserve a
miserable life, present their own Bodies to the Surgeons to be cut and burnt;
they believe these Men upon their word, and confide in their Operations, and
expose themselves to a great pain, in an uncertain prospect of a Good which in
itself is very inconsiderable: What then should hinder us from imitating them,
when the evidence of Reason concurs with the certainty of Faith? If we refuse
to believe in JESUS CHRIST, if we fear not Eternity, if we hearken to out
Senses and Passions, yet it may be, that Reason joined to Faith, will effect
our Conviction: And it may be that, by continually condemning our laziness, it
will excite in us a profitable Inquietude. Let us therefore examine those things
in their Principle.

We ought only to love what is lovely. No Thing is lovely but what is good; but
no Thing is good with respect to us, if it be incapable of doing us good, if it
be incapable of rendering us more perfect and happy (for I speak not here of a
kind of Good which consists in the perfection of every thing.) Now no Thing is
capable of rendering us more perfect and happy, if it be not above us, and
capable of acting in us. But all Bodies are below us, they cannot act in us,
they cannot produce in us either pleasure or light, then they are not to be
beloved: What think you Erastus?


Erast. When I ask my Reason, I freely rest upon this; but when I make use of
my Senses, I doubt it: Yet as my Reason answers me more distinctly than my
Senses, as it is preferable to my Senses, and as it never deceives me, though my
Senses always do, when I make use of them to judge of Truth; I believe that
sensible Objects are incapable of rendering me more perfect and happy.


Theod. Then you ought not to love Bodies?


Erast. It Is true, this is evident.


Theod. But don't you love them?


Erast. Much, Theodorus, I follow not my Reason; I follow my Senses, my
Pleasure.


Theod. Thus Erastus. To love sensible things, it is sufficient to taste
Pleasure in the use of 'em; Pleasure captivates the Heart, it acts more
powerfully upon you than your reason, since you love because of pleasure such
things as you know by reason are unworthy of your Love.


Erast. I have for a long time known what you now tell me.


Theod. I don't doubt it, it is not to teach you what I now tell you, but to
make you think of it; But pray tell me do you love the Game of Piquet or Omber.


Erast, Very much.


Theod. Do you love Hunting?


Erast. I have not yet been at it, but I imagine that there is no great pleasure
to course a Hare for three of four hours together, in the Wind, Rain or Sun.


Arist. You know not what you say, Erastus, there is no greater pleasure in the
World.


Theod. Take heed Erastus, Aristarchus judges not of Hunting as you do, he
loves it, and you love it not. But would you love it? Does your Reason
represent it as if it were worthy of your love?


Erast. No, Theodorus, neither my Reason nor my Senses; for what pleasure can
it be to pursue a miserable Beast a whole day together; I pity the Passion of
Aristarchus.


Theod. I advise you then never to go to it; for if you did, you perhaps would
come back more passionate than Aristarchus, he was once as you are, without any
desire to hunt before he had tasted the pleasure, it may be he had even an
aversion for it, but by little and little he was so accustomed to it, that he
could not refrain from it.


Erast. I believe it, and will never go, for I would not be ruined in Horses
and Dogs.


Theod. But, Erastus, why play you? Why do you lose your time unprofitably?
Will you ruin your (...) by play rather than Hunting?


Erast. I cannot help it.


Theod. Then it is with you as with Aristarchus, you condemn one another, and
have compassion for one another.


Arist. It Is true Erastus; and I are not over wise, thus to follow the Motions
of our Passions, although I see well that he runs the Risque of losing at Cards,
and I, of falling off my Horse.


Theod. What should have been done then to reclaim Erastus from gaming, and
Aristarchus from hunting? For as things now are, there only remains in human
apprehension a violent Remedy.


Erast. When Aristarchus perceived himself, agitated by the pleasure of the
Chase, he should have forthwith left it; He should resemble me, his Imanation
should not be filled with these Vestiges, which continually renew the object of
his Passion; it is the Pleasure that is found in the use of sensible things
which is the Cause of Passions, and which agitates the animal Spirits; but when
the animal Spirits are strongly agitated, they impress deep Vestiges in the
Brain, they even break, through their violent Course, all the Fibers which resist
them: Thus as soon as we taste pleasure we must examine and see if it be
advantageous that the Vestiges of the Object which cause this pleasure perfect
their form; if the Object which causes this pleasure is unworthy of our
Application and Love, we must deprive our selves of it, and also shun the
pleasure which enslaves us by the Vestiges it impresses in our Brain. It Is this
I believe which we ought to do to hinder our Concupiscence from a continual
growth.


Theod. -- But Erastus, when you actually taste of pleasure, can you easily
quit the Object that causes it? When Aristarchus was in the heat of the Chase,
the first time he went thither, do you think he was in a Condition to reflect
upon himself? Did not the Sound of the Horn, the Noise and running of the Dogs,
the motion of the Horse, and above all this the pleasure that he found in all
these different motions, take up his mind? Did not his Passion carry him as
well as his Horse, to the Death of the Hare or Stag? And do you believe that he
could then think of your Remedy? Or if he had thought, do you believe that he
would have been willing to have made use of it? Or that he could have resisted
the Passion which agitated him? The Philosophical Remedies which you have laid
down, are not proper at such a time, Erastus, to hinder our Concupiscence that
it should not increase.


Erast. It Is true Theodorus, the most certain of all Remedies is that of
privation. Pleasure poisons us, we must not taste it, this the most short and
sure Rule (b) He that commits Sin becomes the Slave of it. Joh. 8.34
I find that reason perfectly agrees with the Gospel, nevertheless I remember
that I have cured my Imagination and resisted my Passion by the use of things,
which, according to what you have said, should increase it. Thus,

About three or four years ago, I freely believed every thing that I heard: One
day there came an Officer hither who said, that traveling with an Englishman,
that could not forbear smoking, it happened that this Englishmans Horse fell
down, and broke his Masters Leg, who being upon the ground, and thinking rather
on his Pipe than Leg, he put his hand into his Pocket, and taking out his Pipe
whole, he cried out with Joy, Well, well, my Pipe is not broke. This Relation
struck me, and I imagined the smoke of Tobacco was the most agreeable thing in
the World, so that I perceived my self urged with a violent Passion to try it;
but it happened to me as to many others, that I had no sooner tasted it, but
had a horror for it. Thus, Theodorus, your Remedy, which is to deprive us of
sensible things, is not general; for the use of Tobacco has cured me of the
Passion I had for it, and when I had not used it, I was desirous of it.


Theod. But, Erastus, don't you see that we must be deprived of all that is
capable of sullying the Imagination? The Commerce we have with those who speak
of Bodies as true Goods, is capable of impressing traces in the Brain which
carry us to the love of Bodies, as well as the very use of Bodies. A Drunkard,
who speaks of Wine as of his God, who despises those who know not how to drink,
and who places amongst his bravest Actions the Victories which he has got at
the Table against the greatest Debauchees of the Province, such a Drunkard, in
his gay humor easily persuades a young Man that it is a fine quality to drink as
much Wine as two Horses can drink Water. It Is for this that in all places where
Men speak of drinking much, as of a Virtue, all the World drinks to excess; for
even those who don't at first delight in drinking, doing as others, to avoid
being the Subject of their Companions Ralleries, they are by degrees so
accustomed to Wine, that they cannot be without it.

Thus, Erastus, as Concupiscence does principally reside in the traces of the
Brain, which incline the Soul to the love of sensible things, it must be
deprived of all things which produce these traces, not only of the actual use
of Bodies, which is of no use to the preservation of health and life, but also
of the Conversation of Debauchees, who speak with esteem of the objects of
their passions.

It Is pleasure, Erastus, which agitates the Spirits, and which produces
dangerous traces, not only that which we enjoy by our Senses, but that also
which we enjoy by Imagination; not only the taste, but, also the desire. And
sometimes the Imagination does so augment all things, that the pleasure it
produces excites the Concupiscence after a more strong and lively manner, than
that we enjoy even in the use of Bodies.

Persons who have too quick and delicate an Imagination, may sometimes cure the
hurt they have received in a contagious discourse, by tasting the pleasures
which are represented to them, or of which they formed themselves too great an
Idea. And there are certain bashful, lazy and judicious persons, and of a
certain disposition of mind hard to describe, to whom it is convenient
sometimes to show the world, to give 'em a dislike of it.

But, Erastus, this is rare, and it is extremely dangerous to be familiariz'd
with sensible things. You have an horror for Tobacco, you are pleased not to be
subject to the necessity of always having some with you; yet if you were to be
with Men who frequently use it, their discourse and manner would engage you by
degrees to use it your self, and Use would subject you to it as well as others;
for I know some who cannot be without it, that could not endure it heretofore.


Erast. It is true, Theodorus, that the great Secret to resist Concupiscence,
is to have continually an eye to the purity of our Imagination, and to take
heed that it leave not footsteps in the Brain, which may carry us to the love
of sensible things, thus to remedy the beginning of our Irregularities. The
Councels of JESUS CHRIST, which only tend to deprive us of the use of sensible
things are admirable, but they are very uneasy; methinks Philosophy furnishes
us with a Remedy more commodious than that of the Gospel, it is this:

Philosophy teaches me, that all Bodies which are about me cannot act in me, and
that it is God only that causes in me the pleasure and grief which I feel in
their use; this being granted, I can enjoy Bodies without loving them: for as I
only ought to love that which is truly capable of making me happy, to excite in
me the love of God, I have only to remember in the use of sensible things, that
it is God who makes me happy by their means. Thus I ought not to shun Bodies, on
the contrary I ought to seek them; that so by exciting pleasure in me, they may
continually make me to think of God who is the cause of it.

Whence comes it that the Blessed love God constantly, and that they cannot
leave off loving him, if it is not that they see him, and that they are tied to
him by a preingaging pleasure? Well then, I see God by Philosophy, I perceive
him in every thing; if I eat, I think of God, because it is God that makes me
eat with pleasure; I Am not careful to love good entertainment, as there is
nothing but God which acts in me, I only love him.


Theod. You, Erastus, are free from sin, and confirmed in grace, for who shall
disunite you from God? the most violent pleasures tie you more strongly to him,
and pains can only produce in you a fear and respect for him; but do you your
self often make use of your own Remedy, and have you never acted contrary to
the remorse of your Conscience?


Erast. I am very sensible, Theodorus, that this Remedy of my Philosophy is not
sovereign, but pray explain to us the defects of it.


Theod. I will: When you taste of Fruit with pleasure, your Reason tells you
that there is a God whom you see not, who causes in you this pleasure; your
Senses tell you on the contrary, that this Fruit which you see, which you hold
in your hands, (...) which you eat, is that which causes in you this pleasure;
which of these two speaks higher, your Reason or your Senses? As for me, I find
that the noise of my Senses is so great, that I even think no of God in that
moment; but perhaps Erastus is such a Philosopher, that his Senses are silent
as soon as he pleases, and that they never speak to him without first obtaining
his License. If so, your Remedy is good for you; for the privation of Bodies is
not absolutely necessary to those who have no Concupiscence. Adam could taste
of pleasures without becoming their Slave, tho he had done better to have let
them alone.

Then let those who feel no Concupiscence in them, and whose Body is entirely
subject to the Spirit, make use of your Remedy, it is good for them: they are
just by themselves, they descend in a right Line from the Pre-Adamites. Neither
did Christ come for them, he came not to save the Just, but Sinners. He came
for us who are Sinners, Children of a sinful Parent, sold, and subject to Sin,
and who always feel in our Bodies the Rebellion of our Senses and Passions.

When the obligation we have to preserve our health and life constrains us to
enjoy some pleasure, then we must make a necessity of Virtue, and make use of
your Remedy if we can, remembering that these are not the Objects which cause in
us this pleasure, but God only, we must thank him for them, and pray to him
that he would defend us from the malignity of sensible Objects, we must use
them with fear, and with a kind of horror; for without the grace of JESUS
CHRIST, that which gives life to the Body, gives death to the Soul, you know
the Reasons of it.


Erast. But why? Pleasure in itself is not ill, I receive it, then it does me
no harm, I thank God for it, and love him the more; it unites me to God, who is
the Author of it, then it does me good.


Theod. The love of God, which the enjoyment of Pleasure causes in you is much
interested; I Am much afraid, Erastus, that in loving God as the Author of your
Pleasure, you love your self instead of loving God. But I wish that this love
be not ill, I also wish that you have the power of raising your self up to God,
in the time that you enjoy some Pleasure, but this Pleasure makes traces in the
Brain, these traces continually agitate the Soul, and in the time of Prayer, or
some other necessary business, they disturb the Action, blind the Mind, and
stir up the Passions. Thus when you would even make a good use of Pleasure, at
the moment that you should taste it, the trouble that it disperses through the
Imagination, has so dangerous Consequences, that you had better have been
deprived of it.

Think you, Erastus, that there has been a Race of Mankind so very stupid, as
to get drunk for the honor of God, and to bring him into one's mind for the
pleasure of drunkenness; and do you observe, that the pleasure which is found
in the excessive use of sensible things, is such as cannot be prayed for to God
without remorse. Hence it is, that this pleasure was not ordained by Nature to
carry us directly to God, but for the use of Bodies, so far as they shall be
necessary for the preservation of life.

We must love God, because Reason informs us, that every thing is centered in
him that deserves our love. God will be loved with a clear love, with a love
which flows from pure light, and not with a confused Sentiment such as Pleasure
is. God is so lovely, that those who see him as he is, would love him in the
midst of the most cruel Torments; and we do not love him as he deserves, when
we love him because it is he only who can create agreeable Sentiments in us.

A Friend reproves us, because he should do it; we offend our selves, when we
punish our selves for our Irregularities, do we therefore cease to love our
selves or our Friend? No, doubtless, we endeavor, perhaps, to shun the Reproof
which our Friend thinks himself obliged to give us; but if we see that he only
does what he ought to do, we are unreasonable, if we cease to have an intrinsic
respect and love for him.

If then a person could conceive that God ows that to his Justice, which he
inflicts upon him to make him sensible of the highest pains, he always would
suffer patiently, without ceasing to love God. He should not love these pains
in themselves, but he should love the Author of them, who, if he did not
inflict them, would be less lovely, because he would be less just, and less
perfect.

A Criminal who has bribed his Judge, loves and esteems him much less than if
he had punished him; provided that this Criminal, who is not just enough to hate
the Crime in himself, would be reasonable enough to hate it in another.
Accordingly the blessed might suffer the pains of the damned, without hating
God; for although the pleasure they enjoy keeps them united to God inseparably,
yet they love not God for the sake of the pleasure which they receive from him,
they would even love him in their Torments: For, after all, pleasure is not so
much instituted to make us love the Author of it, as to unite us to him, since,
as reasonable Creatures, Reason alone ought to stir up our love.

Pleasure should carry us to the cause of it, and true Good should be capable
of producing it, because true Good should recompense all those who truly love:
But pleasure, which is the recompense and attraction of the love of the Just,
is not their end, for the Just would then love themselves instead of their
good. God deserves love in himself, and the pleasure which is found in the use
of Bodies, instead of inviting, is to love him as we ought to do, and even the
sweetness which is tasted in love, sets us at a distance from him, if resting
upon this sweetness we love him not for himself, for then we love our selves
instead of him.


Erast. I observe that there is nothing more dangerous than to make use of
sensible pleasures, and I am am now convinced that they increase Concupiscence,
by the impressions which they make in the Brains, and carry the mind not to
God, who is their Author, but to Bodies which seem to produce them, and that
though (absolutely speaking) they may induce us to think of God who is their
Author, yet they excite in us nothing but an interested love, a love which is
more like Self-love, than true Charity.


Arist. But, Theodorus, the Law of Nature does not only oblige us to love God,
but also Men; and if we have not some Correspondence with them by means of the
Body, what other Reason will induce us to love them? It Is Interest which forms
Societies. It Is Pleasure which unites different Sexes; and there are whole
Nations that cannot maintain Peace and Commerce but by the means of Wine. To
drink together is sufficient to put away Enmity amongst some Men. A glass of
Wine must be drunk to drive on a Bargain. Thus you see it is profitable for Men
to enjoy Pleasure together, to preserve that Union and Charity amongst them
which is commanded them.


Theod. I believe you have a mind to make your self merry, Aristarchus, What!
do you believe that there is any thing besides Truth and Justice, which can
strictly unite us together? do you believe that a Peace concluded in drink
betwixt Drunkards, would be so solid as that which reasonable Men make in the
sight of Justice, and by a Motive of Charity? Certainly all the Bonds which are
made by Interest, are unserviceable toward the fulfilling of the Precept of
loving our Neighbor. The Appearances are saved, and Men are treated with
Civility, but cordial Love is wanting, when Interest lies at the stake. We must
love other Men for God; for as it is he that should terminate all the motions
of our heart, he can only reunite all minds in himself. But the Commerce which
we may have with Men by means of the Body, are only proper to create a division
amongst us; for sensible Goods are not like those of the mind, one cannot
possess them without sharing them. It Is enough for a Man to desire an enjoyment
of his Friend's Estate, to make him unhappy and become his Enemy. It Is the Love
of temporal advantage which begets Wars, and breeds Division in Families.
Persons would enjoy these Goods, but cannot, without depriving those of them
that possess them. Thus it is evident, that a contempt of sensible Goods, and a
privation of Pleasures, are as useful for the preservation of Peace amongst
them as to continue a strict Union with God.


Arist. It Is true, Theodorus, that to avoid a quarrel with any Body, there is no
better means than to yield our Possessions to those that desire them of us, but
the Command of Jesus Christ in this matter is very inconvenient, and I do not
see that even the most perfect follow it.


Theod. I confess it, Aristarchus, there are many occasions on which we should
not too rigidly pursue this Command, but we must always be disposed to it if
there be necessity. It Is not the difficulty that we find in this Command, and
in the rest, which ought to hinder us from practicing them; on the contrary,
they are so much the more useful, as they tend more to satisfy the Pontificius
loquitur.
Justice of God, and to merit the Favor of our perfect reunion with him.

We are all Sinners, and deserve to suffer; and these instructions of Privation
being painful, they have this advantage, that they cleanse us from our Sins, in
making us partakers in the Sufferings of CHRIST.

In our misery we have all of us need of the assistance of Heaven, but CHRIST
teaches us to merit them, when our Sufferings being joined to his, our
Sufferings are meritorious with his. Thus the Inconveniency you find in the
Precepts of CHRIST, bring their Recommendation along with them.

If the trouble which attends the privation of sensible Objects were not
necessary to satisfy God, nor merit his Assistance, of which we have the
greatest need, I confess there would be a fault in the Evangelic Councils;
nevertheless there would be none better, for the Reasons I have produced. But
these Instructions do so perfectly and universally remedy all our Evils, they
are so proportioned to the Condition which Sin has reduced us to, that if we
cannot follow them, we cannot yet forbear to admire them.


Erast. It Is true, the Instructions of CHRIST do perfectly remedy
Concupiscence, but it is provided we follow them. We can do only those things
which we would do, and we are commanded to do what we would not; for it is
pleasure that makes us willing, and the Gospel forbids it; Who then shall be
able to follow these Instructions? I am much afraid that Aristarchus's Friend
will say, That Christian Morality resembles Plato's Politics; that it is
beautiful in its Idea, but has this essential fault, which renders it wholly
unprofitable, that Men are incapable of it.


Theod. It Is necessary, Erastus, that Christianity should be such as it is to
be perfect, you agree with me in this, but say it is impossible to follow it.
Yes, Erastus, it is so without CHRIST, but with him all things are possible. He
is our Strength, as well as our Wisdom. If he counsels us to act contrary to
our Wills, it is because he is able to change our hearts. He is not like Plato,
who gives Laws to establish a Republic, but does not make Men capable of
observing those Laws. CHRIST has established the most perfect Morality that
can be, and at the same time gives Men a power to act agreeably; he regenerates
them, and strips them of the Old Man; he gives them a heart of flesh, in which
he writes those Laws which the Jews received from Moses written in Stone; Faith
and Experience teaches us these things.

The Republic of Plato is a Republic in Idea, it is not made up of Men; but how
many Christians, even in a strict Sense, pursue the Counsels of their Master?
How many Religious Saints continually mortify their Senses and Passions, and
labor with all their Might to destroy the Body of Sin, this Old Man, whose
desires disturb their peace and hopes?

It Is necessary, Erastus, that the power of God appear in the execution of the
Precepts of Morality, that we may not doubt of the truth of Religion. It Is
necessary that there be nothing humane in the Religion which God establishes,
to the end that it attribute nothing of its establishment to the Politics of
Princes; the inclination of Men, and the natural disposition of their minds.

The Precepts of CHRIST, though painful in themselves, yet being followed,
justify Religion; and known Religion makes men obedient to his Precepts. He in
whom we believe enables us to act as we act, and what we thus act is so much
above our power, that it makes us believe what we believe. Thus the Precepts of
CHRIST far from being unprofitable, because they appear difficult and uneasy to
us, ought to be esteemed by us wholly Divine, since he that is wise enough to
give them to us, is also powerful enough to assist us. We shall speak something
the next Meeting of this power by which we are enabled to fulfill the Precepts
of the Gospel. Pray, Erastus, think of it with your Friend, so that our next
Discourse may be the more satisfactory.


DIALOGUE IX. The same Subject continued.
Arist. I Have thought on those things you said to us yesterday, Theodorus, and
on those whereof we are to treat this day. I am convinced of the first, and I
will tell you what I think of the others.

I look upon Man as being between Heaven and Earth, between the place of his
Rest and Felicity, and that of his Troubles and Miseries; fastened to God, yet
knowing him not; fastened to Bodies, which he sees. Seeing that pleasure moves
and transports him, and that, whilst he enjoys it, he does not see Him who is
the true cause of it in the same manner as he sees and feels the Bodies that
are the occasion of it, he runs with Fury after Bodies, and does not so much as
think on God. So it is necessary that he deprive himself of sensible pleasures,
if he will stop the motion that draws him out of the way to Heaven, and carries
him toward earthly things; this is plain; but a privation of pleasure is not
yet sufficient to raise him toward Heaven.

Let us suppose, Theodorus, a Balance, one of whose Scales is empty, and the
other heavily laden; tho by little and little you take out of the Scale what
was in it, till there remain almost nothing in it, notwithstanding all this,
there will be no alteration in the Balance: For this you must altogether empty
it, or lay something of weight in the other Scale, that may poize it equally.

Now our Mind is like a Balance; nor is it perfectly free in one sense, but
when the weight that transports and captivates it, is equal for Heaven and
Earth, or rather when there is no weight of either side: For then the Mind
being as it were in Aequilibrio, easily moves of itself toward that which by
reason it finds to be its true good. It is not moved nor determined by
preingaging pleasure, but by reason alone; its senses have no share in the Act;
it is love is an understanding love, and altogether worthy of it.

Adam, before his Fall, having no Concupiscence, his Senses and his Passions
yielding to him as soon as he desired it, in short, being not drawn in spite of
himself to the love of sensible things, by involontary and rebellious
preingaging pleasures, he was perfectly free, and stood in no want of that kind
of Grace which consists in a preingaging delectation; because the Balance was
not swayed on either side by any weight.

But now that one of the Cups of the Balance is extremely loaded, we cannot be
free in the same manner as the first Man; for even the most Righteous Persons
cannot entirely free themselves of the weight of Concupiscence. All they can
do, is to lessen the weight by retirement, by a privation of pleasures, and a
continual mortification of their Senses and Passions. But not being able to
bring that weight to nothing, they stand in need of the delectation of Grace to
counterpoize it, and put the Scale in a perfect Aequilibrium.

I therefore believe Theodorus, that for us to deny our selves the Pleasures of
this World, is not sufficient to deliver us wholly from being Slaves to them,
but that in order to this we stand in absolute need of Christ's Note, By
Christ's Grace, is here meant that which he has particularly merited us, which
consists for in a preingaging delectation, or in a loathing which he causes us
to have for false good: For the Graces of Light and Joy which Christ hat halso
merited for us, are common to us with the First Man, who, knowing no
Concupiscence, had no need of preingaging Pleasures, as we have explained it in
the foregoing Dialogue.
Grace. But as a small Weight is able to make a pair of Scales even, when one
of them has very little in it, it is plain that a lessening of the weight of
Sin, or a denying ones self the use of Worldly Pleasure, is the best
preparation in order to receive, not only Grace, but even the efficacy of Grace
(provided this Self denial be an effect of the dictates of God's Spirit.) For
it is evident that the efficacy of Grace commonly depends on the disposition
which we are in, with respect to Worldly things, as a Weights acting in a pair
of Scales depends, as to its effect, on the force of the contrary Weights.

As every Weight presses downward, so in one sense every Grace is efficacious,
or draws us toward God; but as every Weight does not make the Scales even, nor
turns them when another Weight hinders it, so every Grace does not set us
wholly free, nor does it force us toward God. So that every Grace may be said
to be efficacious, though it turn not a Heart entirely, and every Grace is
sufficient to do this, when we are well prepared to receive it; for there is no
Weight, how small soever it may be, but what may set a pair of Scales even,
when the obstacle is very light.

Thus the efficacy and sufficiency of Grace may be considered in themselves, or
relatively: If we examine them in themselves, any Grace will appear to be
efficacious, and consequently sufficient; if relatively, we shall find it
sometimes efficacious and sufficient, and sometimes not. Yet not but that God
may bestow on a Sinner some Graces whose efficacy all the malignity of Sin
could never hinder; for though we suppose a Balance to be extremely filled on
one side, there may yet be found a Weight great enough to make it even.

This is what came into my Mind upon the subject matter of our Conference.


Theod. Your Reflections are Just; but your Comparison does not say enough yet.
Pray, Aristarchus, what do you mean by this word Grace? It Is a loose and
undetermined expression which, like some words used by Logicians, can give no
distinct Idea of any thing, principally to such a one as Erastus. Do you
understand by this word barely preingaging Delectation?


Arist. Hitherto I only meant this kind of Delectation: But by the word Grace,
we may understand whatever is capable of making the Scales even, and of drawing
the Mind toward God, or of fixing it strongly to him, if it be united to him
already.


Theod. All this is still very general. Pray tell me Erastus, do you know what
are the things that are capable of drawing us toward God, and of fixing us
strongly to him?


Erastus, I do not know them all in particular; but it seems to me in general,
that only Light and Pleasure make us love him, and that, besides Light and
Pleasure, Joy may confirm our Love, though it never begins it; since, when I
examine my self, I know no other motive of my particular will. If I begin to
love any thing, it is either because I know, or feel that this thing is good
for me; and if I continue to love it, it is because I continue to know or feel
that this thing is good for me; or else it is that I rejoice at the sight or
taste of the good that I possess.


Theod. Thus, Erastus, all the Graces of which you have an Idea, which carry
you toward good, are either Graces of Light which enlighten the Mind without
determining it, or Graces of preingaging Pleasure which determine the Mind
without enlightening it, or Graces of Joy which follow the Light and
Determination of the Mind, and only serve to confirm it in its choice. You do
not speak of being ignorant of false good, or ween'd from it, nor do you speak
of the Loathing which we come to have of it, nor of the sorrow we conceive at
the sight of our misery when we rejoice in this false good. But I plainly see
the Reason of it: It Is that these sorts of Graces do not by themselves carry us
toward our true good, though they are often necessary that the Graces which by
themselves carry toward that true good may act.


Erast. This is true, Theodorus.


Theod. But pray, Erastus, what think you of the necessity of Grace? Are you of
Aristarchus's Opinion?


Erast. Altogether, Theodorus: I believe that a self-denial as to sensible
Pleasure, after what manner soever you may imagine it to be, cannot of it self
reunite us to God, though the efficacy or the prevailing of the Grace of Christ
depends on that for the most part, I believe that all Men have need of the
Light of Faith, and that those who are tempted by violent Pleasures cannot
overcome them by the Grace of Light only: I believe they have still need of
preingaging Pleasure, especially if they are used to follow the motions of
their Passions. As for the Righteous whose Hearts are strongly fixed on God,
though they cannot overcome a Temptation without actual help, I believe that
Light alone, which they never want in pressing occasions, is commonly
sufficient for that, and that the Joy which they feel in the practice of
Virtue, works in them the same effect that preingaging Pleasure does in those
who are beginning that Conversion.


Theod. But, Erastus, why do you say that the Righteous never want Light in
great Temptations that tend to draw them away from God?


Erast. It Is because the Righteous are only such so far as they love God. Now
those that love him, even when they are in danger of losing him, have a desire
to keep to him; but they cannot desire to keep to him without thinking upon the
means that may serve to that end, nor without representing to themselves the
greatness of their loss.


Theod. Why so, Erastus?


Erast. Because the Natural Prayer that obtains of God the lively Idea of an
Object is the actual Will of thinking on this Object. For when we will think on
any thing, the Idea of this thing presents its self to our Mind, and this Idea
is so much the more lively the more firm our Will is.

A Just Man loves God more than all other things, and in a Temptation, by which
he is in danger of losing God, is in a condition of seeing his loss; nor can he
see it without being sensible of it, nor without desiring to avoid it. His Will
therefore Naturally requires Light, and obtains so much the more of it, the
stronger his Desire is, and the more fervent his Love; for it is this Love that
prays as it ought, and is always heard.


Theod. This is true, Erastus: Our Good cannot be snatched from us, but that at
the same time we must be desirous to preserve it, and this Desire or Will is
always followed by Light; for nothing gives so much Light as Interest. Those
that look upon God as their true Good have commonly Light enough in the dangers
of Temptations, and usually find out means to avoid them. But, Erastus, this
only happens when the Love is strong, and the Temptation weak. There are some
Righteous Men who love God above all things, yet whose Love is not lively,
being suffered by them to languish for want of Nourishment, and weakened
extremely by that Concupiscence which incessantly wars against it; so that the
Ideas, which, according to the Laws of Nature, present themselves to their
Minds in Temptation, dissipate and vanish in a moment; they are of no substance
nor consistence: But the Ideas which according to the Laws of Nature are
excited in the motions of the Passions are sensible. Thus, Erastus, lest the
Righteous should fall, God must either give them a greater Light than that
which should ensue from their love, according to the Laws of Nature, or awaken
and fortify their love by a preingaging delectation. But because he does it if
he pleases, and as much as he pleases (this not being in course of Nature a
thing to which he is obliged) the Light of the Righteous and the Disposition of
their Hearts, as sufficient as it is, does not always give them the victory in
the time of Temptation.


Erast. It Is a very sad thing that even the Righteous --


Theod. It is true, Erastus, but the Righteous can pray. God has obliged
himself by his Promises, which he keeps as inviolably as the Laws of Nature, to
give them continually actual and efficacious help, if they have need of it. The
Righteous are Members of Christ; they are animated with the Spirit of Christ;
it is, as we may say, Christ that prays in them, and God can refuse nothing to
his Son: For the Righteous obtain nothing that they ask, unless they ask it in
the Name of Christ, and in order to preserve the Spirit of Christ within them.


Erast. But, Theodorus, when a Righteous Man through negligence lets his love
decay, when he lets the Light and Life of the Spirit dye in him, God knows his
wants, God loves him, for every Righteous Man is loved of God; why then does he
stay till he pray to him? Why does he not grant before he demands? Why does he
not protect and defend him?


Theod. God does not always stay till the Righteous pray to him, but often
gives them help which they ask not of him; and if he does command them to ask
it of him, it is because he will be loved and adored for it. God knows our
wants better than we do our selves; and if he commands us to pray to him, it is
to oblige us to think on him, and to look upon him as the only Being that is
able to fill us with good things; it is to excite and awaken our love toward
him; and not to learn of us either our wants or the motives he has to relieve
us. He is resolved to be gracious to us upon his Sons account, and if it is his
will that we pray to him for it in his Sons Name, it is that we may love him and
his Son.

It Is love that prays, it is respect, it is the disposition of the Mind and
Heart: For we cannot pray to God without actually believing a great many things
concerning him and us, without actually hoping in him, and actually loving him.
But acts stir up and even beget habits; therefore it is principally to awaken in
us our Faith, our Hope and our Love, that God commands us to pray to him.

But when our Faith is lively, our Hope firm and our Love ardent, it is not
possible, according to the very Laws of Nature, we should want a lively and
efficacious Light. For, as you say, it is impossible that what we love should be
snatched away from us without exciting in us a desire to preserve it; and this
desire is naturally followed with a prospect of the means to preserve it.

Besides, the Joy we find in the possession of what we ardently love is of
great force: For the Righteous possess God by the fore-taste of their hope, and
this fore-taste accompanied with light is able to make them overcome the
strongest Temptations, because it makes them embrace with Joy the means that
the Light offers them. Thus Prayer is the nourishment of the Soul, and by it it
receives new strength, by it it thinks on God, and comes into his presence,
unites its self to him, that is its whole strength; and even it receives of
God, through Christ, the delectation of Grace to counterballance those
preingaging Pleasures which it receives also of God (for it is God alone that
acts in it) but which are involuntary and rebellious by reason of Adam's
disobedience.

And you ought to observe, Erastus, that the Righteous have always in them the
strength to pray (seeing it is Love that prays) and consequently strength to
obtain an increase of their Love, seeing that God has obliged himself by his
Promises to grant them their Prayers. Nay they can easily make use of this
strength they have to pray at all times in which they have liberty of Spirit,
and need of Prayer, especially if they live in a retirement, and deny
themselves sensual Pleasures. For, as the Righteous love God, it is easy for
them, when they have liberty of Mind, and perceive that any thing sets them at
a distance from God, to make some attempt to return to him again: And this
effort is an efficacious Prayer which is rewarded according to the greatness of
the effort. They may fly to Christ, think on his Counsels and Examples; and if
they cannot easily imitate his Life, they may at least desire to do it, they
may strengthen their hope and raise their love, by praying with Faith and
Humility in the prospect of the Merits of Christ.


Arist. They may do what you say, if they think upon it: But if they do not
think upon it, certainly they cannot do it; for none can do what you say with
out thinking on it.


Theod. They always think upon it, Aristarchus, when it is necessary, because,
being righteous, they love God. For those that love God have him still present
when there is danger of losing him; because we cannot have that which we love
snatched away from us, and not desire to preserve it. I suppose, in the mean
time, that they preserve the Liberty of their Minds by putting away Sensual
Pleasures; for sometimes the Imagination is so taken up and troubled by the
Action of Bodies that are about us, and by the Motion of the Spirits which the
Passions raise in us, that we may lose God easily enough, and without making
all the Reflections which I believe necessary to preserve and fortify Love.


Erast. Thus, Theodorus, we should always return to the Counsels of Christ.
There is nothing more necessary for the Righteous, as well as for Sinners, than
to remove from the Noisie World and Violent Pleasures; and I believe that those
who set no Bounds to their Pleasures, nor to their Passions, can hardly
continue in this Presence of God which bears up and fortifies their Love. I
fancy that the Hurry, Music, Pomp, Magnificence, and other Allurements that are
at Public Places, would very much perplex my Mind, if I should resort thither;
for, they say, the Authors of those Sports, which you formerly frequented so
much, Aristarchus, have no other design than to raise the Passions, and bewitch
the Imagination. I think that if any Temptation surprised me in those Places, I
should not be Master of my self enough to resist it; so I Am resolved never to
go thither.


Theod. You speak with a great deal of Reason, Erastus; We should always seek
the most simple, and most moderate Diversions; we should use Recreations as
harmless as are those of Children: But some People cannot be diverted without
being disturbed; these do not take their Diversion as you do, merely to unbend
their Mind; alas! they never tire it with hard Study; they are for Diversions
that may give some respite to their Passions, which weary them too much because
they follow their violent Motions. Their design is not by this means to settle
again the Imagination in its natural Seat after it has been harrass'd by
Meditation; but rather to put out of their Mind some ambitious, or other unruly
Thoughts which the Passions have excited, and which are no longer pleasing to
them; that so they may make themselves more happy in following the Motions of
Passions softer and more moderate than those that commonly move them: for after
all, the Passions which are Acted on the Stage do not so violently move us, as
those whose Object is real and substantial.


Erast. Certainly, Theodorus, these Persons are very miserable; their
Imagination is much disordered; Concupiscence, or the weight of Sin, (to use
Aristarchus's Expression) weighs heavy in their Scale, and there had need be a
great deal of pre-ingaging Pleasure to counterballance it.

In the mean time, they hope to be saved like other Christians, and imagine,
that, though they do not prepare themselves for ordinary Graces by following
the Counsels of Christ, God will give them those extraordinary Graces which
overcome all the Malignity of the most corrupt Minds. In short, they say that
it belongs to God to convert them.


Theod. When I hear your voluptuous or ambitious Men complain that God does not
give them such Graces as may work their Conversion, methinks I see a Company of
cruel Wretches that stab themselves, and at the same time accuse God of the
barbarity which they use against themselves. They expect that he should do them
good, while they are doing themselves harm; and at the very time that they
cause in their Bodies such Motions as by the Order of Nature are still to be
attended with Pain, they would have God to alter that Order and Work Miracles
for their sakes.

We cannot too often call to mind, that God always acts by the most simple
Means, and inviolably keeps the Laws which he has prescribed to himself, not
only in the Order of Nature but also in that of Grace. The simplest and
shortest way for the Conversion of Sinners, is, that they deprive themselves of
Pleasures; this is plain: They must therefore begin with this, and not flatter
themselves with the hopes of such extraordinary Graces as may really be
esteemed Miracles in the Order of Grace.

If we desire to live, we must eat; if we would enjoy some Pleasure, we must
excite within our Body those Motions which Nature has decreed should be
attended with pleasing Sensations; for, these Motions oblige God, in
Consequence of his Will, to cause us to feel the Pleasure which we wished for.
So, if we would attain to a regenerate state, and live the Life of Grace, we
ought to ween our selves of sensible Objects, mortify the Lusts of the Flesh,
and pray without ceasing. Our Repentance and our Prayers will prevail with God,
according to his Promise, to bestow on us such Graces as are able to regenerate
us. But if we follow the Impulse of our Passions, and rely on the Efficacy of
extraordinary Graces, it is as if some Madmen should cast themselves headlong
down a Precipice, in hopes that God would do a Miracle to save them.

When we do not know what the Laws of Nature are, we learn them by Experiments;
but, when we know what those Laws are, we look upon them to be inviolable, and,
conforming our Actions to them, we do not pretend to overturn them. So, a
Person who does not know that Fire may offend him, comes too near it; but he no
sooner knows how it acts on him, but that he takes greater Care of himself,
neither does he think that the Fire ought to respect him if he should presume
to throw himself in the midst of its Flames. Now if we are ignorant in the Laws
of Grace, we ought to inform our selves about them, and when we know what they
are, we must be conformable to them, and not think we may break them as we
please; For, God's Will can never be made to depend on our Caprichios.

The Natural Philosophers have but a very imperfect Insight into the particular
Laws of Nature; for, Experiments, which are the surest Means to discover them,
are very uncertain: yet, they revere and fear those Laws, as unknown as they
are to them; and shall Christians, void of all Veneration and Fear for the Laws
of Grace, which they do not know, presume to reconcile all Things to their
Designs? They know the Poison, but because it seems pleasant, they swallow it
without horror.

Reason teaches them, as we discovered it at our last Conference, that the
shortest way for the Restoration of Nature is Self-denial; the inward
Sentiment of their Conscience confirms the Decree of their Reason; the
Admonitions of our Savior, his Example, those of all good Men, do not suffer
them to doubt of it; yet they take pleasure in blinding themselves not to
discover the necessity they lie under to follow that Means; and if they find
themselves obliged to own how necessary it is to follow this Direction given us
by Christ, all the deference they pay to it is often barely exterior; denying
themselves some certain Things which they do not value; and suffering a carnal
Circumcision, that is not the Circumcision of the Heart which God requires of
them.

When we consider the Life of our Savior's Forerunner, who was, in a manner,
the Personal Preparation to Substantial Grace; for, St. John the Baptist was
sent to represent to us by his Preaching and Holiness of Life all the things
that prepare us for the receiving of Grace, as Christ was sent to impart it to
us: When we consider, I say, that living Pattern of Preparation to Grace, we
see in him nothing but a separation from the World, a continual self-denial
even as to the things that seem needful for the upholding of Life; for you know
what is said of him in the Gospel, Matthew. 3.4. Thus his Example sufficiently
teaches us what we are to do to befit our selves for the receiving of Grace.
But our imagination, wholly depraved by sensible Pleasures, soon takes off our
Eyes from this model of Mortification and Penitence, to mould us another of
some Person whom the World esteems a good Man, though he indulges himself in
the Pleasures which St. John disclaimed as contrary to the ways through which
Christ comes to dwell in us.


Arist. I must needs own to you, Theodorus, that all the Heroes whom I have
hitherto set before my self as living Exemplars to walk by, are more generous
and communicative than St. John the Baptist, since they are not afraid of being
sociable, nor of complying with the World; enjoying certain Pleasures which
they term Civil and Gentleman-like Recreations. I don't know whether they allow
themselves this freedom as knowing themselves strong enough to overcome them;
but I think my self obliged in Conscience to let Erastus know that I never
failed to become a slave to a great many Pleasures, when, like these Heroic
Gentlemen I was not afraid to enjoy them.


Erast. I would not make the Opinion of the Multitude the Rule of my Conduct; I
know we ought to follow a Rule, and be guided by Reason; since, to act only by
a Principle of Imitation has more of the Brute in it than of the Man. I thank
Theodorus for putting me in mind of this. If we set our selves a Pattern to
imitate, it is that its Example may excite us resolutely to do what we know
Reason directs us to perform: For, as all Men are apt to err and to sin, no Man
can be to us an infallible Rule; Reason ought to correct the defects of the
Exemplar.


Theod. Reason ought also to make choice of these Exemplars. For, many times
our Imagination, dazzled by the deceitful luster of false Virtues, makes us
admire a Hero instead of a Saint; and because it is much more pleasant and
easy to live like the first than like the latter, that we may justify our
conduct, we are very ready to set before our selves such Exemplars as suit with
our humors.


Erast. The surest way is to imitate such Exemplars as God prescribes us to
follow; since God cannot deceive us. Our Savior's Precepts are undoubtedly the
best, and St. John's Conduct is altogether consonant with them; we must then
walk after him. Methinks Reason obliges me to retire like him to Deserts, that
I may avoid the Contagion which rages in the World, and prepare for the Grace
of Christ. For, after all, Reason has convinced me that St. John is a good
Pattern to imitate; the Holy Ghost sets him before us in the Scripture, and our
Savior highly commends him for his holiness of Life. What do you think,
Theodorus, do you believe I ought to imitate him?


Theod. I don't know, Erastus; but if you ought not to follow him, I know you
ought to follow Christ. As St. John prepared us for Grace, but did not bestow
it, he was to show us an Example of the greatest austerity: 'Twas his Duty to
take out of the Scale all the Weights in general that make it have a propensity
to cleave to the Earth, because he could not give us the weight of Grace to
make the Scales even. As the precursor of the Author of Grace, he was to remove
by his Preaching and Example all the impediments that kept us from receiving
Christ. For this Reason it was fit he should with the greatest strictness
imaginable forbid us the use of Worldly enjoyments; this was his Duty.

But Christ teaches us to make use of these things. The weight of his Grace
sets us free, because it sets the Scales even again. With that Grace we may
live in the World without becoming slaves to it, because it hinders us from
loving the World. We may enjoy the things of this World, because by the means
of his Grace we enjoy them without Pleasure, as enjoying them not; or rather,
because the Pleasure which attends Grace is stronger than that which we find in
the use of these things. But we must take great care that the liberty which is
given us by the Grace of Christ do not give us occasion to live according to
the Flesh. We may be saved without hating the World; and if while we live in
the World we love it and become slaves to its Pomp, Reason teaches us that we
ought to forsake it; for, we cannot overcome it without Christ; and if his
Grace dwelt in us, we should feel within our selves a Power able to overcome
the World. We may use certain Pleasures on some occasions, but never without
fear and horror; and if we use them without fear and horror, we ought to
avoid them.

Charity obliges us to live with the rest of Mankind; for, Grace does not
destroy Civil Society: But the same Charity obliges us to settle such a
Communion with them as may not end with this Life.

I own that Christ did not come to send Peace on Earth: he came not to send
Peace, but a Sword. He came to set a Man at variance against his Father, and
the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in law against the Mother in
law, Matthew. 10.34,35. If there be five in one house he is come to divide them,
and to set three against two, and two against three, Luke 12.52. He came to set
Man at variance even with himself. If any man hate not his own life, and does
not bear his Cross and come after Christ, he cannot be his Disciple, nor worthy
to be called a Christian. But our Savior came to do these things only that he
might reunite us to God, reconcile us to our selves, and, even in this Life,
begin a fellowship that is to last eternally.

Do you think, Aristarchus, you, whose Heart is so susceptible of Friendship,
that it is possible you should here below have a real love for a person, except
you love him as a Christian? You may indeed love him well enough; so far as
Civil Society, which depends on the relation which Bodies have to one another,
requires it; but you are neither in a condition to know him such as he is, nor
even to know your self. Do you fancy you see your Friend, when you behold a
certain disposition of matter, which is called a Face, or when you hear the
sound of words that move the Air? I don't believe you do. But if you do not see
your Friend, what is it you love then, when you think you love him? Certainly
you either must love your self, and then your Love is selfish; or you love your
Friend's Face, and then your Love is unworthy your Friend; or else you love
your Friend's Virtue and upright Principles, and in that case your Friendship
is just; but then it is a Christian Friendship; for thus you love God in your
Friend, or your Friend as he has a relation to God; you love him because he
belongs to God, lives according to God's Commands, and makes his own Will
conformable to that of God.

And yet, Sir, your Friendship is still imperfect because you don't know what
you love. As you don't see your Friend's Mind in a clear and distinct manner,
you cannot really love him; for, if you saw him inwardly, you would perhaps
abhor him.


Arist. You make me wish that my Friend may be worthy the Friendship I have for
him: I am going to endeavor his Conversion. I have a world of things to say to
him.


Theod. As he is capable of knowing and loving God, he cannot but be worthy
your Friendship; for now nothing but that can recommend us to the love of one
another, since we don't perfectly know each other.

We begin even in this Life to love God and our Neighbor; but because we are
not to have a clear sight of God nor of our Neighbor till we are in Heaven,
our Charity cannot be perfect till we are there.

Go, Sir, see your Friend. But, you Erastus, pray what do you think on?


Erast. Aristarchus thinks on his Friend, and I think on my self: I don't know,
Theodorus, whether I shall be here to morrow, or no. Methinks I ought to make a
good use of the Truths you have taught me. I leave you; for, I am now too much
disordered; you doubtless perceive it well enough. I recommend all things to
your Prayers.


The Tenth and Last DIALOGUE.
Arist. I Have a great deal of News to tell you, Theodorus; my Friend at last
is converted; but we have lost Erastus.


Theod. Pray, what is become of him?


Arist. I just now discovered it. His Mother and I wondering that he was not at
home at Dinnertime, I went up into his Chamber to look for him, and found this
Letter sealed up on his Table.


For Aristarchus.
I Am convinced, Aristarchus, by Reason and by Faith; by a clear Light, and an
infallible Authority; by the intelligible words of inward Truth, and by the
sensible words of incarnate Truth; in short, by all that can convince a
Rational and Christian Soul; that the most safe and usual way to come to God,
is to seclude our selves from the World, and deprive our selves of all sensual
things. But I ought to take the greater care; for, the more the business is of
consequence, the more it is necessary, difficult and dangerous. I ought
therefore, Aristarchus, to retire to some place where I may be sheltered
against the persecution of those who would have me apply my self to some
studies that are necessary to qualify a Gentleman for some Employments, to
which I do not find my self to have a particular Call.

It Is true indeed I do not find my self to have a particular and extraordinary
call for the design I have; But there needs no particular Call when Reason
alone, and the general vocation of Christians is sufficient. Without doubt
those who engage in the affairs of this World ought to have a particular Call
to that way of living; for Reason and our general vocation teach us to do
otherwise: But, as the World goes now, methinks a Man needs but to have common
Sense and to believe the Gospel, to do what I have done.

However, as I would not engage in a particular Course of Life without a
particular Call, I Will be still ready to return to you, when it is necessary. But
I declare, I would think my self guilty of a less fault, should I, without a
particular Call, presume to conform my self to the way of living of the
Religious Persons with whom I intend to live; than if, without a Call, I
entered into the Bonds of Matrimony, or took an Employment that would tie me to
too many things.

All my Relations persecute me, every one according to his humor and ambition.
They have ends which I neither have nor would have. Besides I would gladly
break off the Society which I have with some infectious Wits, who perhaps will
abhor me at my coming back. In short, I believe I ought seriously to mind what
is most essential. Anthimus and Philemon are very fit to finish what Theodorus
has begun. So, I am now going to them; you know they have wished for my coming
a long while.

I beg that you will not impute my withdrawing my self without any previous
leave or notice, to a want of Friendship for you, or of Dutifulness to my
Mother. Far from this; I did it because the Natural Affection which I ought to
have for her, and you, is too violent. I dreaded the Consequences of it in the
performance of a Design which I was resolved to fulfill, for fear of being
wanting in that which I owe to God; but at last I persuaded my self, that as my
Mother and you have a very great esteem for the Persons to whom I am now going,
you will, both of you, forgive the omission of a piece of Formality, which I
could not keep, merely out of too deep a sense of Love for you.

I did not dare write to my Mother at first; but I beseech you, dearest Cozen,
persuade her to admit of the Assurances of my Duty and Submission: I know that,
next to God, I owe all things to her. As for Theodorus, I pray you to tell him,
that I Will continually meditate on the Principles which he discovered to me; and
that I love Truth extremely. By this he will easily know that I Will seldom be
without thinking of him.


Arist. What think you of all this, Theodorus?


Theod. If you would know, Sir, what I think of Erastus; I must needs tell you,
that I never knew a more just and penetrating Mind, a purer and clearer
Imagination, a sweeter and more honorable Temper, a more upright and generous
Heart; and in short, that I never saw a more accomplished young Man than Erastus.

As for his Conduct, if you blame any thing in it, do but Answer what his
Letter says in his Justification: Finding himself here holden by Ties that
inslave him, he breaks them publicly, not being able to get free otherwise. He
is afraid of not being able to preserve the Purity of his Imagination, the
Freedom of his Mind, and the Love of True Good, among Persons who use to take
all Things upon Trust without examining the Truth, and who, by their imposing
Ways and infectious Behavior, are continually like to make some (...)
Impressions on his Mind. You see that even some of his Relations persecute and
seduce him. They endeavor to bring him in to the World for their own Credit;
and they would have him to become considerable there, that his Advancement may
promote theirs, and his Glory reflect some upon them. But Erastus is convinced
by the Strength of Reason, that Wealth, Pomp, and Greatness, disorder the Minds
of those that enjoy them; he is also convinced of it by the Authority of
Christ: Would you not have him be guided by his Light, and Faith? Would you
have him grasp a Phantasm that vanishes, court a Stage-Greatness, and feed
himself up with Illusions and Chimaera's? Either let them prove to him that he
follows a false Light, and that Christ is a Seducer, or else let him alone.


Arist. Do not think, Theodorus, that I have the least Thing to object against
his Conduct; I will rather follow him than disturb him in his Design: He is in
the Right; I am fully convinced of it, not only by what we said in our former
Conferences; but also by what he said to me Yesterday, when I was come back
from my Friend's. Would you have me give you some account of it?


Theod. You will oblige me; we are always very fond of knowing the last Words
of those that leave us.


Arist. Erastus never expressed himself with more Eloquence and Happiness of
Thought: He told me, among other Things, that, Man is not only united to his
own Body, but also to all those that surround him; that our Passions diffuse
our Soul into all sensible Objects, as our Senses diffuse it through every part
of the Body; and that those who launch into the wide World, continually running
after Riches, Pleasures, and Honors, dissipate and lose themselves by being
dispersed as it were out of themselves.

While they fancy that they enlarge their own Being, they weaken themselves;
and become Slaves to those whom they would command: And while they increase
their Power on the Bodies that surround them, they lose that which they have on
the Truth that penetrates them.

Let me consider, said he, how Man comes to be sensible. Out of his Brain
certain Nerves are emitted, whose infinite number of Branches are dispersed over
all the Parts of his Body. These Nerves, or Fibers, which correspond to the
Seat of the Soul, agitate her as soon as they are stirred; they disperse her
through all the Parts into which they insinuate themselves; and whatsoever
happens in the Body breaks her Quiet and disturbs her.

Now let me examine the Condition which that Man is in who is led by his
Passions, and fastened to every Thing. Out of his Heart some Bonds may in one
sense be said to be emitted, and thence their strings are dispersed through all
sensible Objects. These Strings are no sooner stirred by the Motion of those
Objects, but his Heart is also moved. If these Objects are removed at some
distance, his Heart must follow, or be torn. In short, his Soul disperses her
self by the Means of these Ties through whatever surrounds him, just as she
diffuses her self by the Means of Nerves over every Part of the Body.

When a Man inconsiderately gives himself up to the Commerce of the World, the
Ties of his Heart fasten him to a Thousand Objects which only serve to make him
wretched; and if he be mad enough to have a real Love for those Objects, or to
be pusst up with his new Greatness, he is (said he to me) like those who would
be proud of a Dropsy, or of Wens or Bunches that swell their Body to a bigger
Bulk than ordinary.

Do you think (continued he) that the Souls of Gigantic Men are greater than
those of other Men? They have, indeed, a larger Body, and can put a greater
Mass of Matter into Motion; but if you examine them well, you will find that
their Motions are more irregular. The very Horses and Elephants are stronger
than they and more bulky, and if these Men measured the Greatness of their Soul
by that of their Body they would make themselves universally ridiculous.

Yet it were a juster Thing to measure the Greatness of the Soul by that of the
Body, than by that of Riches and Honors, For, after all, our Body is more our
own than our Wealth, and we are more united to it, than we are to our Clothes,
our House, or our Lands: How foolish and vain then are not Men when they
pretend to grow greater by being dispersed out of themselves!

Truly (cried he) Imaginary Greatness makes Men become very miserable
Creatures. Every thing offends them; every thing disturbs them; every thing
holds them fast. And can Men in a perpetual Hurry, and, as it were, wounded in
every Part, be able to Think? Can they be able to cleave to Truth for which
alone they are made, with which alone they can be nourished, and through which
alone they can grow more wise and more happy? They are commonly mad, stupid,
thoughtless Creatures, void of Light and Understanding.

Do you think (added he) that the Voluptuous, and those who continually strive
to extend their Slavery by enlarging the Bounds of their Commands, do so much
as know that they are not made for Bodies, nor for a Time, and that they are
not on Earth barely to live there? Alas! they know nothing of this; they do not
perceive that Bodies are inferior to them, incapable of acting on them, and
altogether unworthy of their Love. As they have not yet felt the Sting of
Death, they cannot strictly be said to know they shall dye. Their Tongues
indeed say, they must; and they believe it; but they do not know it: They think
they shall be no more, but they do not know they shall dye.

What vast difference is there not between seeing and seeing! It Is but a very
little while since I know, that I am not made for Corporeal Beings, that the
Figure of this World passes away, that the true Good of Spirits is a Spiritual
Good, and even since I know what it is to dye. Nay, as my Understanding is but
small, I have too been obliged to think with my utmost application to
comprehend these Truths. Before this, I thought of Death what my Eyes
discovered to me of it, and scarce any thing more: And if I had not been in a
greater Capacity of applying my self to thinking than those who are in the
Hurry of Business or a hunting after Pleasure, I must confess, I had not known
what I believe is unknown to great Numbers of Men.

The application of the Mind produces Light and discovers Truth: The sight of
Truth gives perfection to the Mind, and regulates the Heart: Such an
application is then necessary. But can a Man when he is pulled and drawn on all
sides, struck and wounded every where, thrust back when he would get forwards,
dragged forwards when he would go back, and continually disturbed and misused;
can such a Man, I say, think with application? Can a Man who fears every thing,
yet desires, hopes for, and runs after every thing, think on what he does not
see?

Truth is distant, and not sensible, nor is it a Good which we find our selves
pressed to love: We must seek it, if we would find it; But we may still put off
the Search; for, it never wholly leaves us. On the contrary, Bodies cause
themselves to be felt every Moment, press us to love them, and continually
oblige us to cleave to them, for they are transitory, and leave us as soon as
they have tempted us. So, because Opportunity when lost is not easily
recovered, Men are quickly determined to enjoy them; but as for Truth, they put
off from time to time the applying of themselves to it, because it never leaves
them, nor causes it self to be felt, and for that reason it does not press them
to love it.

How happy are those (added he) who wait for Eternity in Deserts, and who,
finding themselves too weak to preserve the Freedom of their Mind and the
purity of their Imagination against the Efforts and Malignity of sensible
Objects, have bravely broken off all their Bonds to be strictly joined to God!
But how much to be pitied are not those whom God calls to live in the Midst of
the World, to convert it; what Woes have they not to undergo! what Enemies to
fight with! I tremble (said he) when I think on it; yet with Christ's Help any
Thing may be brought under.

Yet (continued he) do you think we are obliged to live amidst the Hurry of the
World? For my part, I do not see that God calls me to this. And indeed the
Glories of the World dazzle me; my Imagnation grows confused, my Mind
dissipates it self, and I am dispersed and out of my self as soon as I do not
keep a strict Watch over my Actions.

As for you (said he to me) you are strong; you are not afraid of the World;
your Imagination is firm and settled, and God has given you Grace to loath the
World, after you had enjoyed its Pleasures. I admire (added he skilfully, to
make me reflect on my inward Misery) how the Traces, which were imprinted on
your Brain by sensible Objects, could so happily wear out; how the Passions,
whose Impulse you formerly followed, could be calmed; and how the Commerce
which you have had with the World, does not increase and prompt Concupiscence
in you! As you have experienced, that the Figure of this World passes away,
you enjoy it as enjoying it not; for, a Man of your Sense will not suffer
himself to be deceived twice. But I alas! am so stupid, that I have no sooner
got out of a Snare but I fall into it again; and I am so insensible as to fancy
my self wholly free, while I am a Slave to my Passions. As soon as I have
resolved to get rid of some ill Habit, I fondly imagine I have really cast it
off; So that I am like a Patient who thinks he is perfectly cured, merely
because he passionately desires to get out of Bed and go abroad.

While Erastus spoke thus, I felt within me what he said of himself; and knew
him to have that Firmness of Mind for which he commended me. This so deeply
struck me, and laid me open to my self in so clear and lively a manner, that
the State of my Soul at once affected me with Terror and Pity; while on the
other side Erastus seemed to me so lovely and ingenious; and spoke to me in so
sweet and natural a manner, that I could not but give the deepest Attention
imaginable to what he said. But at last, after he had spoken some of those
Words which never come out of the Mouth but when the Heart is open, he looked in
my Face to read in my Eyes the Effect which they had produced in my Soul; and
seeing me as I was then, his Countenance at once changed according to mine; his
Speech failed him as mine did me; he opened his Mouth, but was not able to
utter a Word; and when we had gazed on each other a Moment more to know one
another, our Disorder increased, and we were obliged to part.

This is part of what past between Erastus and my self at our last Enterview;
for I have not seen him to day; and, by the little I have now told you of it,
you may believe that he has not only convinced my Reason, but also made himself
Master of my Heart. Whenever I think on him, I, as it were, feel him drawing me
along; but while he takes me with him, the things I leave call me back, and I
lose him. However, I do not lose him for a long time, and I know very well what
I shall do.


Theod. You surprise me much, Aristarchus. What! would you imitate Erastus?
follow a young Man's Example? what will not your Friends say?


Arist. They may say what they will. It Is not after all that I would follow
Erastus; for I should be ashamed to do it: But it is that Erastus is in the Path
in which I would tread, because I know it is the best. I own that I have a
particular Love for him, and the Example he shows me makes me resolve to do
what I think I ought to do: But I follow the Dictates of my Reason, I obey the
Gospel, and walk in the Way that leads me whither I would go; though Children
or Madmen went before me, I ought not to go out of it; for when a Man has
Business, he goes along without minding who besides him walks the Streets.

I have lavished the best half of my Life in the Hurry of Business, and the
Diversions which Wo^y Men usually take. All my former Studies have only (...)
to pervert my Understanding; I did read only in order to make a Figure in the
World, to make my self fit for Conversation, and to gain the Name of a Wit and
a Man of Learning; so that I hardly know any thing of the Christian Religion
and Morals, but what I have heard you say of them

Is it not time then I should look to my self, and seriously minding what is
most essential, repent me of my former disorderly Course of Life? I had
promised Erastus to study the Holy Scripture with him; All keep my Word to him;
his Retirement ought not to make me forbear it; for, that sort of Study is most
proper in a Retirement. In short, had not I a mind to endeavor, as much as I
can, wholly to convert my Friend, I should not a little surprise Erastus; for I
then would be before him where he is a going. But I hope to surprise him
otherwise; perhaps I shall not go by my self to meet him there: My Friend's
Heart is changed; and as it is difficult he should be able to lead a Christian
Life in the sight of the Libertines, with whom he formerly kept Company, who
would continually persecute him, I believe 'twill be no hard matter to make him
resolve to fly to a Retirement.


Theod. You are in the Right, Aristarchus; I advise you to relate to your
Friend what passed between you and Erastus, just as you told it me now, and to
give him an account of the Design you have to follow him. If he sincerely
desires to alter his Course of Life, I am sure he wishes for some Place to
which he may retire: For it is likely, he does not find himself armed with a
Resolution strong enough to conquer the Shame which those who follow Christ are
put to by the World. But your Overture, backed with your Example, will probably
make him resolve to fly to some dark Retreat.

The Thing, in doing of which a Man who is in great Reputation in the World
finds most difficulty, is in resolving to pass for a Fool or Madman the rest
of his Life. But let that Man think that he forsakes the World and follows such
a Friend as you, and then his Imagination will not so much disturb his Reason.
For our Imagination is usually comforted by Examples; and if on one side it
fancies that some Men will laugh at what we are going to do, it remembers at
the same time that those Scoffers will be distant and are now nothing to us.

Your Friend who so often laughed at those whom he now would imitate, best
knows how hard a Thing it is to live among Worldly Men, and not do as they do.
He has experienced that those who would lead a godly, righteous, and sober
Life, must suffer Persecution. He has not forgot how he has used others, and
perhaps cannot resolve to condemn himself, in leading a new sort of Life among
his old Acquaintance.

Thus you will doubtless ease him very much, if you entreat him to follow your
Example; and this will certainly prevail with him, if, as you say, he intends
to change his Life.


Arist. I even believe, Theodorus, that neither he nor I can live in the Hurry
of the World, without running the danger of being undone. The Pleasures which
we have enjoyed, and the Honors which have been paid us, have impressed on our
Imagination some Traces that represent them, and which continually folliciting
us might surprise and pervert us at last.


Theod. It Is true, Aristarchus: We need but taste a while of a Pleasure to
become a Slave to it; and we cannot abide to expose our selves to be laughed at.
When the Imagination has been contaminated, the least matter disorders it: So
those who have formerly given themselves up to their Pleasures, ought to deny
themselves many Things which other Men may be allowed to enjoy. And when our
Reputation runs too great a danger, we naturally model our selves according to
the Spirit and Ways of the World: So that we ought to be, as it were, hidden,
if we would live according to the Light of Reason and the Gospel.

When we are alone, we take what Countenance or Posture we please; but when we
are in Company, we lose that sort of Freedom; because the Presence of others
naturally spreads on our Face an Air suitable to the Quality and to the
Disposition of Mind of the Persons that speak to us.

The same may be said of our Conduct; we live as we please when we are alone;
but we are, as it were, obliged to do as others do, and follow their Maxims
when we run too great a Risque of being laughed at, and fear the Censures of
too many People.

We were made to live in Society one with another; And the Natural Union which
we have with Men, is now stronger and stricter than that which we have with
God. So that we often swerve from Truth, and from Justice, out of mere
Complaisance. We offend God rather than disoblige our Worldly Acquaintance; and
prefer their Applause, to the Testimony of our Conscience; fearing less the
secret Checks of our Reason, and the terrible Threats of the Living God, than
the silly Laughter of Worldly Men.

Thus, Aristarchus, you justly believe that the Ways of the World might lead
both you and your Friend astray. Therefore steadfastly follow your Light; and
retire to some Solitude to breath an uncorrupted Air; shun an Enemy whom you
fear to engage; break the Bonds that detain you in Captivity; but break them
publicly and with Noise; that having made your self ridiculous in the Eyes of
carnal Men, you may be ashamed to appear before them, and that your Imagination
may no more urge you to look back, but rather that it may excite you to be
private, that you may enjoy the Freedom you desire.

A private Recess chiefly befits those who are obliged to mortify their
Affections and lead a most penitent Life, those who are like your Friend, whom
you have described to me as a Person who used blindly to follow all the
Dictates of his Passions: For, it is necessary that those who have wallow'd in
Pleasure should live after the strictest and most Self-denying way; and the
continual Humiliation practiced in Religious Houses is the surest Means to pull
down the Pride of the Mind.

Endeavor, then, to save your Friend, and, with him, also your self. Be sure
to make use of all these Arguments, to prevail with him to forsake the World;
and, in short, help and support one another. The Advice which I now give you,
does not indeed square very well with the common Sentiments of Friendship; but
I dare say, you will give me leave to wish you that which I know is your True
Good; since, though I seem to lose you for a Time, it is only that I may find
my self again united to you, by Ties as powerful as God himself, and as lasting
as Eternity.


FINIS.
Meditations Concerning HUMILITY AND REPENTANCE.

Written in French By F. MALEBRANCHE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.

TO THE READER.
THE Design of the following Meditations is to humble the proud Soul, and to
incline it to Repentance.

Man is so mean a thing, that the very Knowledge of him is Naturally attended
with Contempt; and he is so corrupt and degenerate, that it is impossible to
avoid hating him, when we consider him as he is in himself, and without
relation to the Great Restorer of all things. I shall endeavor to represent
him as a Creature, as the Son of a Sinful Father, and a Sinner himself; and I
am persuaded that this will be sufficient to inspire us with just and becoming
sentiments of our selves.

If those who have had a lively and serious sense both of their Miseries and
Obligations, did ever afterward remain dead to Pleasures, incapable of Vanity,
and thoroughly convinced of Essential Truths; these Meditations would be proper
only for such as are just beginning to set about the Work of their Conversion.
But I think I may adventure to assure the Reader that they will be profitable
to all that shall be willing to make use of them; not so much by enlarging
their Knowledge as by fixing their Thoughts on such things as they would not
otherwise consider with due application.

Of MAN, Considered as a CREATURE.
The First Consideration.
MAN, in himself, is but a mere Nothing: His very Being depends absolutely on
the Will of God; and if God should only cease to will his Existence, he would
at the same time cease to be. For, the Power that God has to annihilate his
Creatures, does not consist in willing their Nonexistence, since Nothing
includes no Good, and cannot be the Object of a Positive Act of Gods Will. But
he is able to destroy them merely by Not that God can cease to will what he
once did will, since his Will is Eternal and Unchangeable: But he might have
willed from all Eternity, and by an Unchangeable Will, that I should exist to
this very moment, and no longer.
ceasing to will that they should continue to be; for since the Creatures do
not contain all Goodness, they are not necessarily and indispensably lovely;
and God himself includes all that Perfection and Goodness that is in them.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O GOD, make me continually sensible of my dependence on thy Almighty Will, my
Being is thine, and the duration of my Being, or my Time, is also thine. How
great then is my Injustice! My Being is in a manner the Being of God; and my
Time is properly God's Time; for I am more God's than my own, or rather, I am
not at all my own, nor do I subsist by my self; and yet I neither live nor
employ God's Time but for my self. Alas! how do I deceive my self! O my God,
all that Time which I do not employ for thee, I cannot be said to employ it for
my self; and I can neither seek nor find my self, but by seeking and finding
thee.

The Second Consideration.
MAN, in himself is nothing but Weakness and Infirmity. He cannot desire Good
in general, but by virtue of a continual Impression from God, who does
incessantly turn and force him toward himself; for God is that indefinite and
universal Good, which comprehends all other good things. Man is also not able
by himself to desire any Particular Good; but only so far as he is capable of
determining the Impression which he receives from God.

Man is utterly unable to do Good, but through a new supply of Grace, which
illuminates him by its Light, and attracts him by its Sweetness; for, by
himself, he is only able to Sin.

He could not so much as move his Hand, if God did not communicate to his Blood
and to the Aliment by which he is nourished, a part of that Motion which he has
spread through the whole Mass of Matter, and afterward determine the Motion of
the Spirits according to the different Acts of the impotent Will of Man, by
guiding them toward the Pipes of the Nerves, which the Man himself does not so
much as know.

A Man indeed may desire to move his Hand, but it is God alone that can, and
knows how to move it. For if Man did not eat, and if that which he eats were
not digested, and agitated in his Entrails and Heart, to be afterward turned
to Blood and Spirits, without expecting the Orders of his Will, or if these
Spirits were not guided by a knowing Hand, through a Million of different
Tubes, it would be in vain for Man, who is ignorant of his own Body, to desire
to put it into Motion.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O GOD, let me never forget that without thee I can neither desire nor do any
thing, not even so much as move the smallest Member of my Body. Thou, O God,
art all my Strength, in thee do I place all my Hope and Confidence. Do thou
cover me with shame and confusion, and fill me with inward remorse, if ever I
shall be guilty of so much Ingratitude and Presumption, as to lift up that Arm
against thee, which owes even that Motion, which I seem to give it, rather to
the invincible Power of thy Will, than to the feeble Efforts of mine.

The Third Consideration.
MAN, in himself, is nothing but Darkness. He does not produce in himself those
Ideas by which he perceives all things, for he is not his own Light; and since
Philosophy teaches me that the Objects cannot form in the Mind those Ideas by
which they are represented, it must be acknowledged that it is God alone who
enlightens us. He is that great Sun which penetrates all things, and fills them
with his Light, and that Great Master who instructs every Man that comes into
the World. All that we see we see in him, and in him we may see all that we are
capable of seeing. For since God includes the Ideas or likenesses of all
Beings, and we also are in him, for in him we live, move, and have our Being,
it is certain that we see or may successively see all Beings in him. He is that
intelligible World in which all Spirits are, and in which they perceive the
Material World, which is neither visible, nor intelligible by it self.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O GOD, to whom I owe all my Thoughts, thou Light of my Soul and of my Eyes,
without whom the Sun himself in all his Glory would be invisible to me, make me
ever sensible of thy Power and my Weakness, thy Greatness and my Meanness, thy
Light and my Obscurity, and in a word, what thou art, and what I am.

The Fourth Consideration.
MAN, by himself, is insensible, and in a manner Dead. The Body cannot act upon
its own Soul. A Sword indeed may pierce me, and cause some alteration in the
Fibers of my Flesh, but I perceive clearly that it cannot make me suffer Pain.
A harmonious sound may first shake the Air, and then the Fibers of my Brain;
but my Soul cannot be shaken by it. My Soul is far above my Body, neither is
there any necessary Relation between those two Parts of my self. On the other
hand I find that Pleasure, Pain, and all my other Sensations, are produced in
me without any dependency upon me, and oftentimes even in spite of all my
endeavors to the contrary. And therefore I cannot doubt but that there is a
Being different from my Soul, which inspires it with Life and Sensation, and I
know no other Power but that of God which is able to act thus upon his
Creatures. It Is he then who is the Sovereign of the Soul, and can only punish
or reward it.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O GOD, since I live but by thee, make me also to live only for thee, and may I
be insensible of all things but the love of thee. O God, make me sensible that
none of all the Creatures can either hurt me, or do me good: That there is not
one among them all that can make me feel either Pleasure or Pain: That I ought
neither to scar nor love them: That thou alone, O my God, deservest both my
love and fear; because thou art only able to reward me with the Joys of thy
Elect, or punish me with the Torments of the Reprobate.

O my chaste Delight, thou Author of Nature, and cause of all the Pleasures
that I feel, thou know that these very Pleasures instead of uniting me to
thee, who alone can make me sensible of them, chain me like a wretched Slave
to the Earth; Grant, I beseech thee, that I may never more be so violently
assaulted by them in the use of those things which thou have forbidden. Scatter
a holy dread, and a wholesome bitterness on the Objects of my Senses, that I
may be able to disengage my self from them; and let me feel in thy love those
unutterable delights of thy Grace which may unite me closer to thee. Grant that
the sweetness which I taste in loving thee may augment my love; and that my
love may renew the sense that I have of thy sweetness. May I grow thus in
Charity, till at last being full of thee, and empty of my self and every thing
else, I may re-enter, and lose my self in thee, O my All, as in the Fountain of
all Beings. May that Word, God shall be All in All, be entirely accomplished on
me; and may I find my self and all things else in thee.

Of MAN, Considered as the Son of a Sinful Father.
WE have seen in the foregoing Considerations, that Man, in himself, is a mere
Nothing, that he is made up of Weakness, Infirmity and Darkness, that he
receives Life, Sense and Motion, continually from God, that he owes to him his
whole Being and all his Faculties. And therefore he is certainly under the
highest Obligations of Love and Gratitude to God, since he depends so
absolutely upon him, as he is a Creature: But if we consider him as the Son of
a Sinful Father, and as a Sinner himself, we shall find so great a multiplicity
of essential and indispensable Duties which he owes to God, and at the same
time so great a want of Power, and so much unworthiness to perform them, that
so far is he from being able to do his Duty, that even his Performances would
be rejected, if Christ our Mediator had not merited Grace for him by his Death.
We must not then consider Man only as the Son of a Sinful Father, and as he is
a Sinner himself; but we ought always to look upon him in Jesus Christ, in whom
alone we are able to please God.

The Fifth Consideration.
MAN considered as the Son of a Sinful Father is a Reprobate, a Child of Wrath,
whom his Father will not see, and who shall never see his Father; for he is a
Child whom his Father does not love, nor will he be beloved by such a Child.

God loved Adam before his Fall, and desired to be loved by him: He was willing
to communicate himself to him, and to be in a manner familiarly acquainted with
him. He called to him, as he now does to us, but with a much clearer and more
intelligible Voice, I am thy Good, make me the only Object of thy Love and
Hope. At these words his Senses and Passions were silent, nor was he disturbed
by that confused and flattering noise, which arises in us even against our
Wills, and boldly opposes the dictates of Truth in our Souls. God spoke to him,
and he did not murmur: God inlighten'd him, and he was freed from Darkness: God
commanded him, and he made no resistance. The Pleasure and Joy which he felt in
seeing himself favored and protected by a God that would never forsake him, if
he did not first leave him, kept him united to his Lord by Bonds that were
never like to be broken.

God did not force Adam to love him by preingaging Pleasures, because he would
have him merit his Reward more speedily. He left him to the determination of
his own Free Will, that he might have power to choose for himself; and he
bestowed a due measure of Knowledge and Understanding upon him, that he might
be enabled to make a good choice. Thus Man perceived clearly what he was to do
to obtain solid and perfect Happiness, and nothing could hinder him from
performing that as long as he pleased.

But he was not separated from himself, and the consideration of himself filled
him with a certain Joy and Pleasure, which made him in a manner feel that his
Natural Perfection was the cause of his present Felicity; for Joy seems to
proceed naturally and absolutely from a view of our own Perfections, because we
do not always think on him who operates always in us. Besides, Adam had a Body,
and could, when he pleased, relish such Pleasures in the actual enjoyment of
Sensible Things, as made him feel that Corporeal Things were his Good. I did
not make choice of this Expression without Reason; for he knew that God was his
Good, but did not feel it, because he felt no preingaging Pleasures in the
performance of his Duty; and on the other side he felt that the Objects of his
Senses were his Good, but did not know them to be so, because that which is not
cannot be known.

When Adam felt that Sensible Objects were his Good, or imagined that the cause
of his Happiness was in himself; when he tasted Pleasure in the use of
Corporeal Things, or rejoiced at the sight of his own Perfections, his
Sensations obscured the clear perceptions of his Mind by which he knew that God
was his Good: For Sensation confounds Knowledge, because it modifies the Soul,
and divides its capacity. Thus Adam who perceived all these things clearly,
ought to have been perpetually upon his guard: He should have resisted the
allurements of the Pleasures which he felt, least he should be distracted by
them, and betrayed into unavoidable destruction: He should have stood firm in
the presence of God, and depended absolutely on his Light. But relying too much
upon himself, he suffered his Understanding to be darkened by the relish of
Sensual Pleasures, or by a confused Sensation of a presumptuous Joy; and being
thus insensibly disunited from him who was his true Strength, and the source of
all his Happiness, he was justly punished by the revolt of those Senses to
which he had voluntarily submitted. By which Punishment it seemed that God had
utterly forsaken him, and that he would never any more vouchsafe to accept of
his Love, and had given him the Material World to be the Object of his
Knowledge and Affection.

The Curse of God that was pronounced against Adam, is fallen upon all the
Posterity of that rebellious Father. God has withdrawn his presence from the
World, and instead of communicating himself to it, does continually thrust it
farther from him. We suffer Pain when we seek God, but we feel all sorts of
Pleasures when being weary with following him through such rough and
troublesome ways, we join our selves to his Creatures. The World does not
clearly perceive that it ought to love God, and that he alone ought to be the
proper Object of its Affection; but it feels in a very lively and alluring
manner, that it should love something else besides him; and consequently it
does not love God, but flies from him continually, and even is unable to turn
to him. It was shamefully driven out of Paradise in the Person of Adam, it has
forfeited its Title to God, and lost the hope of Heaven and Happiness: It is
accursed and eternally accursed. It is a Crime to wish well to it, because it is
and for ever shall be at enmity with God. And even it cannot wish well to it
self without doing it self an injury: For by wishing well to it self it
endeavors to break the established Order of Things, it provokes the God of
Order, and increases the Hatred and Indignation of him to whom Vengeance
belongs. What can it thus do? Shall it yield it self up to Fury and Despair,
and seek to be annihilated because it cannot enjoy God? But annihilation it
self is perhaps a Favor which it does not deserve, and therefore shall not
obtain. We may indeed kill, but cannot annihilate our selves; and if Death were
an annihilation, it would not be in the power of Man to put an end to his Life.
What must we do then, and what course must we take to regain our lost
Happiness? We must humble our selves before God, we must hate our selves
mortally as the Children of Adam, and neither love nor esteem our selves or
others but in and through Christ, in whom all things subsist, and by whom we
are reconciled to God.

The Elevation of the Soul of GOD.
O GOD, let me always be sensible of the wretchedness of my condition, as a Son
of fallen Adam; that as such I am not worthy to think on thee, or to adore and
love thee; but am a Child of Darkness, a Sojourner in a dry and parched Land,
banished from thy Presence, despised and rejected by thee, and Heir to thy
Eternal Malediction, and that I have no right to complain of thy just rigor
either to thy self, or to thy Creatures. Grant that I may humble my self before
thee, and abhor my self in this condition in which I am incapable of loving
thee, and that I may with an humble Faith fly to thy Son, who has restored us
to Peace, and by whom we have free access to thee, to render that which we owe
to thee, and to ask of thee that which thou seem to owe to our Misery. O
Jesus, my Deliverer, perfect thy own work, strip me of the old, and cloth me
with the new Man. I will not henceforth love any thing in my self, but what
thou have put into me, or rather I will only love thee in my Heart. Thou art
all my Wisdom, and all my Strength; be thou also all my Glory, and all my
Felicity.

The Sixth Consideration.
MAN considered as the Son of a Father who revolted against God, is a
miserable, weak and tender Child, destitute both of Clothes and Arms, exposed
to the injuries of the Weather, and given up as a prey to the fury of wild
Beasts.

Adam, in the State of Innocence, was strong and mighty, he was seated in an
inaccessible place, and under the protection of God; nothing durst assault him,
and he was able to resist every thing. After his Fall all the Creatures made
War upon him, and he was not able to resist any of them. All the Posterity of
this rebellious Parent do not only partake of his Sin, but also of his
Punishment. Let us illustrate this Truth by distinct Ideas.

It Is Pleasure that rules with a Sovereign and Arbitrary Power in the Heart of
Man, especially when his Reason is blinded: For, Pleasure is the Natural
Character of good, and Men cannot forbear loving that which is good. And
therefore Pleasure is, as it were, the weight of the Soul which inclines it by
degrees, and at last pulls it forcibly toward the Object that is the true or
seeming Cause of that Sensation, though Reason may oppose it for some time. Adam
before his Fall did not feel those preventing and preingaging Pleasures, which
afterward constrained him to place his Affection on the Objects of his Senses:
He enjoyed a perfect liberty, and a full power to dispose of himself: He was
neither forced nor enticed; but, of his own accord, and according to the
measure of Light that was in him, he inclined to love his real good. But
together with his Innocence he lost his perfect Liberty. Not being longer
Master of Pleasure, nor able to stop the Sensation of it, he was at last
inslaved by it, and both his Understanding and Affections were subdued under
the tyranical dominion of Terrestrial Things. He became altogether Earthly, a
Slave to Sin, subject to Death, and to a thousand other Miseries which it would
be needless to describe.

We are all born, like our first Father, chained to the Earth: For we do all
Naturally feel Pleasure in the use of sensible things which are the good of the
Body, but we don't Naturally feel any good in those things which contribute to
the perfection of the Mind: And it is this irregularity of our Pleasures that
disorders our Affections, and is the most fruitful source of all our Miseries.

And while we are in this wretched condition, we cannot by our selves draw near
to God, neither are we able to find in the Natural Order of things, a Creature
that is noble and pure enough, and sufficiently elevated by the dignity of its
Person, and by the greatness of its Merits, to reconcile us to God: But we find
all that we want or can desire in the Christian Religion.

This Holy Religion does continually exhort us to Mortification, Resignation,
to a Circumcision of the heart, and lessening of the weight of Sin; and it
gives us also a Mediator, by whose Merit we receive the weight of Grace, that
victorious delight, which passes all understanding, and which draws us to God,
notwithstanding all the resistance of our Passions and of the Pleasures of our
Senses. For these two things, the privation of Pleasures, and the delectation
of Grace, are absolutely necessary to us in a state of Sin. We must by a
continual Mortification of our Senses and Passions, diminish that weight of
Concupiscence which draws us to the Earth; and ask of God through our Mediator
Christ Jesus the delectation of his Grace, without which all our endeavors to
diminish the weight of Sin would be in vain, for it would still weight us down;
and the least weight of Sin would infallibly draw us along with it, and keep us
as it were fastened to the Earth, and under the dominion of our Enemies.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O GOD, let me never forget that I am an unhappy exile from my Native Country;
that I am in the midst of my Enemies who are still plotting my Destruction;
that the Air of the World is pestilential and poisonous; and that all the
Creatures draw me to themselves, and divert me from thee. Make me sensible O
God, that my Domestic Enemies are most dangerous; that I ought to fear my self
more than the World, and the World more than the Devil; and that among so many
Enemies I have no strength to defend my self, no arms to resist them, nor
understanding to discern them. Inspire me with a deep sense of all my
Infirmities, Wounds and Miseries, of which I have yet but a very imperfect
knowledge.

O JESUS, I see nothing in my self but weakness, when I look upon my self
without thee; but when I feel thee with me, I find my self endued with an
invincible strength. Through thee will we push down our Enemies; and through
thy Name will we tread them under that rise up against us. For I will not trust
in my Bow; neither shall my Sword save me. O thou derided, buffeted, and
scourged Jesus, thou that wast covered with Spittle and Blood, and humbled even
to the Death, confound my Pride and Sensuality. Drive all my Domestic Enemies
out of my Heart, by the Virtue of thy Sufferings, and by the Merit of thy Holy
Resignation: Cloth thy self in Purple, O my King, put on thy Crown of Thorns,
and take thy Reed in thy hand; come to my assistance, and judge and subdue all
my Enemies; make the Earth tremble before thee when thou ascendest the Throne
of thy Cross; slay Death it self, and for ever destroy the Pride of Sin. Carry
me up with thee, O my God, and unite me to thee; Crucify and sacrifice me with
thee, that I may partake of that Power which is so terrible to my Homebred
Enemies, to the World, and to Hell it self.

Of MAN, Considered as a SINNER.
The Seventh Consideration.
IT is extremely difficult to represent the inward Dispositions of Mind that a
Sinner ought to have; for neither the lowest humiliation, nor the highest
self-abhorrence, nor even annihilation it self, are suitable to so mean wicked
and empty a thing, or rather nothing. Annihilation would be a Blessing to a
Sinner who is reserved for the Wrath that is to come: And he cannot abhor
himself as he ought, for it is God alone that can hate him as much as he
deserves.

Man as a Child of Adam is indeed a Reprobate, but he is not subject to the
Punishment of the Damned; he ought indeed to live in perpetual sorrow, as being
deprived of his sovereign good, but he does not deserve the extremity of
Torments. The Children of a Criminal may be justly deprived of all the Favors
which their Father received, but they do not deserve an equal Punishment. God
may with Justice withdraw his Presence from the Sons of Adam; he may deny them
his particular Favors, and refuse to be their Recompense; and even may, if he
pleases, annihilate them, since they are his Creatures. But it does not seem
agreeable to the Divine Justice to punish them with the utmost severity, only
because they are the unhappy Children of a rebellious Father.

But the Case is altered when we consider Man as a Sinner himself: And God
might very reasonably exert all his Wisdom and Power to satisfy his Justice,
if the Sinner were capable of being made the Object of the entire Vengeance of
an angry God. For since the Greatness of Offenses is measured by the Dignity of
the Person that is offended, it is plain that every Offense that is committed
against God is infinite, and deserves an infinite Punishment, if Man were
capable of suffering it.

Thus a Sinner considered without Christ, is something worse yet than a Damned
Soul that is considered with the Satisfaction of Christ. For if we consider the
Satisfaction of Christ, it is not necessary that damned Souls should suffer
according to their utmost capacity of suffering. Neither, in effect, do the
Damned suffer all that they are able to endure; for their Punishment is unequal
as well as their Guilt, though their capacity of suffering be the same, and they
deserve to suffer to the utmost all that they are able to bear. And therefore
the condition of a Sinner without Christ, is more deplorable than that of the
Damned; for he is a Blemish to the Beauty of the Universe, and overturns the
established Order of Things as much as it is possible he should overturn it.

Such a Sinner is even more worthy of Hatred than all the Damned and Devils
together; for the Death of Christ being sufficient to supply the defects of the
satisfaction which the Damned make to the Justice of God, that Sacred Justice
is fully satisfied, and God is Glorified in the Punishment of the Damned
notwithstanding all their Malice and Spite; and even their Malice it self, as
the due reward of their Sins, serves to glorify the Divine Justice: But a
Sinner without Christ is a Monster whom God neither can nor will endure; he is
not capable of being comprehended in any order, neither of Mercy nor of
Justice. There is nothing that is Good in such a Sinner; It Is impossible to
think on him without horror, and those who love Order, that inviolable Law of
Spiritual Motion, can see nothing more worthy hatred and detestation than such
a Creature.

I can neither hate nor humble my self enough as I am a Sinner. Even my
Repentance deserves to be rejected; for my Groans and Tears serve only to renew
the remembrance of my Offenses. In vain do I lift up my voice to Heaven; God
hears not the Cries of Sinners; he laughs at their Calamities, and delights in
their just Punishments. As a Creature, God hears me; as a Son of Adam, he
despises me; but as a Sinner he cannot think on me without making me the Object
of his most rigorous Justice, and punishing me according to the utmost extent
of my capacity of lussering. How miserable then is the condition of a Sinner!
But let us not any longer consider him without a Redcemer.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O Jesus, who came into the World not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance; who did take upon thy self all the marks of a Sinner, and
condescend to be looked upon as a Sinner, and as a Friend to Publicans and
Sinners; thou whose ardent desire it was to suffer for Sinners, and by the
hands of Sinners, a Death which was appointed for the vilest Sinners; O Jesus,
the Savior of Sinners, be thou my shield to protect me against the Arrows of
the Wrath of God; and stop the Arm of thy Father, which is ready to fall
heavily upon me. Join thy Groans to mine, and mingle thy Tears with mine, that
they may not any longer be the object of the scorn and abomination of my God. I
do not ask thee to raise me from the ground, to wipe away my Tears, or to
restore my first Robes; I am not in a state of Innocence, and desire not to
live but in Sorrow and Humiliation. Yes, Lord, I will remain prostrate on the
ground, with my Face covered with Dust and Tears, and thus together with thee
bear that shame and confusion which I justly deserve for my offenses.

The Eighth Consideration
THE Condition of Man, as a Child of Adam, and even though we consider him as
redeemed by Christ, does necessarily require a separation and abstinence from
all the Pleasures of Sense, and Objects of Concupiscence; for every Child of
Adam, how righteous and holy soever he may be supposed to be, does always feel
a weight that draws him to the Earth, and counter-ballances the effort of the
weight of Grace upon his Soul* Now since the weight of Grace does not depend on
us, and acts so much the more vigorously upon us, as the weight of
Concupiscence is less; it is plain that all Mankind is under a very strict
obligation to diminish the last of these weights, by carefully avoiding sensual
Pleasures, which Naturally incline us to the love of those Objects that seem to
cause them, and by so doing stir up and strengthen the motions of Concupiscence
in us.

Besides, Mortification and a depriving our selves of Worldly Pleasures are not
only useful to cooperate with Grace, and remove such things as might obstruct
its efficacy, but are even many times necessary qualifications to deserve
Grace; and in all appearance the shortest way to obtain it, nor do they ever
fail of doing it when they proceed from a Motion of the Spirit of God, and are
practiced with due perseverance.

When we consider that an unchangeable Order is the Essential Rule of the Will
of God, we perceive clearly that Sinners are indispensably obliged to such a
Privation and Mortification; for it is plain that Order requires the Punishment
of Sinners.

Every Man ought to wish with a certain Holy Person, Either to suffer, or to
dye; or rather with another, Not to dye till he has suffered much. For every
one who loves Order, who prefers the Will of God before his own, who has regard
to the Beauty of the Universe, not that visible Beauty which is the Object of
our Senses, but the intelligible Beauty which can be only perceived by our
Minds; every one I say, that considers himself as a part of the Works of God,
and who places not his chief end in himself, nor thinks it his Duty to love
himself more than God, ought to conform himself to the Will of his All. He
ought to undertake the quarrel of God, and inspired with a holy zeal for the
satisfaction of his Justice, exercise a necessary severity against himself; a
severity which will restore him to a state of Order, so much the more quickly
as he shall exercise it more voluntarily: For, if the punishment of Sin were
not voluntary it would necessarily be eternal.

If we considered that Pleasure is a recompense, which God alone is capable of
producing in us; and that he has obliged himself by the Order of Nature, which
is nothing else but the Eternal Decrees of his Will, to make us feel Pleasure,
as often as the Bodies that surround us shall produce in our Body such motions
as are useful for its preservation: If we considered this, I say, we should be
fully convinced that it is an abominable and shameful impudence to make use of
the unchangeableness of the Decrees of a Just God to oblige him to reward us,
at the same time that we deserve to be punished as Sinners, and even for those
Crimes which we are then actually committing against God. For it is certainly a
thing that cannot be reflected on without horror and amazement; viz. that we
make the goodness of God favor our Passions, and in a manner force the God of
order to reward disorder.

But if we consider on the other side, that Pain is a punishment which God
alone is capable of inflicting on us, and that he has obliged himself, by the
same order of Nature, to make us sensible of Pain as often as the Bodies which
surround us shall produce such motions in our Bodies as are contrary to its
preservation; we then can no longer doubt but that a Sinner who willingly
submits to the order of Justice, and makes use of the immutability of the
Divine Will, only that he may be reestablished in a state of order, who, if I
may be allowed to use that expression, reconciles God with God, and natural
order with essential and necessary order, and who, knowing himself to be a
Sinner, obliges God in pursuance of his unalterable Decrees to treat him
according to his deserts; we cannot doubt, I say, but that such a Sinner shall
certainly draw upon himself the favorable Mercy of so good a God as he whom we
adore. For, such a Sinner is truly amiable; he augments the beauty of the
Universe; he endeavors with all his might to re-enter into a state of order,
and he does effectually re-enter into it, his sufferings being united to those
of Christ who alone is an atonement that is able to compass the glorious design
of the general restoration of all things.

How great is the difference between a voluptuous and a repenting Sinner! Let
us endeavor once more to give a lively Idea of it. A voluptuous person is a
monster who breaks all order, and spoils the beauty of the Universe; whereas a
true penitent re-establishes a state of order, and restores to the Universe
what he has taken from it. A voluptuous Man is a Traitor who abuses the
goodness of his Sovereign, and who, being acquainted with his designs, does
maliciously take advantages from them, to oblige him to actions that are
unworthy of him; but a penitent Sinner is a faithful Servant who studies the
will of his Master, and is willing to undergo any sufferings that it may be
executed; one who makes such a prudent use of the knowledge he has of his
Lord's inclinations, that he obliges him in Justice to make him his Favorite.
Finally, a voluptuous Man is a Malefactor who is perpetually committing new
crimes; an obdurate Sinner who drinks up iniquity like water, and rejoices in
his wickedness; a cast Devil whose doom is not yet pronounced; and a fatted
Victim reserved for the day of the Lord's vengeance, and to be the fuel of
inextinguishable flames. On the other side, a true Penitent is a just person
who fears Sin more than he loves Pleasure; an humble and contrite Soul that is
still purifying it self in bitterness and pain; a burnt sacrifice of Love; a
sacrifice that is too pleasing and too acceptable to the God to whom it is made
to remain in the order of Justice, and which shall therefore be infallibly
translated to that of Mercy; for, its punishment, being voluntary, cannot
continue for ever.

We must not then delude our selves by imagining that Christ came into the
World to free us from our obligations to Repentance. Christ did not come to
overturn the order of things: The design of his coming was to suffer with
Sinners, by his sufferings to sanctify their Repentance, and render it
well-pleasing to God. He came to bear by the greatness of his Power that which
Men could not bear by reason of the weakness of their Nature, the finiteness of
their Being and unworthiness of their Persons. But he came not to excuse them
from Repentance; far from that, he encourages them to suffer by his own
Example, strengthens them by his Grace, and instructs them by his Doctrine: For
he has assured us that none but those who follow him to the Death shall enjoy
that Life which he merited for us by the loss of his own. If any Man, says he,
would rise again with me, let him renounce his own Life, let him bear the
instrument of his punishment, let him take up his Cross and follow me; for he
that would save his Life shall lose it. Nay, he even rebukes sharply the
greatest of his Apostles, because he would have dissuaded him from suffering;
he calls him Satan, and commands him out of his presence: Mark 8 33,34,35. But
when Jesus had turned about, and (...) on his disciples, he rebuked Peter,
saying, get thee behind me S^; for thou savourest not the things that be of
God, but the things that be of men. And when he had called the (...) unto him
with his disciples (...); he said unto them, whosoever will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. For whosoever will save
his life, shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
gospels, the same shall save it. This is the Doctrine of the Eternal Wisdom;
this is the Advice which he gives not only to the Apostles, but to all Mankind
in general. And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also,
he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me let him deny himself, etc.

The Elevation of the Soul to GOD.
O LORD, whose Will is ever effectual, and all whose Decrees are unchangeable,
it is of thy bounty that we feel Pleasure in the use of sensible things; but
ungrateful Man loves that false good, and despises the true cause of his
Happiness; or rather, he is ignorant that thou, O Lord, alone art able to
operate in him. It was wisely ordered by thy Providence, that Man should be
able to discern, by short and evident Proofs, whether he should use or avoid
the Bodies that surround him, that he might not be obliged to turn from thee,
nor to six his Mind upon thy Creatures. But he has abused thy Mercy to his own
destruction; for thou, O God, art not in all his thoughts: He imagines that
matter is the cause of all the Pleasure which he feels, and therefore yields
himself a slave to it, and makes it the only Object of his Thoughts and
Affections. Thus what thou had appointed to preserve the Righteous Man in his
Rightcousness serves now to harden the Wicked in their Wickedness. Is it just
thou should work a Miracle for a sinful wretch, O God? No, Lord, let thy
Decrees remain fixed for ever; and woe be to those that tempt thee. Let Men shun
Poison if they would avoid Death. They can discern that Poison, for thou have
taught them to know and avoid it.

But, O thou Just and Merciful God, who dealest Righteously with thy Creatures,
how shall we be able to hate Pleasure? How hate what thou causest us to love?
It is just that we suffer as Sinners; but can we love Pain which thou seem
to make us hate by an invincible Impression? O Lord, whose Wisdom is infinite,
enable us perfectly to understand that thou art not contrary to thy self, and
that thy Wills do not imply contradiction; that Pleasure, in it self, is not
absolutely bad, and that the true cause that produces it, really deserves and
ought to be beloved and respected; beloved with all our Heart and Soul, and
respected so as not to be constrained, in consequence of his Will, to gratify
us, when, absolutely speaking, be should punish us.

O Lord, who hidest thy self from our mortal Eyes, cause thy strength, and the
efficacy of thy will to exert themselves, and do thou clearly and incessantly
convince us that the Bodies which are on all sides about us are absolutely
incapable of doing us either good or harm. Perhaps Men will love none but thee
when they come to know that thou alone art able to do them good, and perhaps
they will fear none but thee when they shall have rightly understood that thou
alone have sufficient strength and power to cause them to suffer Pain.

But I beseech thee, O my God, to deal with me in a more safe and merciful
manner. I know that thy Creatures are not my good, yet I love them: I am
convinced that whatever is round me cannot penetrate me, yet my Heart
insensibly opens it self, and expects to receive from the vilest of thy
Creatures what thou alone art able to give me. Therefore, O Lord, be pleased
out of thy infimte Mercy, to deal with me in a more safe manner than thou do
with those who follow the Dictates of their Love. Oh set me apart from thy
Creatures since they turn my Heart from thee. Draw my Eyes from fixing
themselves on sensible Objects, since I mistake them for thee; or rather, since
I love them instead of thee. This is the surest means to remedy the disorders
in my Heart.

All my Philosophy is not sufficient to regulate my Love, and can only serve to
accuse and confound me before thee. It teaches me that I make use of the Order,
to overthrow the Order; that I misemploy thy Gifts by promoting what is ill;
and that I make use of the immutability of thy Decrees merely to reward
Rebellion and other Crimes: It plainly shows me my Impiety and Injustice; but
leaves me plunged in it. I am stricken with horror when I think on my self,
yet I cannot forbear loving my self. So I procure those Pleasures to my self
which make me happy, at least while I enjoy them. O God, how stupid and
senseless am I not! I love my self for a Moment, and ruin my self for a whole
Eternity: But I have a feeling sense of that Moment, and I have none of
Eternity. It Is true I think on it, and the Thought disturbs my Joy; but alas!
Pleasure, though never so weakened by my Reflections, easily draws after its
self a Heart which it has already put into motion. Deprive me then, O my God,
of all the Objects that flatter my Senses and disorder my Reason. While, as
being the Author of Nature, thou make me seel Pleasure in the use of those
Objects, do thou, as thou art the Author of Grace, make me loath and abhor
them. And I beseech thee out of the abundance of thy Mercies, that at such
times as Pains are voluntary, thou may make me suffer those which my Crimes
deserve. O God, who can not let sin remain impunished, make me continually
return to the observance of the Order. Form me upon the model of thy Son,
crucify me with him, and let his Cross, that is only folly and weakness to the
Eyes of Man, be all my Strength, all my Wisdom and all my Joy.

O Jesus! who wast nailed on the Cross for my sins, I am thine; nail and fix me
there with thee; crucify my Flesh with its Passions and unruly Desires;
destroy this body of Sin, or by thy Grace deliver me from the stress of it that
continually presses upon my Mind. We are baptized in thy Death: We are dead to
all the things of this World: We are even buried with thee through Baptism: Our
old Man, according to thy great Apostle, was crucified with thee, that the body
of sin might be destroyed. And will thou, O Lord, suffer this Old Man to live
again, and this Body of Sin to subsist? O Savior of the World, do thou finish
the work which thou have begun! Continue to suffer in thy Members: Do thou in
our Flesh sinish the Sacrifice which thou have begun in Abel, which thou did
continue in the Patriarchs and Prophets, and to which thou will not put an end
but by the Death of the last Member of thy Body, that is to be the last Saint
whom thou will give to thy Church.

O thou Blessed Spirit of Christ, thou Love of the Father and of the Son,
diffuse thy Charity through our Hearts, drive the servile fear of Slaves out of
our Minds, and fill us with that Fear that is found in the Children, and which
gives a Right to the Inheritance of our Father. Come, O thou Spirit of Comfort,
soften the bitterness and distaste which we find in Repentance; make us partake
of the Sufferings of Christ, that we may also be made partakers of his Glory.
But give us at the same time some of that Heavenly Fire which thou did shower
down on the Apostles; that Fire which kindled in them an ardent Zeal to preach
the Cross of Christ without Fear, and to suffer joyfully the shame of Whipping,
the stress of Torments, and Death it self for Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

