THE Mystery of Iniquity Working in the dividing of PROTESTANTS, In order to
the subverting of Religion and our Laws For almost the space of 30 Years last
past, plainly laid open.

With some Advices to Protestedts of all Persuasions in the present Juncture of
our Affairs.

To which is ad^^^ A Specimen a BILL for Un^^g of Protestants.

By a Protestant and true Englishman.

Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to Desolation; and every
City or House divided against it self, shall not stand.

Mat. 12.25. Dum pugnant singuli, universi vincuntur.

Tacit. Printed in the Year 1689.

The Mystery of Iniquity working in the dividing of Protestants, etc.
IT IS long since the Court of England, under the Authority of the late King and
his Brother, was embarked in a design of subverting the Protestant Religion,
and of introducing and establishing Popery. For the two Royal Brothers being in
the time of their Exile seduced by the Caresses and Importunities of their
Mother, allured by the Promises and Favors of Popish Princes, and being
wheedled by the Crafts and Arts of Priests and Jesuits, who are cunning to
deceive, and knew how to prevail upon Persons that were but weakly established
in the Doctrine, and wholly strangers to the Practice and Power of the Religion
they were tempted from; they not only abjured the Reformed Religion, and became
reconciled to the Church of Rome; but by their Example, and the Influence which
they had over those that depended upon them, both for present Subsistence and
future Hopes, they drew many that accompanied them in their Banishment, to
renounce the Doctrine, Worship, and Communion of the Church of England, though
in the War between Charles the First and the Parliament, they had pretended to
fight for them in equal conjunction with the Prerogatives of the Crown. So that
upon the Restoration in the Year 1660, they were not only molded and prepared
themselves for promoting the desires of the Pope and his Emissaries, but they
were furnished with a stock of Gentlemen, out of whom they might have a supply
of Instruments, both in Parliament and elsewhere, to cooperate with and under
them in the Methods that should be judged most proper and subservient to the
extirpation of Protestancy, and the bringing the Na^^on again into a Servitude
to the Triple Crown. And bes^des the Obligations that the Principles of the
Religion to which they had revolted, laid them under for eradicating the
established Doctrine and Worship, they had bound themselves unto it, by all the
Prom^ses and Oaths which Persons are capable of having proscribed unto, and
exacted of them.

Nor can any now disbelieve his late Majesty's having lived and died a Papist,
who has either heard what he both said and did, when under the prospect of
approaching Death, and past hope of acting a part any longer on the present
Stage, or who have seen and read the two Papers left in his Closet, which have
been since published to the World, and attested for Authentic by the present
King. And had we been so just to our selves, as to have examined the whole
Course of his Reign, both in his Alliances Abroad, and his most important
Counsels and Actions at Home; or had we hearkened to the Reports of those who
knew him at Collen and in Flanders, we had been long ago convinced of what
Religion he was. Nor were his many repeated Protestations of his Zeal for
Protestancy, but in order to delude the Nation, till insensibly as to us, and
with safety to himself, he had overturned the Religion which he pretended to
own, and had introduced that which he inveighed against. And while with the
highest asseverations he disclaimed the being what he really was, and with most
sacred and tremendous Oaths, professed the being what he was not, his Religion
might in the mean time have been traced through all the signal Occurrences of
his Government, and have been discerned written in Capital Letters, through all
the material Affairs wherein he was engaged, from the Day he ascended the
Throne, till the Hour he left the Work. His entering into two Wars against the
Dutch, without any provocation on their part, or ground on his, save their
being a Protestant State; his being not only conscious unto, but interposing
his Commands, as well as Encouragements, for the burning of London. His
Concurrence in all the parts of the Popish Plot, except that which the Jesuits,
with a few others, were involved in against himself, his stifling that
Conspiracy, and de^^^ering the Roman Catholics from the Dangers into which it
had ^ast them. His being the Author of so many forged Plots, which he caused to
be charged on Protestants. His constant Confede^^cies with France, to the
disobliging his People; the betraying of Europe; the neglect of the Reformed in
that Kingdom, and the encouraging the Design carried on against them for their
Extirpation. His entatling the Duke of York upon the Nation, contrary to the
Desires and Endeavors of three several Parliaments, and that no out of Love to
his Person, but Affection to Popery, which he knew that Gentleman would
introduce and establish. All these, besides many other things which might be
named, were sufficient Evidences of the late King's Religion, and of the Design
he was engaged in for the Subversion of Ours. So that it would fill a sober
Person with amazement, to think, that after all this, there should be so many
sincere Protestants and true English Men, who not only believed the late King
to be of the Reformed Religion, but with an insatiableness thirsted after the
Blood of those that durst otherwise represent him. And had it not been for his
receiving Absolution and Extreme Unction from a Popish Priest at his Death; and
for what he left in writing in the two Papers found in his strong Box, he would
have still passed for a Prince who had lived and died a cordial and zealous
Protestant, and whosoever had muttered any thing to the contrary, would have
been branded for a Villain and an execrable Person. But with what a scent and
odor must it recommend his Memory to them, to consider his having not only
lived and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, in contradiction to all
his Public Speeches, solemn Declarations, and highest Asseverations to his
People in Parliament; but his participating, from time to time, of the
Sacrament as administered in the Church of England, while in the interim he had
abjured our Religion, stood reconciled to the Church of Rome, and had obliged
himself by most sacred Vows, and was endeavoring, by all the Frauds and Arts
imaginable, to ^^^vert the established Doctrine and Worship, and set up Heresy
and Idolatry in their room. And it must needs give them an abhorrent Idea and
Character of Popery, and a loathsome representation of those trusted with the
Conduct and Guidance of the Consciences of Men in the Roman Communion, that
they should not only dispense with and indulge such Crimes and Villainies, but
proclaim them Sanctified and Meritorious from the end which they are calculated
for and levelled at.

And for his dear Brother, and renowned Successor, who possessed the Throne
after him, I suppose his most partial Admirers, who took him for a Prince, not
only merciful in his Temper, and imbued with all gracious Inclinations to our
Laws, and the Rights of the Subject, but for one Orthodox in his Religion, and
who would prove a zealous Defender of the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of
the Church established by Law, are before this time both undeceived, and filled
with Resentments for his having abused their Credulity, deceived their
Expectations, and reproched all their gloryings and boastings of him. For as it
would have been the greatest Affront they could have put upon the King, to
question his being of the Roman Communion, or to detract from his Zeal for the
introduction of Popery, notwithstanding his own antecedent Protestations, as
well as the many Statutes in force for the preservation of the Reformed
Religion; so I must take the liberty to tell them, that his Apostasy is not of
so late a Date as the World is made commonly to believe. For though it was many
Years concealed, and the contrary pretended and dissembled; yet it is most
certain that he abjured the Protestant Religion, soon after the Exilement of
the Royal Family, and was reconciled to the Romish Church at St. Germains in
France. Nor were several of the then suffering Bishops and Clergy ignorant of
this, though they had neither the Integrity nor Courage to give the Nation and
Church warning of it. And within these five Years there was in the custody of a
very worthy and honest Gentleman, a Letter written to the late Bishop of D. by
a Doctor of Divinity then attending upon the Royal Brothers, wherein the
Apostasy of the then Duke of York to the Sea of Rome is particularly related,
and an Account given how much the Duchess of Tremoville (who without being her
self observed) had heard the Queen Mother glorying of it, ^^^alled it as a
dishonor to the Royal Family, and as that which night prove of pernicious
Consequence to the Protestant Interest. But though the old Queen privately
rejoiced and triumphed in it, yet she knew too well what disadvantage it might
be, both to her Son, and to the Papal Cause in Great Britain, to have it at
that Season communicated and divulged. Thereupon it remained a Secret for many
Years, and by virtue of a Dispensation, he sometimes joined in all Ordinances
with those of the Protestant Communion. But for all the Art, Hypocrisy, of and
Sacrilege, by which it was endeavored to be concealed, it might have been
easily discerned, as manifesting it self in the whole Course of his Actions.
And at last his own Zeal, the Importunity of the Priests, and the Cunning of
the late King, prevailing over Reasons of State, he withdrew from all Acts of
Fellowship with the Church of England. But neither that, nor his refusing the
Test enjoined by Law, for distinguishing Papists from Protestants, though
thereupon he was forced, both to resign his Office of Lord High Admiral, etc.
nor his declining the Oath which the Laws of Scotland for the securing a
Protestant Governor, enjoin to be taken by the High Commissioner; nor yet so
many Parliaments having endeavored to get him excluded from Succession to the
Crown, upon the account of having revolted to the Sea of Rome, and thereby
become dangerous to the established Religion, could make impression upon a
wilfully deluded and obstinate sort of Protestants, but in defiance of all
means of Conviction, they would persuade themselves, that he was still a Zealot
for our Religion, and a grand Patriot of the Church of England. Nor could any
thing undeceive them, till upon his Brother's Death he had openly declared
himself a Roman Catholic, and afterward in the fumes and raptures of his
Victory over the late Duke of Monmouth, had discovered and proclaimed his
Intentions of overthrowing both our Religion and Laws. Yea so closely had some
sealed up their Eyes against all beams of Light, and hardened themselves against
all Evidences from Reason and Fact, that had it pleased the Almighty God to
have prospered the Duke of Monmouth's Arms in the Summer 85. the present King
would have gone off the State with the Reputation among them, of a Prince
tender of the Laws of the Kingdom; and who, notwithstanding his own being a
Papist, would have preserved the Reformed Religion, and have maintained the
Church of England in all her Grandeur and Rights. And tho his whole Life had
been but one continued Conspiracy against our Civil Liberties and Privileges,
he had left the Throne with the Character, and under the Esteem of a Gentleman;
that in the whole couse of his Government would have regulated himself by the
Rules of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the Realm.

Now among all the Methods fallen upon by the Royal Brothers, for the
undermining and subverting our Religion and Laws, there is none that they have
pursued with more Ardor, and wherein they have been more successful to the
compassing of their Designs, than in their dividing Protestants, and alienating
their Affections, and embittering their Minds from and against one another. And
had not this lain under their prospect, and the means of effecting it appeared
easy, they might have been Papists themselves, while in the mean time they had
been dispensed with to protest and swear their being of the Reformed Religion,
and they might have envied our Liberties, and bewailed their Restriction from
Arbitrary and Despotical Power; but they never durst have entertained a Thought
of subverting the Established Religion, or of altering the Civil Government,
nor would they ever have had the boldness to have attempted the introducing and
erecting Popery and Tyranny in their room. And whosoever should have put them
upon reducing the Nation to the Church of Rome, or upon rendering the Monarchy
unlimited and independent on the Law, would have been thought to have laid a
Snare for exposing the Papists to greater Severities than they were obnoxious
unto before, and to have projected the robbing the Crown of the Prerogatives
which belong unto it by the Rules of the Constitution, and to which it was so
lately restored. And the despair of succeeding, would have rendered the Royal
Brothers deaf to all Importunities from Romish Emissaries, and Court Minions.
Neither the Promises and Oaths which they had made and taken beyond Sea to
introduce Popery, nor their Ambition to advance themselves beyond the restraint
of Laws, and the Control of Parliaments, would have prevailed upon them to
have encountered the Hazards and Difficulties, which in case of the Union of
English Protestants, must have attended and ensued upon Attempts and Endeavors
of the one kind and of the other. Or should their beloved Popery, and their own
Bigottedness in the Romish Superstition, have so far transported them beyond
the bounds of Wisdom and Discretion, as to have appeared possessed with an
Intention of subverting the Protestant Religion, and of enslaving the Nation to
the Superstition and Idolatry of Rome, they would have been made soon to
understand, That the Laws which make it Treason to own the Jurisdiction of the
Pope, or to seduce the meanest Subject to the Church of Rome, were not enacted
in vain, and that those as well as many more made for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, and to prevent the growth and introduction of Popery, were
not to be dallied and played withal. Or, should they have been so far infatuated
and abandoned of all Understanding, as out of a foolish and haughty Affectation
of being absolute, to have attempted the Alteration of the Civil Government,
they would have been immediately and unanimously told, that the People have the
same Right to their Liberties, that the King has to the Prerogatives of the
Crown. And if they would not have been contented with what belongs unto the
Prince by the Common and Statute Laws of the Realm, but had invaded the
Privileges reserved unto the Subject: they would have been made to know, that
they might not only be withstood in what they strove to usurp contrary to Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, and other Laws of the Kingdom, but that thereby
they forfeited, and might be disseized of what either appertained unto the
Crown by fundamental Agreements, or has been since settled upon the Monarch by
Statute-Laws. Nor could any thing have emboldned his late Majesty and the
present King to Enterprises of the one kind or the other, but the prospect of
begetting a Misunderstanding, Jealousy, and Rancor among Protestants, and
thereby both of making them instrumental to the Ruin of one another, and
contributary to the loss of English Liberty and the Reformed Religion, which
they equally value and esteem, and to the setting up Popery and Tyranny, which
the one detesteth and abhors no less than the other.

Tho all English Protestants have ever been at an Accord in all the Essentials
and Vitals of Religion, yet from the very beginning of the Reformation, there
have been Differences among them concerning Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline, and about Forms, Rites, and Ceremonies of Worship. And had they
consulted either their Duty to God, or the common Interest of Religion, they
might have found ways either for removing the occasions of them, or they ought
to have lived together as Brethren, notwithstanding the differences which were
among them in those things. But how much wiser are the Children of this World,
than those of the Kingdom of God and of Jesus Christ. For tho the differences
among the Papists do far exceed ours, both in their number and in the
importance of those things wherein they disagree, yet they do mutually tolerate
and bear with one another. The matters wherein they differ are neither made the
Terms of their Church Communion, nor the Grounds of mutual Excommunications and
Persecutions.

But alas, one Party among us has been always endeavoring to cut or stretch
others to their own Size, and have made those things which themselves style
Indifferent, both the Qualifications for admission to the Pastoral Office, and
the Conditions of Fellowship in the Ordinances of the Gospel. Nor is it to be
expressed, what Advantages were hereby administered all along to the Common
Enemy; and what Sufferings peaceable and orthodox Christians were exposed unto
from their peevish and angry Brethren. And though these Things, with the Heats
begotten among all, and the Calamities undergone by one side, were not the
cause of that funestous War betwixt Charles the First and the Parliament, yet
they were an occasion of diverting Thousands from the side which the
Persecuting Churchmen espoused, and engaging them in the behalf of the two
Houses, in the Quarrel which they begun and carried on against that Prince, for
defense of the Civil Liberties, Privileges, and Rights of the People. But some
of the Mitred Clergy were so far from being made wise by their own and the
Nations Sufferings, as upon their Restoration to hearken to moderate Counsels,
and to decline their former Rigours and Severities, that they became the Tools
and Instruments of the Court, not only for reviving, but for heightning and
enflaming all the Differences which had formerly been among English
Protestants. For the Royal Brothers finding nothing more adapted and
subservient than this, to their Design of altering the Government, and
subverting Religion, they animated those waspish and impolitick Ecclesiastics,
not only to pursue the Restoration of all those Things which had given Rise and
Occasion to former Dissentions and Persecutions, but to lay new Snares for
alienating many Persons, of unspotted Lives and tender Consciences, from the
Church, and of rendering them obnoxious to suffer in their Names, Persons, and
Estates. And what a satisfaction was it to the late King and his Brother, to
find the old Episcopal Clergy prepared through Principles of Revenge, as well
as from Love of Domination, Ambition, and Covetousness, to fall in with the
Design, not only of increasing Divisions among Protestants, both by making the
Conditions of entering upon the Pastoral Function narrower, and for screwing
Conformity with the Church in her Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, into Tests,
for admission to Magistracy and Civil Trusts, but of obtaining several Laws
against Dissenters, whereby the Penalties to which they foresaw that People
would become liable, were rendered greater than they had been before, and their
Sufferings made more merciless, inhumane, and intolerable.

For though his late Majesty had, by a Declaration dated at Breda, promised
Indulgence to all Protestants that would live peaceably under the Civil
Government; yet it was never in his Thoughts to perform it; and the previous
Obligations which he was under to the Church of Rome, had a virtue to supersede
and cancel his Engagements to English Heretics. And all he intended by that
Declaration was only to wheedle and lull those into a tameness of admitting his
return into his Dominions, whom a jealousy of being afterward persecuted for
their Consciences, might have awakened to withstand and dispute it. And, to
give him his due, he never judged himself longer bound to the observation of
Promises and Oaths made to his People, than, until without hazard to his Person
and Government, he could violate and break them. Accordingly he was no sooner
seated in the Throne of his Ancestors, and those whom he had been apprehensive
of Resistance and Disturbance from, put out of Capacity and Condition of
attempting any thing against him; but he thought himself discharged from every
thing that the Royal Word and Faith of a Prince had been pledged and laid to
stake for in that Declaration, and from that day forward acted in direct
opposition to all the Parts and Branches of it. For having soon after his
return obtained a Parliament molded and adapted, both to his Arbitrary and
Popish Ends, he immediately set all his Instruments at work for the procuring
such Laws to be enacted, as might divide and weaken Protestants, and thereby
make us, not only the more easy a Prey to the Papists, but afford them an
advantage through our Scuffles, of undermining our Religion with the less
notice and observation.

How such Persons came to be chosen, and to constitute the majority of the
House of Commons, who by their Actings have made themselves infamous and
execrable to all Ages, were a Matter too large to penetrate at present into the
Reasons of; but that which my Theme conducts me to observe, is, That as they
sacrificed the Treasure of the Nation to the Profuseness and Prodigality of the
Prince, and our Rights and Liberties to his Ambition and Arbitrary Will, so
they both introduced and established those Things which have been a means of
dividing us; and by many severe and repeated Laws, they subjected a great
number of industrious Englishmen and true Protestants, to Excommunications,
Imprisonments, rigorous and multiplied Fines, and all this for Matters only
relating to their Consciences, and for their Obedience to God in the Ordinances
of his Worship and House. And notwithstanding the late King's often pretended
companion to the Dissenters, it will be hard to discern them, unless in Effects
which proceed from very different and opposite Principles. The distance which
he kept them from his Person and Favor; the influencing these Members of both
Houses that depended upon him, to be the Authors and Promoters of Severities
against them; the enjoining so often the Judges and Justices of Peace to
execute the Laws upon them in their utmost rigor; the instigating the Bishops
and Ecclesiastical Courts, if at any time they relented in their Prosecutions,
to pursue them with fresh Citations and Censures; the arraigning them, not only
upon the Statutes made intentionally against Dissenters, but upon those that
were originally and solely enacted against the Papists; these, and other
Procedures of that Nature, are the only Proofs and Evidences which I can find,
of the late King's Bowels, Pity, and Tenderness to them. And whereas the weak
Churchmen were imposed upon to believe, that all the Severity against the
Nonconformists, was the Fruit of his Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and for
the security of the Worship und Discipline established by Law; they might have
easily discovered, if Passion, Prejudice, Wealth and Honor had not blinded
them, that all this was calculated for Ends perfectly destructive to the
Church, and inconsistent with the Safety and Happiness of all Protestants. For
as his seeking oftener than once to have wriggled himself into a Power of
superceding and dispensing with those Laws and suspending their Execution,
plainly shows that he never intended the support and preservation of the Church
by them; so his non-execution of the Laws against Papists; his conniving at
their increase; his persuading those nearest unto him to reconcile themselves
to the Sea of Rome, as he did, among others, the late Duke of Monmouth; his
countenancing the Roman Catholics in their open and intolerable Insolences;
and his advancing them to the most gainful and important Places and Trusts,
sufficiently declare that he never had any love to Protestants, or care of the
Reformed Religion; but that all his Designs were of a contrary Tendency, and
his fairest Pretenses for the Protection and Grandeur of the Church of England,
adapted to other Ends.

Thus the Royal Brothers having obtained such Laws to be enacted, whereby one
Party of Protestants was armed with means of oppressing and persecuting all
others, neither the necessity of their Affairs at any time since, nor the
Application and Interposure of several Parliaments for removing the Grounds of
our Differences and Animosities, by an Indulgence, to be past into a Law, could
prevail, either upon his late Majesty, or the present King, to forgo the
Advantage they had gotten of keeping us in mutual Enmity, and thereby of
ministering to their projection of supplanting our Religion, and re-establishing
the Faith and Worship of the Church of Rome. Hereupon the last King, not only
refused to consent to such Bills as diverse late Parliaments had prepared for
indulging Dissenters, and for bringing them into an union of Counsels, and
conjunction of Interest with those of the Church of England, for resisting the
Conspiracies of the Papists against our legal Government and established
Religion; but he rejected an Address for suspending the Execution of the Penal
Laws against Dissenters, which was offered and presented unto him by that very
Parliament which had framed and enacted those cruel and hard Laws.

And as the Royal Brothers have made it their constant Business to cherish a
Division and Rancour among Protestants, and to provoke one Party to persecute
and ruin another; so nothing could more naturally fall in with the Design of
Arbitrariness, or be more subservient to the betraying the Nation to Papal
Idolatry and Jurisdiction. For several Penal Laws. against a considerable Body
of People, do either expose them against whom they are enacted, to be destroyed
by the Prince, with whom the executive Power of the Law is trusted and
deposited; or they prove a Temptation to such as are obnoxious of resigning
themselves in such a manner to the Will and Pleasure of the Monarch, for the
obtaining his connivancy at their violation of the Laws, as is unsafe and
dangerous for the common Liberty and Good of the Kingdom. For in case the
Supreme Magistrate pursue an Interest distinct from, and destructive to that of
his People, they who the Law has made liable to be oppressed, are brought
under Inducements of becoming so many Partisans for abetting him in his
Designs, in hopes of being thereupon protected from the Penal Statutes, the
execution whereof is committed to him. And as it is not agreeable to the Wisdom
and Prudence which ought to be among Men, nor to the Mercy and Compassion which
should be among Christians, for one Party to surrender another into the Hands
and Power of the Sovereign, to be impoverished and ruined by him at his
pleasure, especially when those whom they give up to be thus treated and
entertained, are at agreement with them in all the Essentials of Religion,
equally zealous as themselves for the Liberties of their Country; and who, for
Sobriety in their Lives, Industry in their Callings, and Usefulness in the
Commonwealth, are inferior to none of their Fellow Subjects: So it is obvious
to any who give themselves leave to think, that the King would long ere this
have been stated in the Absoluteness that is aspired after, and both Church and
State reduced to lie at the discretion of the Monarch, provided the
Nonconformists, for procuring his Favor in non-execution of the Laws, had
suffered themselves to be prevailed upon, and drawn over to stand by and assist
him in his Popish and Despotical Designs.

But that honest People, though hated and maligned by their Brethren, rather
than be found aiding the King in his Usurpations over the Kingdom, have chosen
to undergo the utmost Calamities they could be made subject unto, either
through the Execution of those Laws which had been made against them, or
through our Princes and their Ministers wrecking their Malice upon them in
Arbitrary and Illegal Methods. But what the Royal Brothers could not work the
afflicted and persecuted Side unto, they found the Art to engage the other Side
in, tho not only excepted from all Obnoxiousness to those Laws, but
strengthened and supported by them. For as soon as the Court begun to despair
of prevailing upon Dissenters to become their Tools and Instruments of
enslaving the Nation, and of exalting the Monarchy to a despotical
Absoluteness, they applied to the Bigots of the Church of England, whom by
gratifying with a vigorous Execution of the Laws upon Dissenters, they brought
to abet, applaud, and justify them in all those Counsels and Ways which have
reduced us into that miserable condition wherein we not long since were. The
Clergy being advanced to Grandeur and Opulency, things which many of them are
fonder of, and loather to forgo than Religion and the Rights of the Nation, the
Court made it their business to possess them with a Belief, that unless the
Fanatics were suppressed and ruined, they could not enjoy with Security their
Dignities and Wealth. Whereupon not only the lesser Levites, but the Superior
Clergy having their Lesson and Cue given them from White Hall and St. James's,
fell upon pursuing the Nonconformists with Ecclesiastical Punishments, and upon
exciting and animating the Civil Officers against them. And under pretense of
preserving and defending the Church, they gave themselves over to an implicit
serving of the Court, and became not only Advocates but Instruments for the
robbing of Corporations of their Charters, for imposing Sheriffs upon the City
of London who had not been legally elected, and of fining and punishing Men
arbitrarily for no Crime, save the having asserted their own and the Nations
Rights in modest and lawful ways. Posterity will hardly believe that so many of
the Prelatical Clergy, and so great a number of Members of the Church of
England, should from an Enmity unto, and pretended Jealousy of the Dissenters,
have become Tools under the late King for justifying the Dissolution of so many
Parliaments, the Invasion made upon their Privileges, the ridiculing and
stifling of the Popish Plot, the shamming of forged Conspiracies upon
Protestants, the condemning several to Death for High Treason, who could be
rendered guilty by the Trangression of no known Law, and finally for advancing a
Gentleman to the Throne, who had been engaged in a Conjuration against Religion
and the Legal Government, and whom three several Parliaments would have
therefore excluded from the Right of Succession. And being seduced into an
espousal of the Interests of the Court against Religion, Parliaments, and the
Nation, it is doleful to consider what Doctrines both from Pulpit and Press
were thereupon brought forth and divulged. Such as Monarchy's being a
Government by Divine Right; that it is in the Prince's Power to rule as he
pleases; that it is a Grace and Condescension in the King to give an account
of what he does; that for Parliaments to direct, or regulate the Succession,
borders upon Treason, and is an Offense against the Law of Nature; and that the
only thing left to Subjects, in case the King will tyrannize over their
Consciences, Persons, and Estates, is tamely to suffer, and as some of them did
absurdly express it, to exercise Passive Obedience. So that by corrupting the
Minds and Consciences of Men with those pestilent and slavish Notions, they
betrayed the Nation both to the Mischiefs which have already overtaken us, and
to what further we were threatened with. Nor did these Doctrines tend merely to
the fettering and enfeebling the Spirits of Men, but they were a Temptation to
the Royal Brothers to put in Execution what they had been so long contriving
and traveling with, and were a kind of reprimanding them for being ignorant of
their own Right and Power, and for not exerting it with that Vigor and
Expedition which they might. I do acknowledge that there were many both of the
Sacred Order, and of the Laick Communion of the Church of England, who were far
from being infected with those brutish Sentiments and Opinions, and who were as
zealous as any for having the Monarchy kept within its ancient limits;
Parliaments maintained in their wonted Reverence and Authority; the Subjects
preserved in the enjoyment of their immemorial Privileges; and who were far
from sacrificing our Religion and Laws to Popery and Arbitrariness; and from
lulling us into a Tameness and Lethargy, in case the Court should attempt the
abolishing the established Doctrine and Worship, and the subverting and
changing the Civil Government. But alas! besides their being immediately
branded with the Name of Trimmer and conformable Fanatics, and registered in
the Calendar with those that stood precluded the King's Favor, and merited his
Animadversion; their Modesty was soon drowned and silenced in the loud Noise of
their clamorous Brethren, and their retiredness from Conversation, while the
others frequented all places of Society and public Concourse, deprived the
Nation of the benefit of their Example, and the happiness of their
Instructions. Nor have I mentioned the Extravagancies of any of the
Ecclesiastics and Members of the Church of England, with a design either of
reproaching and upbraiding them, or of provoking and exasperating the
Dissenters to Resentments, but only to show how fatal our Divisions have been
unto us, what Excesses they have occasioned our being hurried and transported
into, and what mischievous Improvement our Enemies have made of them, to the
supplanting and almost subverting of all that is valuable unto us, as we are
Englishmen, Christians, and Protestants.

And as our Animosities, through our Divisions, gave the Court an advantage of
suborning that Party, which they pretended to befriend and uphold, into a
Ministration to all their Counsels, and Projections against our Religion and
Laws; so by reason of the unnatural Heats wherewith Protestants have been
enflamed and enraged against Protestants, many weak, ungrounded, and unstable
Souls, have been tempted to question the Truth of our Religion, and to
apostatize to the Church of Rome, and thereupon have become united in
Inclination, Power, and endeavors with the Court, and our old Enemies the
Papists, for the extirpation of Protestancy, and the alteration of the
Government. As it has been matter of Offense and Scandal to all Men, so it
has been ground of stumbling and falling unto many, to see those who are
professedly of the same Religion, to be mutually embittered against one
another, and so far transported with Malice and Rage, as to seek and pursue
each others Destruction. For such a Carriage and Behavior are so contrary to
the Spirit and Principles of Christianity, and to the Genius and Temper of true
Religion, that it is no marvel if Persons ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, and
strangers to the converting and comforting Virtue of the Doctrine of the Gospel
asserted in our Confessions, and insisted upon by our Divines, should suspect
the Orthodoxy of that Religion which is accompanied with so bitter Fruits, even
in the Dispensers of the Word as well as in others, and betake themselves to
the Communion of that Church, where how many and important soever their
Differences be one with another, yet they do not break sorth into those Flames
of excommunicating and persecuting each other, that ours have done. How have
some among us, through having their Spirits fretted and exasperated by the
craft and cunning of our Enemies, not only loaded and stigmatized their
Brethren and fellow-Protestants with Crimes and Names, which were they true and
deserved, would justly render us a loathing and an Abomination to Mankind, but
have libelled and branded those whom God had honored to be Instruments of the
Reformation, with Appellations and Characters fit to beget a detestation of
their Doctrine as well as their Memory. The worst that the Papists have forged
and vomited out against Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, etc. has been raked up and
repeated to the disparagement of the Reformation, and to the scandalizing the
Minds of weak Men against it. And as the Jesuits and Priests have improved
those Slanders and Calumnies to the Seduction of diverse from the Church of
England, and to a working them over to a Reconciliation with the Church of
Rome; so the Court has thereby had an increase of their Faction and Party
against our Religion and Liberties, and have been enabled to muster Troops of
Janisaries for their Despotical and Unlimited Claim.

Nor have our Divisions, with the Heats, Animosities, Revilings, and
Persecutions that have ensued thereupon, proved only an occasion of the
Seduction of several from our Religion, and of their Apostasy to Popery, but
they have been a main spring and source of the Debauchery, Irreligion, and
Atheism, which have overspread the Nation, and have brought so many both to an
indifferency and unconcernedness for the Gospel, and all that is virtuous and
noble, and have disposed them to fall in with those that could countenance and
protect them in their Impiety and Profaneness, and feed their Luxury and Pride
with Honor and Gain. What a woeful Scheme of Religion have we afforded the
World! and how shamefully have we painted forth and represented the holy
Doctrine of the blessed Jesus, while we have not only lived in a direct
opposition to all the Commands of Meekness, Love, and mutual forbearance which
our Religion lays us under the Authority of, but have neglected to practice
good manners, to observe the Rules of Civility, to treat one another with
common Humanity, and to do as we would be done unto? While we have been more
offended at what seemed to supplant our Dominations and Grandures, than at what
dishonored God and reproached the Gospel; while we weighed not so much whether
they whom we took into our sacred Communion, as well as into our personal
Friendship, were conformable in their Lives to the Scripture, as whether they
complied with the Canons of the Church, while we reprobated all that were not
of our way, though never so virtuous and devout, and sainted all that were,
though never so wicked and profane; while we branded such for Fanatics, whom
we could justly charge with nothing, save the not admitting that into Religion
which came not from the Divine Author of it; and hugged those for good and
Orthodox Believers, that would sooner consult the Statute-Book for their
Practice in the Worship of God, than the Bible; while we haled those to Prison
and spoiled them of their Estates, to whom nothing could be objected, except
their being too precise and conscientious, in avoiding that, through fear and
apprehension of sinning, which others had a liberty and latitude to do, as
judging it lawful, and in the mean time esteemed those worthy of the chiefest
Trusts in the Church and Commonwealth, whose Folly and Villainies made them
unfit for Civil Societies; while they who lived most agreeably to the Laws of
God and the Example of Christ, were persecuted as Enemies to Religion and the
Pests of the Kingdom, and in the interim too many of the very Clergy were not
only Countenances of the most profligate Persons as their best Friends, but
joined and assisted in scandalous Debaucheries, under pretense of sustaining
the Honor of their Tribe, and doing Service to the Church. I say, while these
were the unhappy, but too obvious Fruits of our Divisions, and of the bitter
Heats that accompanied them, how was the Reverence for the Sacred Order
lessened and diminished, the Veneration for Religion weakened and lost, the
Shame and Dread of appearing profane and wicked, removed and banished; and
such who took the measures of Christianity from the Practices of those that
were styled Christians, rather than from the immaculate and holy Scriptures,
tempted to think all Religion a Juggle, and Priesthood but an Artifice and
Craft to compass Honor and Wealth. And though nothing but a shortness of
Understanding, and an immoderate Love to their Lusts, could occasion the
drawing such a Conclusion from the foregoing Premises, yet I must needs grant
that there was too just a ground administered unto them of saying, that many did
not believe that themselves, the Faith whereof they recommended to others. But
that which I would more particularly observe is, that it is from among those,
who by the foregoing occasions have been tempted to Debauchery and Irreligion,
that the Romish Emisaries have made the Harvest of Proselytes and Converts to
the Church of Rome. For as they who fear not God will, be easily brought to
imitate Ceasar; and such who are of no Religion will, in subserviency to
Secular Ends, assume the Mask and Profession of any: so Popery is extremely
adapted to the Wishes and Desires of wicked and profane Men, in that it
provides for their living as enormously as they please here, and flatters them
with hopes and assurances of Blessedness hereafter. They who can be ascertained
of going to Heaven upon their confessing their Sins to a Priest, and their
receiving Absolution, the Eucharist and Extreme Unction, need not look after
Repentance toward God, Conversion to Holiness, nor a Life of Faith, Love,
Mortification and Obedience, which the Protestant Religion, upon the Authority
of the Gospel, obliges them unto, in order to the obtaining of Eternal
Happiness. And as the late Apostates to Popery in England, are chiefly such who
were notorious for Looseness, Profaneness and Immorality, and were the Scandal
of our Religion while they professed it; and while in our Church, were not
properly of it: so it is from among Men of this stamp and character, that their
late Majesty's have found Persons assisting and subservient to their Despotical
and Arbitrary Designs. For whosoever takes a Survey of the Court-Faction, and
considers who have been the Advocates for Enchroachments upon our Liberties,
and Abetters of Usurpations over our Rights, they will find them to have been
principally the profligate and debauched among the Nobility and Gentry, the
mercinary, ignorant and scandalous among the Clergy, the Offscouring and such
as are an Ignominy to Human Nature among the Yeomanry and Peasants. And it was
in order to this villainous End, that the Royal Brothers have endeavored so
industriously to debauch the Nation, and have made Sensuality and Profaneness
the Qualifications for Preferment, and the Badges of Loyalty. And if among
those that appear for the Preservation of the Liberties of their Country, there
be any that deserve to be styled Enemies to Religion and Virtue, as I dare
affirm that they owe their Immoralities to Court-Education, Converse and
Example; so I hope that though they have not hitherto been all of them so happy
as to have left their Vices where they learned them, yet that they will not
continue to disparage the good Cause which they have espoused with an unsuitable
Life, nor give their Adversary; reason to say, that while they pretend to seek
the Reformation of the State, they are both the Deriders of Sobriety and
Virtue, without which no Constitution can long subsist, and guilty of such
horrid Oaths, Cursing, Imprecations, Blasphemies and Uncleanness, which
naturally, as well as morally and meritoriously, dispose Nations to Subversion
and Extirpation.

Finally, Being through the bitter Effects which have ensued upon our
Divisions, made apprehensive and jealous one of another, it has from thence
come to pass, that while the Care of the Conformists has been to watch against
the growth of the Dissenters; and the solicitude of the Nonconformists has
been, how to prevent the Rage of the biggotted Churchmen, the Papists, in the
mean time, without being heeded or observed, have both incredibly multiplied,
and made considerable Advances in their designs of ruining us. For whenever
the Court was to take a signal step toward Popery and Arbitrary Power, there
was a clamor raised of some menacing Boldness of the Dissenters. And if the
Nation grew at any time allarmed, by reason of the Favor shown to the Roman
Catholics, and of some visible Progress made toward the King's becoming
Despotical, all was immediately hushed with a shout and cry of the Government
and Church's being in imminent hazard from the Dissenters. Yea, whenever the
Papists and their Royal Patrons stood detected, of having been conspiring
against our Religion and Civil Liberties, all was di^erted and stisled, by
putting the Kingdom upon a false Scent, and by hounding out their Beagles upon
the Nonconformists. So that the Eyes and Minds of Protestants being employed in
reference to what was to be apprehended and feared from one another, the
working of our Popish Enemies either escaped our Observation, or were heeded by
most, only with a superficial and unaffective Glance. And while our Churchmen
stood prepossessed by the Court, with a dread and jealousy of the Dissenters,
all that was said and written of a Conspiracy carried on by the Papists against
our Laws and Religion, was entertained and represented by the prejudiced
Clergy, as an Artifice only of the Dissenters for compassing an Indulgence from
the Parliament, which in case such a Plot had obtained the belief, that a
Matter of so great Danger and Consequence required, would have been easily
granted, being the only rational Expedient for the preservation of the
established Religion and the legal Government. Nor did our Enemies question,
but that having enflamed our Divisions, and raised our Animosities to so great
a height, rather than the one Party would lay aside their Severities, and the
other let fall their Resentments, we would even be contented to lie at their
Mercy, and submit our selves to the Pleasure and Discretion of the Court and
Papists. And there have not wanted some peevish, foolish, and ill Men of both
Parties, who rather than sacrifice their Spleen and Passion, and abandon their
particular Quarrels for the Interest and Safety of the whole, have been
inclined to expose the Protestant Religion and English Liberties, to the
Hazards wherewith they were apparently threatened, and to suffer all
Extremities, merely to have the satisfaction of seeing those whom they
respectively hate, involved with them under the same Miseries. But as this was
such a degree of Madness and Infatuation, as could proceed from nothing but
brutish Rage, and argues no less than a Divine Nemesis; so, I hope, they are
but few that now stand infected with these passionate Sentiments and
Inclinations, and remain thus hardened in their mutual Prejudices. And to those
I have nothing to say, nor the least Advice to administer, but shall leave them
to their own Follies, as Persons to whose Conviction no Discourse, though never
so rational, can be adapted, and whom only Stripes can work upon.

It Is to such therefore as are capable of harkening to Reason, and who are
ready to embrace any Counsel that shall be found adjusted to the Common
Interest, that I am to address what remains to be represented and said in the
following Leaves. For all Parties of Protestants having seen how far our
Enemies have improved our Divisions and Rancours, to the compassing their
wicked and ambitious Designs, and the robbing us of all that good and generous
Men account valuable; they are at last convinced of the necessity we have been
and are reduced unto, of altering the measures of our acting toward one
another, and both of laying aside our Persecutions, and of exchanging our
Wranglings among our selves, into a joint contending for the Faith of the
Gospel, and the Rights of the Nation. For what the Gentleman, so lately in the
Throne, intends and aims at, is not any longer matter of mere Suspicion and
Jealousy, but of demonstrable Evidence and unquestionable Certainty.

His Mask and Vizor of Zeal for the preservation of the Church of England, and
of tender regard for the Laws of the Land, were laid by and put off, and his
Resolutions of governing Arbitrarily, and of introducing Popery, were become
obvious to all Men, whom Reason and Sense have not forsaken and left.

The Papists, whom it was thought much, a while ago, to see connived at in the
exercise of their Worship in private Houses, are allowed now to practice their
Idolatry openly in our chief Towns, and in the Metropolitan City of the Kingdom
to usurp the public Churches and Cathedrals. Those Catholic Gentlemen, whom
heretofore it was matter of surprise to see countenanced with the private
Favor of the Prince, are now advanced to the supreme Commands in the Army, and
the principal Trust in Civil Affairs. The Recusant Lords, whose enlargement out
of the Tower, we could not but look upon as an unpresidented Violation, both of
the Laws of the Land, and of the Rights and Jurisdiction of Parliament, being
committed thither by the Authority of the House of Lords, upon a Charge and
Impeachment of High Treason, by the Commons of England in Parliament assembled,
were now honored to be Members of the Privy Council, and exalted to be chief
Ministers of State. They whom the Statutes of the Realm make subject to the
severest Penalties for Apostasy to Rome, are not only protected from the edg of
the Laws, but maintained in Parochial Incumbencies, and Headships of Colleges.

Our Orthodox Clergy are not only inhibited to preach against Popery, but are
illegally Reprimanded, Silenced, and Suspended, for discharging that Duty which
their Consciences, Offices, Oaths, and the Laws of the Kingdom oblige them
unto. And such whom neither the Ecclesiastical nor Westminster Courts can
arraign and proceed against, we had a new Court of Inquisition erected for the
adjudging and punishing of them. So that it is not the Dissenters who are the
only Persons to be struck at and ruined, but the Conformists are to be treated
after the same manner, and to share in the common Lot whereunto all honest and
sincere Protestants are destined and designed. Even they who were the Darlings
of Whitehall and St. Jameses, and recompensed with Honors and Titles for
betraying the Rights and Privileges of Corporations, persecuting Dissenters,
and heading Addresses, wherein Parliaments were reproached, the Course of
Justice against Popish Offenders was slandered, the illegal and arbitrary
procedures of the Court applauded and justified, and all that were zealous for
our Laws and Liberties stigmatized with the Names of Villains and Traitors, are
now themselves, for but discouraging Popish Assemblies, and attempting to put
the Laws in execution against Priests who had publicly celebrated Mass, not
only checked and rebuked, but punished with Seizure and Imprisonment.

Nor are our Religion and Civil Liberties merely supplanted and undermined by
illegal Tricks, glossed over with the Varnish of judicial Forms, but they are
assaulted and battered in the face of the Sun, without so much as a palliation
to give their procedures a plausible figure. And the King being brought to a
despair of managing the Parliament to his barefaced Purposes of Popery and
Arbitrariness, and of prevailing with them to establish Tyranny and Idolatry by
Law, notwithstanding their having been as industriously packed and chosen to
answer such a Design, as Art, Bribery and Authority could reach; and
notwithstanding their having been obsequious in their first Session to an
excess that has proved unsafe to themselves and the Nation, he became resolved
not to allow them to meet any more, but to set up a-la-mode de France, and to
have his personal Commands, seconded with the Assent of his durarte-beneplacito
Judges, to be acknowledged and obeyed for Laws. So that they who were formerly
seduced into a good Opinion of him, are not only undeceived, but provoked to
warm Resentments, for having had their credulity and easiness of belief so
grossly abused. And as the converting so a vast a number of well-meaning, but
woefully deluded People, who had suffered themselves to de hoodwinked, and
fatally hurried to betray their Religion, Country, and Posterity, to the
Ambition and Popish Bigottry of the Court, was a design becoming the
Compassion, Mercy and Wisdom of God; so the Method's and Means whereby they are
come to be enlightened and proselyted, are a signal vindication of the Sapience
and Righteousness of God in all those tremendous steps of his Providence, by
which our Enemies have been emboldned to detect and discover themselves. For
though their continuing so long to have a good opinion of the present King, and
their abetting him so far in the undermining our Religion, and invading our
Liberties, may seem to have proceeded not so much from their Ignorance, as from
their Obstinacy and Malice; yet God, who penetrates into the Hearts of Men, may
have discovered some degrees of sincerity in their Pretentious and Carriages,
though accompanied with a great deal of folly and unmanliness. Nor are the
Lord's ways like to ours, to give Persons over as unteachable and
irreclaimable, upon their withstanding every measure of Light, and the
resisting even those Means which were sufficient and proper for their
Conviction; but he will try them by now and extraordinary Methods, and see
whether Feeling and doleful Experience may not convert those, upon whom
Arguments and moral Evidence could make no impressions. And there being among
those formerly misled and deluded Protestants, many who retained a Love for
their Country, a Care for their Posterity, and a Zeal for the Gospel and
Reformed Religion, even when their Actions imported the contrary, and seemed to
betray them; the singling and weeding out such from among the Court-Faction and
Party, is a compensation both for the defeatment of all endeavors, for the
prevention of the Evils that have overtaken us, and for the Distresses and
Calamities under which we do at present lie and groan. And if there be joy in
Heaven upon the conversion of a Sinner, with what thankfulness to God, and joy
in themselves, should they who have so many Years wrestled against the
encroachments of Popery and Arbitrariness, and who have deeply suffered in
their Names, Persons and Estates upon that account, welcome and embrace their
once erring and misled, but now enlightened, reclaimed and converted Brethren?
And instead of remembering or upbraiding them with the opposition and rancour
which they expressed against our Persons, Principles, and Ways, let there be no
Language heard from us, but what may declare the joy we have in our selves for
their conversion, and the entire trust and confidence which we put in them.

The first Duty incumbent therefore upon Dissenters toward those of the Church
of England, is to believe, that notwithstanding there have been many of them so
long Advocates and Partisans for the Court, through ignorance of what was aimed
at and intended, they are nevertheless as really concerned as any others, and
as truly zealous for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and for
maintaining the legal Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and when occasion
shall offer, will approve themselves accordingly. It Is a ridiculous, as well as
a mischievous Fancy, for one Party to confine all Religion only to themselves,
or to circumscribe all the ancient English Ardor for the common Rights of the
Nation, to such as are of their particular Fellowship and Persuasion, there
being sincere Christians, and true Englishmen among those of all Judgments and
Societies of Protestants, and among none more than those of the Communion of
the Church of England. It were the height of Wickedness, as well as the most
prodigious Folly, to imagine that the Conformists have abandoned all Fidelity
to God, and cast off all Care of themselves and their Country, upon a mistaken
Judgment of being Loyal and Obedient to the King. The contrary is plain enough;
they knew as well as any, that the giving to Caesar the Things that are Cesar's,
lay them under no Obligation of surrendering unto him the Things that are God's;
nor of sacrificing unto the Will of the Sovereign the Privileges reserved unto
the People by the Fundamental Rules of the Constitution, and by the Statutes of
the Realm. And they understand, as well as others, that the Laws of the Land
are the only Measures of the Prince's Authority, and of the Subjects Fealty;
and where they give him no Right to Command, they lay them under no tie to
Obey. And though here and there a Dissenter has written against Popery with
good Success, yet they have been mostly Conformable Divines, who have triumphed
over it in elaborate Discourses, and who have beaten the Romish Scriblers off
the Stage. Nor can it be thought that they who have so accurately related and
vindicated the History, and asserted and defended the Doctrine of the
Reformation, should either tamely relinquish, or be wanting in all due and
legal Ways to uphold and maintain it. And though some few of the Nonconformists
have, with sufficient strength and applause, used their Pens against
Arbitrariness, in detecting the Designs of the Royal Brothers, yet they who
have generally, and with greatest Honor, appeared for our Laws and Legal
Government, against the Invasions and Usurpations of the Court, have been
Theologues and Gentlemen of the Church of England. Nor in case of further
Attempts for altering the Constitution, and enslaving the Nation, will they
show themselves unworthy the having descended from Ancestors, whose Motto in
the high Places of the Field was, nolumus Leges Angliae mutari. They who have
so often justified the Arms of the United Netherlands against their Rightful
Princes the Kings of Spain, and so unanswerably vindicated their casting off
Obedience to those Monarchs, when they had invaded their Privileges, and
attempted to establish the Inquisition over them, cannot be ignorant what their
own Right and Duty is in behalf of the Protestant Religion and English
Liberties; for the Security whereof, we have not only so many Laws, but the
Coronation Oaths, and Stipulations of our Kings.

And those Gentlemen of the Church of England, who appeared so vigorously in
three Parliaments for excluding the Duke of York, from the Succession to the
Crown, by reason of a Jealousy of what, through being a Papist, he would
attempt against our Religion and Privileges, in case he were suffered to
ascend the Throne; cannot be now to seek what becomes them toward him, having
seen and felt what before they only apprehended and feared. For if the Law that
entaileth the Succession upon the next of Kin, and obliges the Subjects to
admit and receive him, not only may, but ought to be dispensed with, in case
the Heir, through having imbibed Principles which threaten the Safety, and are
inconsistent with the Happiness of the People, has made himself incapable to
inherit; we know, by a short Ratiocination, how far we stand bound to a Prince
on the Throne, who by transgressing against the Laws of the Constitution, has
abdicated himself from the Government, and stands virtually Deposed. For
whosoever shall offer to rule Arbitrarily, does immediately cease to be King de
jure, seeing by the Fundamental, Common, and Statute Laws of the Realm, we know
none for Supreme Magistrate and Governor, but a limited Prince, and one who
stands circumscribed and bounded in his Power and Prerogative.

And should the Dissenters entertain a belief that the Conformists are less
concerned and zealous than themselves for the Protestant Religion, and Laws of
the Kingdom, they would not only sin, and offend against the Rules of Charity,
but against the Measures of Justice, and daily Evidences from Matters of Fact.
For neither they, nor we, owe out Conversion to God, and our practical Holiness
to the Opinions about Discipline, Forms of Worship, and Ceremonies, wherein we
differ, but the Doctrines of Faith and Christian Obedience, wherein we agree.
It Is not their being for a Liturgy, a Surpliss, or a Bishop, that has
heretofore influenced them to subserve the Court in Designs tending to
Absoluteness, but they were seduced unto it, upon Motives whereof they are now
ashamed; and the ridiculousness and folly of which they have at last
discovered. Nor is the multitude of profligate and scandalous Persons, with
which the Church of England is crowded, any just impeachment of the Purity of
her Doctrine in the Vitals and Essentials of Religion, or of the Virtue and
Piety of many of her Members. For as it is her being the only Society
established by Law that attracts those Vermin to her Bosom, so it Is her being
restrained by Law from debarring them, that keeps them there to her reproach,
and to the grief of many of her Ecclesiastics. Neither is it the fault of the
Church of England, that the Agents and Factors for Popery and Arbitrary Power,
have chosen to pass under the Name of her Sons; but it proceeds partly from
their Malice, as hoping by that means to disgrace her with all true
Englishmen, as well as with Dissenters; and partly from their Craft, in order
thereby the better to conceal their Design, and to shroud themselves from the
Censure and Punishment; which had it not been for that Mask, they would have
been exposed unto, and have undergone. And I dare affirm, that besides the
Obligations from Religon, which the Conformists are equally under with
Dissenters, for hindering the introduction of Popery, there are several
Inducements from interest which sway them to prevent its establishment, wherein
the Dissenters are but little concerned. For though Popery would he alike
afflictive to the Consciences of Protestants of all Persuasions, yet they are
Gentlemen, and Ministers of the Church of England, whole Livings, Revenues, and
Estates have been threatened in case it had come to be established.

Nor would the most Loyal and obsequious Levites, provided they resolve to
continue Protestants, be willing that their Personages and Incumbencies, to
which they have no less Right by Law, than the King has to the Excise and
Customs, should be taken from them and bestowed upon Romish Priests, by an Act
of Despotical Power, and of unlimited Prerogative. And for the Gentlemen, as I
think few of them would hold themselves obliged to part with their Purses to
Highway Padders, though such should have a Patent from the King to rob
whomsoever they met upon the Road; so there will not be many inclined to suffer
their Manours and Abbey-Lands, to which they have so good a Title, to be
ravished from them either by Monks or Janissaries, though authorized thereunto
by the Prince's Commission. Even they who had formerly, suffered themselves to
be seduced, to prove, in a manner, Betrayers of the Rights and Religion of
their Country, will now (being undeceived) not only in conjunction with others,
withstand the Court in its prosecution of Popish and Arbitrary Designs; but
through a generous exasperation, for having been deluded and abused, will judge
themselves obliged, in vindication of their Actings before, to appear for the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws of England, with a Zeal equal to that
wherewith they contributed to the undermining and supplanting of them. For they
are not only become more sensible than they were of the Mischiefs of Absolute
Government, so as for the suture to prize and assert the Privileges reserved
unto the People by the Rules of the Constitution, and chalked out for them in
the Laws of the Land; but they have such a fresh view of Popery, both in its
Heresies, Blasphemies, Superstitions, and Idolatries; and in the Treachery,
Sanguinariness, Violence and Cruelty which the Papal Principles mould,
influence, and oblige Men unto; that they not only entertain the greatest
abhorrency and detestation imaginable for it, but seem resolved not to cherish
in their Bosom, a Thing so abominable to God, execrable to good Men, and
destructive to Humane as well as to Christian Societies.

Nor are the Dissenters merely to believe that the Conformists are equally
zealous as themselves for the Reformed Religion, and English Rights, but they
are to consider them as the only great and united Body of Protestants in the
Kingdom, with whom all other Parties compared bear no considerable proportion.
For though the Nonconformists, considered abstractly, make a vast number of
honest and useful People, yet being laid in the Scale with those of the
Episcopal Communion, they are but few, and lie in a little room. And whosoever
will take the pains to balance the one against the other, even where
Dissenters make the greatest Figure, and may justly boast of their Multitude,
they will soon be convinced that the number of the other does far transcend and
exceed them. And if it be so in Cities and Corporations, where the greatest
Bulk of Dissenters are, it is much more so in Country Parishes, where the
latter bear not the proportion of one to a hundred. Nor does the Church of
England more exceed the other Parties in her number, than she does in the
quality of her Members. For whereas they who make up and constitute the
separate Societies, are chiefly Persons of the middle Rank and Condition; the
Church of England does in a manner vouch, and claim all the Persons of Honor,
of the Learned Professions, and such as have valuable Estates, for her
Communicants. And though the other sort are as necessary in the Commonwealth,
and contribute as much to its Strength, Prosperity, and Happiness, yet they
make not that Figure in the Government, nor stand in that Capacity of having
influence upon Public Affairs. For not only the Gentlemen of both the Gowns,
who by reason of their Calling and Learning are best able to defend our
Religion, and vindicate our Laws and Privileges with their Tongues and Pens,
but they whose Estates, Reputation, and Interest, recommendeth them to be
elected Members of the great Senate of the Nation, as well as they, who by
reason of their Honors and Baronages, are Hereditary Legislators, are
generally, if not all, of the Communion of the Church of England. So that they
who conform to the established Worship and Discipline, are to be looked upon
and acknowledged as the great Bulwark of the Protestant Religion in England,
and the Hedge and Fence of our Civil Liberties and Rights.

And though it be true, that this great Breach made upon our Religion and Laws
is fallen out under their hand, while the poor Dissenters had neither accession
to, nor were in a condition to prevent; it yet seeing their own Consciences do
sufficiently load and charge them for it with Shame and Ignominy, it were
neither candid, nor at this Juncture seasonable to upbraid it to them, or
improve it to their Dishonor and Reproach. For as they have tamely looked on
and connived till our Religion and Liberties are so far undermined and
supplanted; so it is they alone who have been in a condition of stemming the
Inundation of Idolatry and Tyranny, with which we were threatened, and of
repairing our Breaches, and reducing the Prerogative to its old Channel, and
making Popery sneak and retreat into its holes and corners again. And should
the Church of England have been overthrown and devoured, what an easy Prey
would the rest have been to the Romish Cormorants! And could the King, under
the Conduct of the Jesuits, and with the assistance of his Myrmidons, have
dissolved the established Worship and Discipline, they of the Separation would
have been in no capacity to support the Reformed Religion, nor able to escape
the common Ruin and Persecution. It Is therefore the Interest, as well as the
Duty of the Dissenters, to help maintain and defend those Walls, within the
skreen and shelter whereof their own Huts and Cottages are built and stand. And
the rather seeing the Conformists are at last, though to their own, Religion's,
and the Nation's Expense, become so far enlightened, as to see a necessity of
growing more amicable toward them, and to enlarge the Terms of their
Communion, grant an Indulgence to all Protestants that differ from them. And as
we ought to admire the Wisdom of God in those Providence, by which Protestants
are taught to lay aside their Animosities, and to let fall their Persecutions
of one another; so it would be a Contradiction both to the Principles and
repeated Protestations of Dissenters, to aim at more than such a Liberty as is
consistent with a National Ecclesiastic Establishment. Yea it were to proclaim
themselves both Villains and Hypocrites, not to allow their Fellow-Protestants
the Exercise of their Judgments, with what further Profits and Emoluments the
Law will grant them, provided themselves may be discharged from all
obnoxiousness to Penalties and Censures upon the account of their Consciences,
and be admitted a free and public Practice of their own respective Modes of
Discipline, and be suffered to worship God in those ways which they think he
has required and enjoined them. And were England immediately to be rendered so
happy as to have a Protestant Prince or Princess (as we are not now quite out
of hopes) ascend the Throne, and to enjoy a Parliament duly chosen, and acting
with freedom, no one Party of the Reformed Religion among us, must ever expect
to be established and supported to the denial of Liberty to others, much less
to be by Law empowered to ruin and destroy them. Should it please Almighty
God, to bring the Princess of Orange to the Crown, though the Church of England
may in that case justly expect the being preserved and upheld as the National
Establishment, yet all other Protestants may very rationally promise themselves
an Indulgence, and that not only from the Mildness and compassionate Sweetness
of her Temper, but from the Influence which the Prince her Husband will have
upon her, who, as he is descended from Ancestors, whose Glory it was to be the
Redeemers of their Country from Papal Persecution and Spanish Tyranny; so his
Education, Generosity, Wisdom, and many Heroic Virtues, dispose him to embrace
all Protestants with an equal Tenderness, and to erect his Interest upon the
being Head and Patron of all that profess the Reformed Religion. Had the late
Duke of Monmouth been victorious against the Forces of the present King, and
enabled to have wrested the Scepter out of his Hand, though all Protestants
might thereupon have expected, and would certainly have enjoyed an equal
freedom, without the liableness of any Party to Penal Laws for matters of
Religion, yet he would have been careful; and I have reason to believe that it
was his purpose to have had the Church of England preserved and maintained, and
that she should have suffered no alteration but what would have been to her
Strength and Glory, through an enlargement of the Terms of her Communion, and
what would have been to the Praise of her Moderation and Charity through her
being persuaded to bear with such as differ from her in little things, and
could not prevail with themselves to partake with her in all Ordinances. Upon
the whole, it is both the prudence and safety of Dissenters, as they would
escape Extirpation themselves, and have Religion conveyed down to Posterity, to
unite their Strength and Endeavors to those of the Church of England for the
upholding her against the assaults of Popish Enemies, who pursue her
Subversion. As matters have been circumstanced and stated in England, there
has not been an Affront or Injury offered or done unto her by the Court, which
did not at the same time reach and wound the Dissenters. It Is not her being for
Episcopacy, Ceremonies, and imposed set-Forms of Worship, the Things about
which she and the Nonconformists differ, that she has been, not long since,
maligned and struck at by the Men in Power, and his Popish Juncto; but it is
for being Protestant, Reformed, and Orthodox, Crimes under the Guilt whereof
Dissenters were equally concerned and involved. Being therefore in opposition
to the common Cause of Religion, that the late Court of Inquisition was erected
over her Ecclesiastics, all Protestants jointly resented the Wrongs which she
sustained, and not only to sympathize with those dignified and lower Clergy
which were called to suffer, but to espouse her Quarrel with the same warmth
that we would our own.

And as we are to look upon those of the Episcopal Communion, to be the great
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion and Reformed Interest in England; so it was
farther incumbent on Dissenters toward them, and a Duty which they owe to God,
the Nation, and themselves, not to be accessory to any thing, through which the
legal Establishment of the Church of England might have been, by any Act of
pretended Regal Prerogative, weakened and supplanted.

I never counsel the Dissenters to renounce their Principles, nor to
participate with the Prelatical Church in all Ordinances, on the Terms to which
they have straightened and narrowed their Communion. For while they remain
unsatisfied of the lawfulness of those Terms and Conditions, they cannot do it
without offending God, and contracting Guilt upon their Souls; nor will they of
the Church of England in Charity, Justice and Honesty, expect it from them. For
whatsoever any Man believes to be Sin, it is so to him, and will by God be
imputed as such, till he be otherwise enlightened and convinced; nor are the
Dissenters to be false and cruel to themselves, in order to be kind and
friendly to them. But that which I would advise them unto is, that after the
maintaining the highest measure of Love to the conformable Congregations as
Churches of Christ, and the esteeming their Members as Christian Protestant
Brethren, notwithstanding the several things wherein they judge them to err, and
to be mistaken, that they would not by any Act and Transaction of theirs,
betray them into a Despotical Power, nor directly, nor indirectly acknowledge
any Authority paramount unto, and superceding the Laws, by which the Church of
England is established in its present Form, Order, and Mode of Jurisdiction,
Discipline and External Worship.

Whatsoever Ease arrived to the Dissenters, through the King's suspending the
Execution of the Penal Laws, without their Address and Application, they might
receive it with Joy and Humility in themselves, and with Thankfulness to God,
nor was there hereby any prejudice offered on their part to the Authority of
the Law, or Offense or Injury given or done to the conformable Clergy. Nor is
it without grief and regret that the Churchmen have been forced to behold the
harassing, spoiling, and imprisonment of the Nonconformists, while in the mean
time the Papists were suffered to assemble to the Celebration of their
Idolatrous Worship without Censure and Control. And had it been in their power
to remedy it, and give Relief to their Protestant Brethren, they wou^d with
delight and readiness have embraced the occasion and opportunity of doing it.
But alas! instead of having an advantage put into their hand, of contributing
to the Relief of the Dissenters, which I dare say, many of them ardently wish
and desire, they were compelled, contrary to their Inclination, as well as
their Interest, to become instrumental in persecuting and oppressing them. Nor
does the late King covet a better and a more legal advantage against the
Conformists, than that they would refuse to pursue Dissenters, and decline
molesting them with Ecclesiastical Censures and civil Punishments. So that
their conditition was to be pitied and bewailed, in that they were hindered from
acting against the Papists, though both enjoined by Law, and influenced
thereunto by Motives of self-Preservation, as well as by ties of Conscience,
while in the mean time they were forced to prosecute their fellow-Protestants,
or else to be suspended and deposed, and put out of their Offices and Employs.
And tho I believe that they would at last have more Peace in themselves, and be
better accepted with God in the great Day of their Account, should they have
refused to disturb and prosecute their Protestant Brethren, and soorn to be any
longer Court-Tools for weakening and undermining the Reformed Cause and
Interest, yet I could not but leave them to act in this as they should be
persuaded in themselves, and as they judged most agreeable to Principles of
Wisdom and Conscience. In the interim, the Dissenters have all the Reason in
the World to believe, that the Proceedings of the Clergy and Members of the
Church of England against them, were not the Results of their Election and
Choice, but the Effects of moral Compulsion and Necessity. Nor will any
Dissenter that is prudent and discreet, blame them for a matter which they
cannot help, but bear his Misfortune and Lot with Patience in himself, and with
Compassion and Charity toward them; and have his Indignation raised only
against that Court, which forced them to be instrumental in their Oppression
and Trouble. The Protestant Dissenters could not be so far void of sense, as to
think that the Person lately in the Throne bore them any Good Will, but his
drift was to scrue himself into a Supremacy and Absoluteness over the Law, and
to get such an Authority confessed to be vested in him, as when he pleased he
might subvert the Established Religion and set up Popery. For the same Power
that he can dispense with the Penal Statutes against the Nonconformists, he may
also dispense with those against the Roman Catholics. And whosoever owneth
that he has a Right to do the first, does in effect own that he has a Right
to do the last. For if he be allowed a Power for the superceding some Laws made
in reference to Matters of Religion, he may challenge the like Power for the
superceding others of the same kind. And then by the same Authority that he can
suspend the Laws against Popery, he may also suspend those for Protestancy. And
by the same Power that he can, in defiance of Law, indulge the Papists the
Exercise of their Religion in Houses, he may establish them in the public
Celebration of their Idolatry in Churches and Cathedrals. Yea, whereas the Laws
that relate to Religion are enacted by no less Authority, than those that are
made for the Preservation of our Civil Rights, should the King be admitted to
have an Arbitrary Power over the one, it is very like that by the Logic of
White Hall he might have challenged the same Absoluteness over the other. Nor
do I doubt but that the eleven Judges, who gratified him with a Despoticalness
over the former, would, when required, grant him the same over the latter, I
know the Dissenters have been under no small Temptations, both by reason of
being hindered from enjoying the Ordinances of the Gospel, and because of many
grievous Calamities which they suffer for their Nonconformity, of making
Applications to the King for some Relief by his suspending the Execution of the
Laws; but they must give me leave to add, that they ought not for the obtaining
of a little Ease, to have betrayed the Kingdom, and sacrifice the legal
Constitution of the Government to the Lust and Pleasure of a Popish Prince,
whom nothing less would serve than being Absolute and Despotical. And had he
once been in the quiet Possession of an Authority to dispense with the Penal
Laws, the Dissenters would not long have enjoyed the benefit of it. Nor could
they have denied him a Power of reviving the Execution of the Law, which is
part of the Trust deposited with him as Supreme Magistrate, who have granted
him a Power of suspending the Laws, which the Rules of the Government precluded
him from. And as he might whenever he pleased, cause the Laws, to which they
were obnoxious, to be executed upon them, so by virtue of having an Authority
acknowledged in him of superceding the Laws, he might deprive them of the
liberty of meeting together to the number of five, a Grace which the Parliament
thought fit to allow them, under all the other Severities to which they were
subjected. Nor needs there any further Evidence, that the Princes challenging
such a Power was an Usurpation, and that the Subjects making any Application,
by which it seemed allowed to him, was a betraying of the ancient legal
Government of the Kingdom; whereas the most obsequious and servile Parliament
to the Court that ever England knew, not only denied this Prerogative to the
late King Charles, but made him renounce it by revoking his Declaration of
Indulgence which he had emitted Anno 1672.

And as it will be to the perpetual Honor of some of the Dissenters to have
chosen rather to suffer the Severities which the Laws make them liable unto,
than by any Act and Transaction of theirs, to undermine and weaken either the
Church or the State; so it will be a means both of endearing them, we hope, not
only to the Prince of Orange, now by a miraculous Providence brought in amongst
us, but to future Parliaments, and of bringing them and the Conformists into an
union of Counsels and Endeavors against Popery and Tyranny for ever; which is
at this season a thing so indispensably necessary for their common
preservation. Especially when though a new and more threatening Alliance and
Confederacy with France, than that in 72, the King had not only engaged to act
by and observe the same Measures toward Protestants in England, which that
Monarch has vouchsafed the World a Pattern and Copy of in his carriage toward
those of the Reformed Religion in France: but had promised to disturb the Peace
and Repose of his Neighbors, and to commence a War, in conjunction with that
Prince, against Foreign Protestants. For as the King's giving Liberty and
Protection to the Algerines to frequent his Havens, and sell the Prizes which
they take from the Dutch, is both a most infamous Action for a Prince,
pretending to be a Christian, and a direct violation of his Alliance with the
States General; so nothing can be more evident, than that he thereby sought to
render them the weaker for him to assault, and that he was resolved (if some
unforeseen and extraordinary Providence had not interposed and prevented) to
declare War against them the next Summer; in order whereunto great Remises of
Money were already ordered him from the French Court. So that the Indulgence
which he pretends to be inclinable to afford the Dissenters, was not an effect
of Kindness and Good Will, but an Artifice whereby to oblige their Assistance
in destroying those Abroad of the same Religion with themselves. Which if he
could once compass, it were easy to foresee what Fate both the Dissenters, and
they of the Communion of the Church of England, were to expect. Who as they
would not then have known whither to retreat for shelter; so they would have
been destitute of Comfort in themselves, and deprived of Pity from others; not
only for having, through their Divisions, made themselves a Prey to the Papists
at Home, but for having been accessory to the Ruin of the Reformed State
Abroad; and which was the Asilum and Sanctuary of all those that were elsewhere
oppressed and persecuted for Religion.

Gloria Deo Optimo, Maximo.
Honos Principi nostri celcissimo, pientissimo.
A Specimen of a Bill, For UNITING PROTESTANTS: BEING A rough Draught of such
Terms, as seem equal For the Conformist to grant, and the Nonconformist to
yield to, for Peace sake; Provided a good while, and Published on purpose only
for the farther, better, and more easy Consideration of the Parliament.
WHereas, there are many Jealousies risen about Popery, which makes it even
necessary to the peace of the Nation, that the Protestant Interest be united
and strengthened by all Good and Lawful Means: And to this end, there being
this one proper Expedient, to wit, The removing the Occasion of Divisions,
which several persons do find to themselves in those late Injunctions, which
yet were intended to the same purpose of Concord in the Nation: Be it Enacted,
-- That an Explanation of these Impositions, and such Allevations, be allowed
to the tenderly Considerate, and peaceably Scrupulous, as follow.

In the Act of Uniformity, By the Declaration of Assent and Consent to all
things, and every Thing contained in, and prescribed by the two Books of
Common Prayer, and of Ordering Priests and Deacons, we understand These
Materials were provided, during the Sitting of that Parliament which passed the
Act of Uniformity, and other the like Rigorous Acts; and are therefore drawn up
in the form of an Explanatory Bill, because it was supposed, they were not like
to Repeal their own Acts, though they might be got to Interpret them. But now
we have a New Parliament, and that after another also Dissolved, we may expect
quicker Work: Yet will the Proposing these Things still to view, have their
use, both for suppressing such as have said, The Nonconformists know not what
they would have; and setting some Measure to our own desires, and the Parliam.
Condescentions about the same.
not, that these Books are in every Minute particular, infallible, or free from
that Defect, which is incident to all Human Composure: But that they are in the
main Contents, to be sincerely approved and used. And we do therefore allow
this Declaration to be sufficient, if it be made to the use of the Book, in the
Ordinary Constant Lords-Day-Service, notwithstanding any Exceptions some may
have against some Things in the By-Offices, and Occasional Service, the
Rubric, and otherwise. And for the Ceremonies which are made, and have been
always, and on all hands, held to be only indifferent Things, we think sit that
they be left to the Consciences and prudence of Ministers, and People, every
where (excepting the Cathedrals) to use them, or forbear them, as they judge it
most meet for their own and others Edification: provided, that if any person
will have his Child Baptized with the Sign of the Cross, or stands upon any
thing else, hitherto required by the Service Book, if the Minister himself
scruple the performance, he shall permit another to do it.

In the same Act, By those Words in the Subscription, that It is not lawful to
take Arms against the King, upon any Pretense whatsoever; we intend no new or
strange Thing, but the Rightful Maintenance only of the King's Authority
against Rebellion, That we have our Reason for these Interpretations, any one
may see that please in those Arguments against the Oxford Oath, and this
Subscription which are offered in a little Book, Entitled, The Peaceable
Design, so that we can by no means submit thereto, without them. There is
moreover this Clause [ And I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church, as it
is by Law Established] we desire may be spared, because upon our Declaration
before of Assent and Consent, (which must be the Bounds of our Sense thereof)
it is needless altogether, and can serve but for a Snare only to Men's
Consciences.
according to the common determination of Learned Writers, in the Case of
Subjection to Princes. By the Words, I abhor the Position of taking Arms by the
Authority of the King, against any Commissionated by Him, we never thought of
Advancing the Arbitrary Commissions of the King above Law; but by those
Commissionated by Him, we understand such as are Legally Commissionated, and in
the Legal pursuit of such Commission. By the Clause which follows, that
requires a Renunciation of all Endeavor of any Alteration of Government in the
Church or State, we never meant to deny any Freeborn Subject his Right, of
Choosing Parliament Men, or Acting in his place for the Common Good any way,
according to Law; but that he shall Renounce all such Endeavor, as is
Seditious, or not warranted by the Constitution of the Nation; and
particularly, such an Endeavor as was Assumed in the late Times, without, and
against the Consent of the King: And for the rest of the Subscription, which is
enjoined but to the Year 1682. Be it Enacted, that it cease presently, and be
no longer enjoined.

And forasmuch as there is an Oath prescribed and required of all
Non-conformists Preachers, that reside in any Corporate-Town, by a certain Act
of the former Parliament, made at Oxford in the 17th Year of His now Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act for restraining Nonconformists, from inhabiting
Corporations: This Oath is of the same Contents with the Subscription before;
and to impose both, is nothing else but the multiplying Wrath, and laying Lead
on the already Laden.
We do further declare, That it shall suffice any Man, for the Enjoyment of his
Freeborn Liberty, of Inhabiting where he thinks best; and serve him also
instead of the forementioned Subscription; to take that Oath in this form of
Words following. I. A. B. do swear, That I hold it unlawful upon any pretense,
to take Arms against the King, His Government or Laws: And that I disclaim that
dangerous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority, against His Person, or any
Legally Commissionated by him, in the Legal pursuit of such Commissions: And
that I will not endeavor any Alteration of Government in the Church or State,
in any way or manner, not warranted by the Constitution of the Kingdom, or any
otherwise than by Act of Parliament. And as soon as any Man has taken the Oath
thus, he shall be discharged of all penalty for his omission before.

We do declare moreover, That whereas it is required also in the Act of
Uniformity, that every Minister who injoys any Living or Ecclesiastical
preferment, shall be Ordained by a Bishop; and there are several persons of
late, who in case of Necessity, for want of Bishops took Presbyterian-Orders:
Our meaning is not in any wise to disgust the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, and make it necessary for such to be Re-ordained to the Office; but that
they receive this Second imposition of Hands to the Exercise of their Office in
the new charge, There is Reordinatio ad Officium, which (we say) is generally
decryed by Divines: Re-ordinatio ad Exercitium particulate, which may be
irrefragably proved from Acts 13.2, 3. with Acts 14.26. amd consequently
allowed to serve this Occasion.
unto which they are, or shall be called; and that the Bishop shall frame his
Words accordingly.

And whereas there is a Subscription also in the Canons, and the Canonical-Oath
of Obedience, imposed on most Ministers by the Bishops, that have given some of
the greatest Occasion to Nonconformity heretofore; which yet never passed into
Law by any Act of Parliament: We do further declare, If the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance be taken and the Articles of the Church subscribed, and the
Declaration before to the Common Prayer, made; we see no need of boiling over
these three Things again for us, in the Canons.
That nothing more of that kind shall be required of Ministers henceforward,
then was made and held necessary by the Act of the thirteenth of Elizabeth.

And in regard there has been great Offense taken by Conscientious Ministers,
at the Bishops, (or their Courts) commanding them to read the Sentence of
Excommunication against some or other of their Parish, Neither shall any
Minister be punishable for the withholding his own Act in delivery of either
Sacrament to any, who in his Conscience he judges unworthy, or incapable of it.
As we think there is no Elder in the New Testament, who is not a Pastor, and
that there is no Lay Pastor; so do we account, that there is no Pastor or
Presbyter, but such as have the power both to Rule and Teach, committed to
them, by Christ: Yet do we, for all that, apprehend it not only Lawful, but
Expedient, for the ordinary Ministers of our Parochial Congregations, (when the
Church is National) to commit part of their charge, (to wit that of Ruling) in
Actu Secundo, to some few among them, who are more Eminently fitted for the
Work, (that is, the (...)) and consequently to the Bishop: So that, if this
Fundamental Right of Governing their own Flocks, be but acknowledged to Reside
in every Presbyter, by granting so much to us as this (and what has preceded)
comes to, we shall be unwilling to fall off from Episcopacy, upon the points of
Ordination and Jurisdiction.
for such faults as they think not at all worthy of so great a Censure: We
declare it but a just Thing, that every Minister be first satisfied in the
Cause, or else be exempted from the Execution of that Charge; and that the
Bishop (or his Court) provide some other person that is satisfied about it, to
do it.

And to the intent, that a free search after Truth may not be discouraged in
the pursuit of Concord, and many other Scruples avoided upon that Account: We
declare, that though an Authentic Interpretation be required, as to the
Substance of all Laws, yet in the Articles of the Church, which are Theses for
Agreement, and not Laws) and the Homilies, a Doctrinal Interpretation shall be
held sufficient for an Assent or Subscription to them. The Authentic
Interpretation of an Article, is the meaning of the Major Part of the
Convocation: A Doctrinal Interpretation, is the meaning of any one of the
Doctors there present, (and consequently of any other Learned Expositor) who
are supposed to have the Liberty to abound in their own Sense, so long as they
can agree in the Words of the Article Established. And this Clause therefore we
put in upon Mature Consideration, in regard more especially to the
Conscientious Latitudinarians, (which is a Name abused) who being some
Arminian, and some Calvinian, cannot otherwise Subscribe the Doctrine of the
same Theses, as the Reader may see more in such a sort of Book as this, called
The Healing Paper, out of which this Bill for Union is Collected.


And because the very Superintendency of Bishops, and that Subjection to them
which is required by the Constitution of the Realm, is, or may be an hinderance
to many sober Ministers, and other Protestants, of coming into the Church, who
are ready to consent to the Doctrine, but not to the Discipline or Government
of it: We do declare, That so long as any person or party do acknowledge the
King's Supremacy, as Head of the Church in this Nation, and obey their
Ordinary, or the Bishops, in Licitis and Honestis, upon the Account of his
Authority (committed to them for the Exercise of that External Regiment Circa
Sacra which is granted by all our Divines, That is, Although there be some that
cannot acknowledge our Diocesan Prelates to be Christ's Officers, distinct from
the Elders in scripture, yet so long as they can live Peaceable lives in
Obedience to them, as Ecclesiastical Magistrates under His Majesty, for the
keeping the several Congregations in their Precincts, to that Gospel Order,
which themselves allow, and for super-vising their Constitutions in Things
indifferent, that nothing be done, but in Subordination to the Peace of the
Kingdom, (which is a Notion wherein the Judicious of every Party may acquiesce,
and expressed by us in these very Words in a Book forenamed) it is sufficient
unto National Church-Vnion.
to the Higher Powers in every Nation,) it is enough for the owning Episcopal
Jurisdiction (so far as they do own it, in the Declaration of Assent and
Consent, or in any other part of Conformity;) and shall serve them to all
intents and purposes in Law, no less than a professed belief and acknowledgment
of the immediate Divine Right of it.

Be it therefore Enacted by this present Parliament, That i^ any Person be
willing to Conform to the present Establishment of the Church of England, and
her Service appointed according to these Explanations, Alleviations,
Declarations, Lenitives, or Cautions, he shall be admitted to any
Ecclesiastical Preferment, and enjoy the use of his Ministry without any
molestation: All Statutes, Canons, or Laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the making this Act of better Signification to the Concerned, and the
prevention of that Scandal which is raised on the Clergy, through the
Covetousness of some, in heaping up to themselves all the Preferments they can
get, when others have scarce Subsistence for their Families, and the Souls of
many people are thereby neglected: Be it farther Enacted, That no Clergyman
for the Three next years ensuing, We propose these Things, we confess, as if we
were in Republica Platonis, but we should be glad to see any Fruits of this
kind, as those who are in Faece Romuli may expect. What is Right and Just, and
ought to be done, is one thing, and to be sought; though what is like to be
done, or will be done, is another.
be suffered to Enjoy any more than one Living or Cure of Souls, and one
Dignity, (or other Ecclesiastical preferment) at one Time; and that every Man
(without Exception) that has more than One of Either, shall immediately give
up the Rest to be distributed among those who shall be brought off from their
Nonconformity, upon the Terms of this Act into the Established Order. Which
that they may also be obtained, and possessed with a clean Conscience, and that
grievous Corruption of Simony may be extripate out of the Land: Be it Enacted
moreover, That every Patron that shall henceforward present his Clerk to any
Living, shall have the Oath called The Simonical Oath, imposed on himself, no
less than on the Incumbent: And if he Refuses to take it, that then the Bishop
shall have immediate Power (taking only the same Oath) of Presentation in his
Room.

And forasmuch, as there are some Ministers of a good Life, that cannot
(according to their Judgments) allow of our Parochial Churches, nor a Book of
Liturgy: But do choose to Worship God, and Jesus Christ, in the way of their
gathered or separate Congregations; and crave the Protection and Clemency of
the King, upon their Allegiance, as other Subjects: Be it finally Enacted, for
the happiness and quiet of the Realm, and the Reduction of these Men by other
means than those which have hitherto proved unsuccessful, That every Christian
Subject throughout the Land that profess the Reformed Religion, and be not
convict of Popery, be pardoned all Faults and Penalties, incurred upon the
account of any Fore-passed Nonconformity; and that they shall not, during
these Seven Years next ensuing, be prosecuted upon any Penal Law for their
Consciences, in the matter of Religion; They carrying themselves innocently and
peaceably, with submission to the Civil, and without disturbance to the
Ecclesiastical Government, now settled in the Nation: All Statutes to the
contrary notwithstanding.

There are two Parts of this Bill; One for Concord or Coalition with all such
as can join in Parochial Communion, in the Clauses before: The other for
Forbearance of those that cannot, in this last Clause. For, what shall we do
with such? We must not knock them on the Head: They must therefore have time.
If the Parliament will begin with the last first, that is, a Suspension of the
Penal Statutes, and then let us treat for a Composition after, we consent with
all ou^ Hearts, and like the Method best. Then Abner called unto Joab, and
said, Shall the Swor^ devour for ever! Know thou not, that it will be
bitterness in the end! How long shall it be, ere thou bid the People return
from following of their Brethren.
Until by a further Act of Parliament, or a Convocation, those that are fit to
be Tolerated, and the Intolerable be-distinguished.
In Short,
A Repeal of our Laws about Conformity unto the 13th of Elizabeth; Or, a New
Act of Uniformity; Or, The Kings Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs
at His first coming in, turned into a Law, were Comprehension.

His latter Declaration to all his Loving Subjects (some few things in both,
yet a little considered) made so, were Indulgence.

A Bill for Comprehension with Indulgence, both together, will do our business.
An Addition, or Clause in it against Pluralities, will do it with
Supererrogation.

Deo Gloria.

