A TREATISE OF Morality.

In Two Parts.

Written in French by F. MALBRANCH, AUTHOR of The Search after Truth. And
Translated into English, By JAMES SHIPTON, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1699.

THE Author's LETTER TO MONSIEUR ****
SIR,
I Have sent you the Treatise of Morality which you desire of me with so much
importunity. It is divided into two Parts. In the First I have examined wherein
Virtue does precisely consist, and laid down the means of acquiring and
preserving it: The Second contains the Duties of it. I know not what Censure
you will pass on this Book, you, Sir, who are so nice a Judge; for I confess to
you that there are many things in it, which I have not explained with that
exactness which you require of Authors. But I desire you to consider two
Things. The First is, that having no clear Idea of the Soul, you understand
what I mean, the greatest part of the Terms of Morality can express only its
Sensations. The Second is, that Books ought to be proportioned, as far as it is
possible, to the Capacity of the generality of Mankind, and that if I had been
too nice and scrupulous in explaining the signification of the Terms which I
make use of, I should have extremely tired the Attentions of my Readers; for
People are soon weary of reading a Book that does not raise agreeable Sensations
in their Mind. Perhaps I may think it necessary hereafter to add some
Illustrations which may clear those Difficulties which the common Phrase of
Speech cannot remove. The success that this Treatise meets with, will determine
my Resolution in that Point.

I am; etc.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Universal Reason is the Wisdom of God himself. All Men have some
Communication with God. True and False, Just and Unjust is the same in respect
of all intelligent Beings, and of God himself. What Truth and Order is, and
what we must do to avoid Sin and Error. God is essentially Just; he loves the
Creatures according as they are amiable, or as they resemble him. We must be
Perfect to be Happy; Virtue, or the Perfection of Man consists in a Submission
to the immutable Order, and not in following the Order of Nature. The Error of
some of the Heathen Philosophers in this Matter, grounded upon their Ignorance
of the simplicity and immutability of the Divine Conduct. Page 1. CHAP. II.
There is no other Virtue but the Love of Order and Reason. Without this Love
all Virtues are false. We must not confound Duties with Virtue: We may
discharge our Duties without Virtue. It Is for want of consulting Reason that
Men approve and follow damnable Customs. Faith serves or conducts to Reason:
For Reason is the supreme Law of all intelligent Beings. p. 12. CHAP. III. The
Love of Order does not differ from Charity. Two sorts of Love, one of Union,
and the other of Benevolence. The former is due only to Power, or to God alone.
The latter ought to be proportioned to perso^^^ Merit, as our Duties to
relative. Self-love enlightened is not contrary to the love of Union. The love
of Order is common to all Men. The Species of the love of Order, natural and
free, actual and habitual. Only that which is free, habitual and ruling renders
us just in the sight of God. So that Virtue consists in nothing but a free,
habitual and ruling Love of the immutable Order. p. 21. CHAP. IV. Two
fundamental Truths belonging to this Treatise. I. Acts produce Habits, and
Habits Acts. II. The Soul does not always produce the Acts of its ruling Habit.
The Sinner may avoid committing any particular Sin, and the just Man may lose
his Charity, because there is no Sinner without some love for Order, and no
just Man without Self-love. We cannot be justified in the sight of God by the
strength of Free Will. The means in general of acquiring and preserving
Charity. The method used in the explication of these means. p. 23. CHAP. V. Of
the Strength of the Mind. Our Desires are the occasional Causes of our
Knowledge. The Contemplation of abstract Ideas is difficult. The Strength of
the Mind consists in an acquired Habit of enduring the Labor of Attention. The
way to acquire it is to Silence our Senses, Imagination and Passions, to
Regulate our Studies, and to Meditate only on clear Ideas. p. 40. CHAP. VI. Of
the Liberty of the Mind. We should suspend our Assent as much as we can, which
is the great Rule. By the Liberty of the Mind we may avoid Error and Sin, as by
the Strength of the Mind we free our selves from Ignorance. The Liberty of the
Mind, as well as the Strength of it, is a Habit which is confirmed by use. Some
instances of its Usefulness in Physics, Morality, and Civil Life. p. 51. CHAP.
VII. Of Obedience to Order. The means of acquiring a firm and ruling
Disposition to obey it. It cannot be done without Grace. How far the right use
of our Strength and Liberty contributes toward it, by the Light it produces in
us, by the contemptible Opinion it gives us of our Passions, and by the Purity
which it preserves and establishes in our Imagination. p. 61. CHAP. VIII. The
Means which Religion furnishes us with to gain and preserve the Love of Order.
Jesus Christ is the occasional Cause of Grace; we must call upon him with
confidence. When we come to the Sacraments, the actual Love of Order is changed
into habitual, in consequence of the permanent desires of Christ: The Proof of
this Truth being essential to the Conversion of Sinners. The fear of Hell is as
good a Motive as the desire of eternal Happiness. We must not confound the
Motive with the End. The desire of being Happy, or Self-love, should make us
conformable to Order, or obedient to the Law of God. p. 71. CHAP. IX. The
Church in its Prayers Addresses its self to the Father by the Son, and why. We
should Pray to the Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints, but not as occasional
causes of inward Grace. The Angels, and even the Devils have power over Bodies,
as occasional causes. By this means the Devils may tempt us, and the Angels
promote the efficacy of Grace. p. 83. CHAP. X. Of the Occasional Causes of the
Sensations and Motions of the Soul which resist the Efficacy of Grace, either
of Light or Sense. The Union of the Soul with God is immediate, not that of the
Soul with the Body. An Explication of some general Laws of the Union of the
Soul and Body, necessary for the right understanding the rest of this Treatise.
p. 91. CHAP. XI. What kind of death we must die to see God, to be united to
Reason, and to deliver our selves from Concupiscence. It is the Grace of Faith
that gives us this happy death. Christians are dead to Sin by Baptism, and
alive in Christ by his Resurrection. Of the Mortification of the Senses, and
the use we should make of it. We should unite our selves to corporeal Objects,
and separate our selves from them without loving or fearing them. But the
surest way is to break off all Correspondence with them, as far as is possible.
p. 99. CHAP. XII. Of the Imagination. This Term is obscure and confused. What
it is in general. Several sorts of Imagination. Its effects are dangerous. Of
that which the World calls Wit. That quality is very opposite to the Grace of
Christ. It is fatal to those who possess it, and to those who esteem and admire
it in others, though they have it not themselves. p. 109. CHAP. XIII. Of the
Passions. What they are. Their dangerous effects. We must moderate them. The
conclusion of the first Part. p. 119.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART. Of Duties.
CHAP. I. GOod Men often do wicked Actions. The Love of Order must be
enlightened to make it regular. Three Conditions required to make an Action
perfectly Virtuous. We should study the Duties of Man in general, and take some
time every day to examine the Order and Circumstances of them in particular.
Page 1. CHAP. II. Our Duties toward God must be referred to his Attributes, to
his Power, Wisdom and Love. God alone is the true Cause of all Things. The
Duties we owe to Power, which consist chiefly in clear Judgments, and in
Motions governed by those Judgments. p. 4. CHAP. III. Of the Duties we owe to
the Wisdom of God. It is that alone which enlightens the Mind in consequence of
certain natural Laws, whose efficacy is determined by our Desires as occasional
Causes. The Judgments and Duties of the Mind in relation to the universal
Reason. p. 14. CHAP. IV. Of the Duties which we owe to the divine Love. Our
Will is nothing but a continual impression of the Love which God bears to
himself, the only true Good. We cannot love Evil: But we may take that for
Evil, which is neither Good nor Evil. So we cannot hate Good: But the true Good
is really the Evil of wicked Men, or the true cause of their Misery. That God
may be Good in respect of us, our Love must be like his, or always subject to
the divine Law, Motions or Duties. p. 21. CHAP. V. The three Divine Persons
imprint each their proper Character on our Souls; and our Duties give equal
Honor to them all three. Though our Duties consist only in inward Judgments and
Motions, yet we must show them by outward Signs, in regard of our Society with
other Men. p. 30. CHAP. VI. Of the Duties of Society in general. Two sorts of
Society. Every thing should be referred to the eternal Society. Different kinds
of Love and Honor. The general heads of our Duties toward Men. They must be
External and Relative. The danger of paying inward Duties to Men. The
Conversation of the World very dangerous. p. 36. CHAP. VII. The Duties of
Esteem are due to all Mankind, to the lowest of Men, to the greatest Sinners,
to our Enemies and Persecutors: To Merits, as well as to Natures. It is
difficult to regulate exactly these Duties and those of Benevolence, by reason
of the difference of personal and relative Merits, and their various
Combinations. A general Rule, and the most certain one that can be given in
this matter. p. 42. CHAP. VIII. Of the Duties of Benevolence and Respect. We
should procure all Men the true Goods, and not relative Goods. Who it is that
fulfills the Duties of Benevolence. The unreasonable Complaints of worldly Men.
The Duties of Respect should be proportioned to the greatness of participated
Power. p. 52. CHAP. IX. Of the Duties due to Sovereigns. Two Sovereign Powers.
The difference between them. Their natural Rights. Rights of Concession. Of the
Obedience of Subjects. p. 61. CHAP. X. Of the Domestic Duties of Husband and
Wife. The Ground of these Duties. Of the Duties of Parents toward their
Children, with relation to the Eternal and Civil Societies. Of their
instruction in the Sciencies and Morality. Parents should give their Children a
good Example. They should govern them by Reason. They have no right to use them
ill. Children owe Obedience to their Parents in all Things. p. 69. CHAP. XI.
The original of the difference of Conditions. Reason alone ought to govern, but
Force is now necessary. The lawful use of Force is to make Men submit to
Reason, according to the Primitive Law. The Rights of Superiors. The Duties of
Superiors and Inferiors. p. 81. CHAP. XII. Of our Duties toward our Equals.
We should give them the place they desire in our Mind and Heart. We should
express our inward Dispositions in favor of them by our outward Air and
Behavior, and by real Services. We should yield them the Superiority and
Pre-eminence. The hottest and most passionate Friendships are not the most
solid and durable. We should not make more intimate Friends than we can keep.
p. 90. CHAP. XIII. A Continuatian of the same Subject. If we would be beloved,
we must make our selves amiable. The Qualities which make a Man amiable. Rules
for Conversation. Of different Airs. Of Christian Friendships. p. 100. CHAP.
XIV. Of the Duties which every Man owes to himself; which consist in general in
laboring for his own Perfection and Happiness. p. 110.
A TREATISE OF Morality.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Universal Reason is the Wisdom of God himself. All Men have some
Communication with God. True and False, Just and Unjust is the same in respect
of all intelligent Beings, and of God himself. What Truth and Order is, and
what we must do to avoid Error and Sin. God is essentially Just; he loves the
Creatures according as they are amiable, or as they resemble him. We must be
Perfect to be Happy; Virtue, or the Perfection of Man consists in a Submission
to the immutable Order, and not in following the Order of Nature. The Error of
some of the Heathen Philosophers in this Matter, grounded upon their Ignorance
of the simplicity and immutability of the Divine Conduct.
I. THE Reason of Man is the Word, See the first and second Christian
Meditation, or the Illustration on the Nature of Ideas, Search after Truth,
Tom. 3.
or the Wisdom of God himself; for every Creature is a particular Being; but
the Reason of Man is Universal.

II. If my own particular Mind were my Reason and my Light, my Mind would also
be the Reason of all intelligent Beings; for I am certain, that my Reason
enlightens all intelligent Beings. No one can feel my Pain but my self, but
every one may see the Truth which I contemplate; so that the Pain which I feel
is a Modification of my own proper Substance, but Truth is a Possession common
to all Spiritual Beings.

III. Thus, by the means of Reason, I have, or may have some Society with God,
and all other intelligent Beings; because they all possess something in common
with me, to wit, Reason.

IV. This Spiritual Society consists in a participation of the same
intellectual Substance of the Word, from which all Spiritual Beings may receive
their Nourishment. In contemplating this Divine Substance, I am able to see
some part of what God thinks; for God sees all Truths, and there are some which
I can see. I can also discover something of the Will of God; for God wills
nothing but according to a certain Order, and this Order is not altogether
unknown to me. It is certain that God loves Things according as they are worthy
of Love; and I can discover that there are some Things more Perfect, more
Valuable, and consequently more worthy of Love than others.

V. It is true, indeed, that I cannot by contemplating the Word or consulting
Reason, be assured whether God does actually produce any thing out of his own
Being or no. For none of the Creatures proceed naturally from the Word; nor is
the World a necessary emanation of the Deity; God is fully sufficient for
himself; and the Idea of a Being infinitely perfect, may be conceived to
subsist alone. The Creatures then suppose in God free and arbitrary Decrees,
which give them their Being. So that the Word, as such, not containing in it
the Existence of the Creatures, we cannot by the Contemplation of it be assured
of the Action of God: But supposing that God does act, I am able to know
something of the manner in which he acts, and may be certain that he does not
act in such or such a manner; for that which regulates his manner of Acting,
the Law which he inviolably observes, is the Word, the Eternal Wisdom, the
Universal Reason, which makes me Rational, and which I can in part contemplate
according to my own desires.

VI. If we suppose Man to be a Rational Creature, we cannot certainly deny him
the Knowledge of something that God thinks, and of the manner in which he acts.
For by contemplating the substance of the Word, which alone makes me and all
other intelligent Beings Rational, I can clearly discover the Relations or
Proportions of Greatness that are between the intellectual Ideas comprehended
in it; and these Relations are the same eternal Truths which God himself sees.
For God sees as well as I, that twice two is four, and that Triangles which
have the same Base, and are between the same Parallels, are equal. I can also
discover, at least confusedly, the Relations of Perfection which are between
the same Ideas; and these Relations are that immutable Order which God consults
when he acts, and which ought also to regulate the Esteem and Love of all
intelligent Beings.

VII. From hence it is evident, that there are such things as True and False,
Right and Wrong, and that too in respect of all intelligent Beings; that
whatsoever is true in respect of Man, is true also in respect of Angels, and of
God himself; that what is Injustice or Disorder with relation to Man, is so
also with relation to God. For all Spiritual Beings contemplating the same
intellectual Substance, necessarily discover in it the same Relations of
Greatness, or the same speculative Truths. They discover also the same
practical Truths, the same Laws, and the same Order, when they see the
Relations of Perfection that are between those intellectual Beings comprehended
in the Substance of the Word, which alone is the immediate Object of all our
Knowledge.

VIII. I say, when they see these Relations of Perfection or Greatness, and not
when they judge of them; for only Truth or the real Relations of Things are
visible, and we ought to judge of nothing but what we see. When we judge before
we see, or of more things than we see, we are deceived in our Judgment, or at
least we judge ill, though we may happen by chance not to be deceived: For when
we judge of things by chance, as well as when we judge by Passion or Interest,
we judge ill, because we do not judge by Evidence and Light. This is Judging by
our selves and not by Reason, or according to the Laws of Universal Reason:
That Reason, I say, which alone is superior to Spirits, and has a Right to
judge of those Judgments which are pronounced by them.

IX. The Mind of Man being finite, cannot see all the Relations that the
Objects of its Knowledge bear to one another; so that it may be deceived when
it judges of Relations which it does not see. But if it judged of nothing but
just what it saw, which without doubt it may do; certainly, though it be a finite
Spirit, though it be Ignorant, and in its own Nature subject to Error, it would
never be deceived; for then the Judgments framed by it would not proceed so
much from it self, as from the Universal Reason pronouncing the same Judgments
in it.

X. But God is infallible in his own Nature; he cannot be subject to Error or
Sin, for he is his own Light, and his own Law; Reason is consubstantial with
him, he understands it perfectly, and loves it invincibly. Being infinite, he
discovers all the Relations that are comprehended in the intellectual Substance
of the Word; and therefore cannot judge of what he does not see. And as he
loves himself invincibly, so he cannot but esteem and love other things
according as they are valuable and according as they are amiable.

XI. It is probable that Angels and Saints, though in their own Nature subject to
Error, are never deceived; because the least attention of Mind represents to
them clearly the Ideas of things and their several Relations; they judge of
nothing but what they see; they follow the Light, and do not go before it; they
obey the Law, and do not set themselves above it: In them Reason alone judges
definitively and without appeal. But Man, such as I find my self to be, is
often deceived, because the labor of Attention is extremely tiresom to him;
and though his Application be strong and painful, he has commonly but a confused
fight of Objects. Thus being weary and not much enlightened, he reposes himself
on probability, and contents himself for some time with the enjoyment of a
false Good; but being soon out of relish with it, he begins his search anew,
till being tired or seduced again he takes some rest, till he be in a condition
to begin afresh, though weakly, his difficult enquiries.

XII. Since speculative and practical Truths are nothing else but relations of
Greatness or Perfection, it is evident that Falsehood is not any thing real.
That twice two is four, or that twice two is not five is true, because there is
a Relation of Equality between twice two and four, and a relation of Inequality
between twice two and five. And he that sees these relations, sees Truths,
because the relations are real. That twice two is five, or that twice two is
not four is false, because there is no relation of equality between twice two
and five, nor of inequality between twice two and four. And he that sees, or
rather believes he sees these relations, sees Falsities. He sees relations that
are not. He thinks he sees, but indeed he does not see; for Truth is
intelligible, but Falsehood in it self is absolutely incomprehensible.

XIII. In like manner, that a Beast is more valuable than a Stone, and less
valuable than a Man is true; because a Beast bears a greater proportion or
relation of perfection to a Stone, than a Stone does to a Beast; and a Beast
has a less proportion of perfection compared to a Man, than a Man has
compared to a Beast. And he that sees these Relations, sees such Truths as
ought to regulate his esteem, and consequently that sort of Love that is
determined by esteem: But he that esteems his Horse more than his Coachman, or
thinks that a Stone is in it self more valuable than a Fly, or than the very
least of organized Bodies, does not see that which perhaps he thinks he does;
it is not universal Reason, but his own particular Reason, that makes him judge
after that manner: It is not the love of Order, but self-love, which inclines
him to love as he does. That which he thinks he sees, is neither visible nor
intelligible; it is a false and imaginary Relation: And he that governs his
esteem or love by this or the like Relation, must necessarily fall into Error
and Irregularity.

XIV. Since Truth and Order are Relations of greatness and perfection, real
immutable and necessary relations, relations comprehended in the substance of
the Divine Word; he that sees these relations, sees that which God sees: He
that regulates his Love according to these Relations, observes a Law which God
invincibly Loves. So that there is a perfect conformity of Mind and Will
between God and him. In a word, seeing he knows that which God knows, and loves
that which God loves, he is like God, as far as he is capable of being so. So
likewise since God invincibly loves himself, he cannot but esteem and love his
own Image. And as he loves things in proportion to their being amiable, he
cannot but prefer it before all those Beings which either by their nature or
corruption are far from resembling him.

XV. See the 3. Discourse of the Treatise of Nature and Grace.
Man is a free Agent, and I suppose him to have all necessary assistances: In
respect of Truth, he is capable of searching after it notwithstanding the
difficulty he finds in Meditation; and in respect of Order, he is able to
follow it, in spite of all the efforts of Concupiscence. He can sacrifice his
Ease to Truth, and his Pleasures to Order. On the other side he can prefer his
actual and present Happiness before his Duty, and fall into error and disorder.
In a word, he can deserve well or ill by doing good or evil. Now God is just;
he loves his Creatures as they are worthy of Love, or as they resemble him. His
Will therefore is, that every good action should be rewarded, and every evil
one punished; that he who has made a good use of his Liberty, and by that
means has rendered himself in part perfect and like God, should be in part
happy as he is, and the contrary.

XVI. See the Remarks upon the seeming efficacy of second Causes, or the 5 and
6 Christian Meditations.
It is God alone that acts upon his Creatures; at least he has a power of
acting on them, and can do what he pleases with them. He has power therefore
to make spiritual Beings happy or miserable; happy by the enjoyment of
Pleasure, and miserable by the suffering of Pain. He can exalt the just and
perfect above other Men; he can communicate his Power to them for the
accomplishment of their desires, and make them occasional causes for himself to
act by in a Thousand manners. He can pull down the wicked, and make them
subject to the action of the lowest Beings: This Experience sufficiently shows,
for we all, as we are Sinners, depend upon the action of sensible objects.

XVII. He therefore that labors for his Perfection, and endeavors to make
himself like God, labors for his Happiness and Advancement. If he does that
which in some sort depends upon himself, that is to say, if he deserves well by
making himself perfect, God will do that which in no sort depends upon him, in
making him happy. For since God loves all Beings proportionably as they are
amiable, and the most perfect Beings are the most amiable; the most perfect
Beings shall be the most powerful, the most happy and the most contented. He
that incessantly consults his Reason, and loves Order, having a share in the
Perfection of God, shall have also a share in his Happiness, Glory and
Greatness.

XVIII. Man is capable of three Things; Knowing, Loving, and sensibly
Perceiving; of knowing the true Good, of loving and enjoying it. The knowledge
and love of Good are in a great measure in his own power, but the enjoyment of
it does not at all depend upon himself. Nevertheless, seeing God is just, he
that knows and loves him, shall also enjoy him. God being just, must of
necessity give the pleasure of enjoyment, and by it Happiness, to him that by a
painful application seeks the knowledge of the Truth, and by a right use of his
Liberty and the strength of his Resolution, conforms himself to the Law of God,
the immutable Order, notwithstanding all the efforts of Concupiscence, enduring
Pain, despising Pleasure, and giving that Honor to his Reason, as to believe
it upon its Word, and to comfort himself with its Promises. It is a strange
thing! Men know very well that the enjoyment of Pleasure and avoiding of Pain
do not depend immediately on their Desires: They find on the contrary that it
is in their own power to have good Thoughts, and to love good Things, that the
light of Truth diffuses it self in them as soon as they desire it, and that the
loving and following of Order depends on themselves. This Age is so ill-natured
or so nice, that there are somethings which it is not sufficient for a Man not
to say, but he must also assure the World and, that more than once that he does
not say them. And therefore my Readers must pardon me if I seem to distrust
their equity.
(I still suppose those necessary assistances which are never wanting to those
who have Faith, but through their own negligence.) And yet they seek after
nothing but Pleasure, and neglect the foundation of their eternal Happiness,
that knowledge and love which resemble the knowledge and love of God, the
knowledge of Truth and the love of Order; for as I said before, he that knows
Truth and loves Order, knows as God knows and loves as he loves.

XIX. This then is our first and greatest Duty, that for which God has created
us, the love of which is the Mother of all Virtue, the universal, the
fundamental Virtue; the Virtue which makes us just and perfect, and which will
one Day make us happy. We are rational Creatures; our Virtue and Perfection is
to love Reason, or rather to love Order. For the knowledge of speculative
Truths, or relations of Greatness does not regulate our Duties. It is
principally the knowledge and love of the relations of Perfection, or practical
Truths wherein consist our Perfection. Let us apply our selves then to know, to
love and follow Order. Let us labor for our Perfection; as for our Happiness,
let us leave that to the disposal of God, on whom it wholly depends. God is
just, and necessarily rewards Virtue: Let us not doubt then but that we shall
infallibly receive all the Happiness that we have deserved.

XX. The Obedience which we pay to Order and submission to the Law of God, is
Virtue in all Senses. Submission to the divine Decrees, or to the power of God
is rather Necessity than Virtue. A Man may follow Nature, and yet walk
irregularly, for Nature it self is irregular. On the other side, he may resist
the action of God, without opposing his Orders; for oftentimes the particular
action of God is so determined by second or occasional Causes, that it is not
conformable to Order. It is true indeed that God wills nothing but according to
Order; but he often acts contrary to it: For Order it self requiring, See the 7
and 8 Christian Medit.
that God as the general cause, should act in a constant and uniform manner
according to certain general Laws which he has established, the effects of
that cause are many times contrary to Order. He forms Monsters, and is
subservient as it were to the Wickedness of Men in this World, by reason of the
simplicity of those ways by which he executes his Designs. So that he who
should think to obey God, in submitting to his Power, and in following and
observing the course of Nature, would offend against Order, and fall into
Disobedience every Moment.

XXI. If all the motions of Bodies were caused by particular acts of the Will
of God, it would be a sin to avoid the Ruins of a falling House by flight; for
we cannot without injustice refuse to render back to God that Life which he
has given us, when he requires it again. At this rate it would be an Affront
to the Wisdom of God, to alter the course of Rivers, and to turn them to Places
that want Water; we should follow the Order of Nature and be quiet. But since
God acts in consequence of certain general Laws, we correct his Work, without
injuring his Wisdom: We resist his action, without opposing his Will; because
he does not will positively and directly every thing that he does. For example,
he does not directly will unjust Actions, though he alone gives motion to those
that commit them: And though it be only he who sends Rain, yet every Man has a
liberty to shelter himself when it Rains. For God does not send Rain but by a
necessary consequence of general Laws; Laws which he has established, not that
such or such a Man should be wet through, but for greater ends, and more
agreeable to his Wisdom and Goodness. If the Rain fall upon Men, upon the Sea,
or upon the Sand, it is because he is not obliged to alter the uniformity of
his Conduct, for the uselessness or inconvenience of the consequences of it.

XXII. The case is not the same between God and Men, between the general cause
and particulationes. When we oppose the action of Men, we offend them; for
since they act only by particular motions of the Will, we cannot resist their
action without opposing their Designs. But when we resist the action of God, we
do not at all offend him, nay we often promote his Designs: For since God
constantly follows those general Laws which he has prescribed to himself, the
combination of those effects which are the necessary consequences of them,
cannot always be conformable to Order, nor proper for the execution of his
Work. And therefore it is lawful for Men to divert these natural effects, not
only when they may be the occasion of their Death, but also when they are
inconvenient or disagreeable. Our Duty then consists in submitting our selves
to the Law of God, and following Order: For to submit to his absolute Power is
necessity. This Order we may know by our union with the Word; so that the
immutable Order may be our Law and our Guide. But the Divine Decrees are
absolutely unknown to us: And therefore let us not make them our Rule. Let us
leave that chimerical Virtue of following God or Nature, to the Sages of Greece
and the Stoics. But let us consult Reason, let us love and follow Order in all
things; for then we truly follow God, when we submit to a Law which he
invincibly loves.

XXIII. But though the Order of Nature be not precisely our Law, and a submission
to that Order be by no means a Virtue, we must observe nevertheless that we
ought oftentimes to have a regard to it: Yet still this is because the
immutable Order so requires, and not because the Order of Nature is an effect
of the Power of God. A Man that suffers Persecution, or rather one that is
tormented with the Gout, is obliged to bear it with Patience and Humility,
because being a sinner, Order requires that he should suffer, besides other
Reasons which need not here be produced. But if Man were not subject to Sin,
and the immutable Order did not require that he should suffer to deserve his
Reward, certainly he might, nay and ought to seek his ease, and avoid all sorts
of inconveniences, though he were persecuted, if that were possible, by the
inclemency of the Seasons, and by the Miseries which Sin has brought into the
World. And a Man, though he be a sinner, may shelter himself from the Rain and
the Wind, and avoid the action of an avenging God; because Order requires that
he should preserve his Strength and Health, and especially the liberty of his
Mind, to think upon his Duty, and search after Truth: And because Rain and Wind
being consequences of the general laws of the Order of Nature, it does not
plainly appear that it is the positive Will of God that he should suffer that
particular inconvenience. For it would be a heinous Crime in us to avoid the
Rain, if God should make it Rain on purpose to wet and punish us: As it was in
our first Parent to eat of a Fruit, because of the express Prohibition, and his
formal Disobedience. But if Virtue consisted precisely in living in that
condition wherein we are placed in consequence of the Order of Nature, he that
is born in the midst of pleasure and abundance, would be virtuous without pain;
and Nature having been happily favorable to him, he would follow it with
pleasure. But Virtue must be painful at present, that it may be generous and
meritorious. A Man ought to sacrifice himself for the possession of God:
Pleasure is the Reward of Merit, and therefore cannot be the foundation of it,
as I shall show hereafter. In a Word, Truth it self informs us of one that was
commanded to sell his Goods, and distribute them to the Poor, if he would be
perfect; which was to change his state and condition. Perfection then or Virtue
does not consist in following the Order of Nature, but in submitting wholly to
the immutable and necessary Order, the inviolable Law of all intelligent Beings.

CHAP. II. There is no other Virtue but the Love of Order and Reason. Without
this Love all Virtues are false. We must not confound Duties with Virtues We
may discharge our Duties without Virtue. It Is for want of consulting Reason
that Men approve and follow damnable Customs. Faith serves or conducts to
Reason: For Reason is the supreme Law of all intelligent Beings.
I. THE Love of Order is not only the chief of all moral Virtues, but the only
Virtue: It is the Mother Virtue, the fundamental, universal Virtue; the Virtue
which alone makes the Habits or Dispositions of our Minds virtuous. He that
bestows his Goods on the Poor out of Vanity or natural Compassion, is not
liberal; because it is not Reason that guides him, nor Order that governs him,
it is nothing but Pride or Mechanism. Officers that voluntarily expose
themselves to Dangers are not brave, if it is Ambition that animates them; nor
Soldiers, if it is only an abundance of Spirits, and the Fermentation of the
Blood. This imaginary noble Ardour, is nothing but Vanity or Clock-work: A
little Wine oftentimes is sufficient to produce a great deal of it. He that
bears the Injuries that are offered him, many times is neither moderate not
patient: It Is his Slothfulness that makes him immovable, or his ridiculous and
stoical Bravery that bears him up, and in imagination sets him above his
Enemies: It may be nothing but the disposition of the Machine, want of Spirits,
coldness of Blood, Melancholy, and perhaps above all some contagious Distemper
of a strong Imagination. The same may be said of all the other Virtues. If the
love of Order be not the foundation of them, they are false and vain, and
altogether unbecoming a reasonable Nature, which bears the Image of God
himself, and has a communication with him: They derive their Original from the
Body only; they are not formed by the Holy Ghost, and whoever makes them the
Object of his Desires, and the Foundation of his Glory, has a base and abject
Mind, a mean Spirit, and a corrupted Heart. But whatever a rebellious
Imagination may think, it is not mean nor servile to submit to the Law of God
himself; nothing is more just than to be conformable to Order; nothing is more
great and noble than to obey God; nothing is more brave and generous than to
follow the Party of Reason with an unshaken Constancy and inviolable Fidelity,
not only when one may follow it with Honor, but then more especially when the
circumstances of Times and Places are such that one cannot do it without the
greatest Shame and Disgrace: For he that passes for a Fool in following Reason,
loves Reasom more than himself: But he that follows Order only when it shines
and sparkles in the Eyes of the World, seeks only Glory; and though he may
appear very Glorious in the Eyes of Men, he is an Abomination in the Sight of
God.

II. I know not whether I may be mistaken or no, but I believe there are
abundance of People that do not rightly know what true Virtue is; and even
those that have writ of Morality, do not always speak very clearly and exactly
of it. It is certain that all those great Names which they give to Virtues and
Vices, produce rather confused Sensations in the Mind than clear Ideas: But
because these Sensations affect the Soul, and abstracted Ideas, though clear in
themselves, do not diffuse their Light but in attentive Minds. Men most
commonly rest satisfied with these words, which please the Senses, but leave
the Mind in the dark. They fancy that a Discourse the more briskly it strikes
upon the Imagination, the more Solid it is; and look upon those exact
Reasonings, which disappear when Attention is wanting, as Specter and
Illusions; like Children, who judging of Objects by the Impression they make on
their Senses, imagine that there is more Matter in Ice than in Water; in Gold,
and heavy and hard Metals, than in the Air which surrounds them almost without
being felt.

III. Besides, whatever is familiar to us does not surprise us, we never stand
to examine it; we think we conceive very well what we have said our selves, or
heard others say a great many times, though we have never examined it: But the
most solid and evident Truths always create Distrust in us, when they are new.
Thus a Word of an obscure and confused Signification, seems clear and obvious,
how equivocal soever it be, if common use has made it current; but a Term
which contains nothing equivocal in it, seems obscure and dangerous, if we have
never heard it used by those Persons whom we love and esteem. This is the cause
that the Terms of Morality are the most obscure and confused, and especially
those which we look upon as the most clear, because they are the most common.
Every one, for Example, imagines he understands very well the Signification of
these Terms; Loving, Fearing, Honoring, Charity, Humility, Generosity, Pride,
Envy, Self-love; and if a Man should join clear Ideas to these Terms, and to
all the Names which are given to Virtues and Vices, besides that, this supposes
more Knowledge than is generally believed, he would certainly take the most
confused and perplexed way to treat of Morality: For it will appear in the
sequel of this Discourse, that to define these Terms rightly, he ought first
clearly to comprehend the Principles of that Science, and to be well versed in
the Knowledge of Human Nature.

IV. One of the greatest Defects observable in the Moral Writings of some
Philosophers, is, that they confound Duties with Virtues, or that they give the
name of Virtues to simple Duties: So that though properly there be but one
Virtue, to wit, the love of Order, they make an infinite number of them. This
is it which causes such Confusion and so perplexes that Science, that it is
very hard to understand thoroughly what a Man must do to be perfectly Good and
Virtuous.

V. It is evident that Virtue ought to render him Virtuous that possesses it;
and yet a Man may acquit himself of his Duty, and with ease perform acts of
Humility, Generosity or Liberality without any of these Virtues: So that a
disposition or facility of performing such Duties is not properly Virtue,
without the love of Order. When a Man discharges his Duty, he is Virtuous in
the Eyes of Men; when he bestows part of his Goods on his Friend, he appears
Liberal and Generous: But Men are not always such as they seem to be; and he
that never neglects the outward Offices of Friendship, but when they are
contrary to the inviolable Order, though he may sometimes seem guilty of
Infidelity, is a truer and more faithful Friend; at least he is a more Virtuous
Man and more worthy of Love, than those hot and zealous Friends who Sacrifice
their Kindred, their Life and their eternal Salvation to the Passions of their
Friends.

VI. We must not then confound Virtue with Duties by reason of a similitude of
Names; it is this that deceives Men. There are some who imagine they follow
Virtue, when they follow only a natural Inclination they have to perform some
certain Duties; and because they are not guided by Reason, they are in truth
Vicious in excess, when they fancy themselves to be Heroes in Virtue. But the
greatest part of Mankind, being deceived by this confusion of Terms and the
splendor of Names, rely upon, and value themselves without Reason, and often
judge ill of the most Virtuous Persons; because it is impossible that good Men
should follow the Rules of Order any long time, without failing according to
outward appearance in some essential Duty. For in short, to be Prudent,
Good-natured and Charitable in the Eyes of the World, a Man must sometimes
commend Vice, or at least hold his Tongue when he hears it commended: To be
esteemed Liberal, he must be Prodigal: If he be not Rash, he shall hardly be
accounted Valiant; and if he be not Superstitious or Credulous, let his Piety
be never so great, he may perhaps pass for a Libertine in the Opinion of others.

VII. It is certain that Universal Reason is always the same, Order is
immutable, and yet Morality changes according to Places and Times. It is a
Virtue among the Germans to drink hard; and a Man can have no conversation with
them if he be not drunk: It is not Reason, but Wine that unites their
Societies, settles their Agreements, and makes their Bargains. It Is reckoned
Bravery in a Gentleman to shed the Blood of him that gives him the Lie.
Duelling was for a long time a lawful Action amongst the French; and as if
Reason was not worthy to determine their Differences, they decided them by
Force: They preferred the Law of Brutes or Chance, before the Law of God
himself. Nor must we imagine that this Custom was in use only amongst the Men
of the Sword, it was in a manner general; and if the Clergy did not fight
themselves out of respect to their Character, they had their Champions who
represented them, and maintained their Quarrel by shedding the Blood of their
Adversaries: Nay, they imagined that God approved this manner of proceeding;
and whether their Differences were decided by the Sword or by Lot, they did not
doubt but that God sat as Judge in the Cause, and gave it in favor of him that
had Right on his side. And indeed, if we suppose God to act by particular
wills, where is the Impiety of believing, either that he favors Injustice, or
that his Providence does not extend to all things?

VIII. But without going to seek for damnable Customs in the past Ages, let any
one, by the Light of Reason, judge of those that are at present kept up among
us; or let him only observe the Conduct of those very Persons who are appointed
for Guides to others. Without doubt, we shall often find that every one of them
has his particular Morality, his own private Religion, and his favorite
Virtue; that one talks of nothing but Penance and Mortification; another
esteems only the Duties of Charity; and a third cries up nothing but Meditation
and Prayer. From whence can this diversity proceed, if the Reason of Man be
always the same? From hence no doubt, that they leave off consulting Reason,
and suffer themselves to be guided by Imagination, its Enemy; in stead of
observing the immutable Order, as their inviolable and natural Law, they frame
to themselves Ideas of Virtue, conformable at least in some things to their own
Inclinations. For there are some Virtues, or rather Duties, which have a
relation to our Tempers or Humors; there are shining and glittering Virtues
proper for fierce and lofty Souls; low and humble Virtues which are fit for
timorous and fearful Minds, and soft and effeminate Virtues, if I may so call
them, which suit very well with Laziness and Inactivity.

IX. It is true, they agree that Order is the inviolable Law of Spiritual
Beings, and that nothing is regular, if it be not conformable to it. But they
maintain a little too stiffly, that they are not capable of consulting this Law;
and though it be graven upon the Heart of Man, so that he need only retire into
himself to be instructed in it, they think, like the gross and carnal Jews,
that it is as hard to discover it, as to climb up into Heaven, or go down into
Hell, as the Scripture speaks.

X. I must confess, that the immutable Order is not easy to be found; it
dwells within us, but we are always roving abroad: Our Senses unite our Soul to
all the parts of our Body, our Imagination and Passions extend it to all the
Objects which surround us, and often carry it into a World that has no more
reality than imaginary Spaces; this is undeniably so: But then we should
endeavor to silence our Senses, Imagination and Passions; and not fancy that
we can be reasonable without consulting Reason. But this Order by which we
ought to be governed, is a Form too abstracted to serve as a Model for grosser
Spirits; I grant it: Let us then give it a Body, let us make it sensible, let
us cloth it in several Dresses to render it agreeable to carnal Men; let us,
if I may so speak, incarnate it, yet so as it may be always known again. Let us
accustom Men to distinguish true Virtue from Vice, from seeming Virtues, and
from simple Duties, which a Man may often perform without Virtue, and not set
before them Phantoms or Idols, which attract their Admiration and Respect, by
the sensible Splendor and Pomp that surrounds them. For in short, if we are
not guided by Reason, if we are not animated by the Love of Order, how exact
soever we may be in the performance of our Duties, we can never be solidly
Virtuous.

XI. But, say they, Reason is corrupted, it is liable to Error, it must submit
to Faith: Philosophy is but a Servant, we ought to distrust the Light which
that affords. (All equivocal Terms.) Man is not his own Light: Religion is the
true Philosophy. It is not, I confess, the Philosophy of the Heathens, nor that
of those great Talkers, who speak to others before Truth has spoke to them.
Reason is immutable, incorruptible, infallible, and ought always to govern; God
himself follows it. In a word, we ought never to shut our Eyes against the
Light; but we should accustom our selves to distingush it from Darkness or
false Glares, from confused Sensations, from sensible Idea's, which appear
bright and shining Lights to those who are not accustomed to distinguish Truth
from Probability, Evidence from Instinct, and Reason from its Enemy,
Imagination. Certainly Understanding is preferable to Faith; for Faith will
have an end, but Understanding will remain for ever. Faith is, indeed, a very
great good; but it is because it leads to Understanding, and without it we
cannot deserve the Understanding of some necessary and essential Truths,
without which it is impossible to attain either to solid Virtue or everlasting
Happiness: Nevertheles, Faith without Understanding, I speak not here of
Mysteries of which we can have no clear Idea; Faith, I say, without any Light,
if that be possible, cannot make a Man solidly Virtuous: It is the Light which
perfects the Mind and regulates the Heart; and if Faith did not enlighten a Man
and lead him to some Understanding of the Truth, and some Knowledge of his
Duty, without doubt it would not have those Effects which are attributed to it.
But Faith is a Term as equivocal as that of Reason, Philosophy, and human
Sciences.

XII. I grant then, that those who have not Light enough to guide themselves,
may attain to Virtue, as well as those who can retire into themselves to
consult Reason, and contemplate the Beauty of Order; because the Grace of Sense
or preventing delectation, may supply the want of Light, and keep them firm and
steadfast in their Duty. But that which I maintain, is, First, That supposing
all other things equal, he that enters farthest into himself, and hearkens to
the Truth within him in the greatest silence of his Senses, Imagination and
Passions, is the most solidly Virtuous. Secondly, That such a Love of Order as
has for its Foundation more of Reason than of Faith, that is, more of Light
than of Pleasure, is more solid, meritorious and valuable, than another Love
which I suppose equal. For indeed, the true good, the good of the Soul should
be loved by Reason, and not by the instinct of Pleasure. But the condition to
which Sin has reduced us, makes the Grace of Delight necessary to counterpoise
the continual endeavors of our Concupiscence. Lastly, I assert, That if a Man
should never, I say, never retire into himself, his imaginary Faith would be
wholly useless to him. For the Word became sensible, only to render Truth
intelligible. Reason was made incarnate for no other end, but to guide Men to
Reason by their Senses; and he that should do and suffer all that Jesus Christ
did and suffered, would be neither reasonable nor a Christian, if he did it not
in the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Order and Reason. But there is no cause
to fear this; for it is absolutely impossible, that any Man should be so far
separated from Reason, as never to retire into himself to consult it. And though
there are many People who perhaps know not what it is to retire into
themselves, yet it is impossible but that they must do it sometimes, and must
sometimes hear the Voice of Truth, notwithstanding the continual Noise of their
Senses and Passions: It is impossible but that they must have some Idea of
Order, and some Love for it, which without doubt they cannot have but from
something which dwells in them, and renders them so far just and reasonable;
for no Man is himself the ground of his Love, nor the Spirit that inspires,
animates and guides it.

XIII. Every Man pretends to Reason, and yet every Man renounces it. This may
seem a Contradiction; but there is nothing more true: Every Man pretends to
Reason, because every Man has this engraven on the very Foundation of his
Being, that it is an essential Right of human Nature, to have a share of
Reason. But all Men renounce Reason, because they cannot unite themselves to
it, and receive from it Light and Understanding, without a sort of Labor which
is very discouraging, because it has nothing that pleases the Senses. And
therefore since they invincibly desire to be happy, they quit the Labor of
Attention, which renders them actually unhappy; but yet when they quit it, they
commonly fancy they do it by Reason. The voluptuous Man thinks he ought to
prefer the actual Enjoyment of Pleasures before a barren and abstracted View of
Truth, which costs him nevertheless abundance of Pains. The ambitious Man
imagines that the object of his Passion is something real, and that
intellectual Enjoyments are nothing but Phantoms and Illusions; for commonly
Men judge of the Solidity of good things by the Impression they make on the
Imagination and Senses. Nay, there are some Persons of Piety, who prove by
Reason, That we ought to renounce Reason; That we are not to be guided by
Light, but by Faith alone; and that blind Obedience is the principal Virtue of
a Christian. The Laziness of Inferiors, and their proness to Flatter, is often
satisfied with this fancied Virtue, and the Pride of Superiors is always very
well pleased with it: So that perhaps there may be some Persons, who will be
offended with me, for giving so great an Honor to Reason, as to set it above
all other Powers; and think me a Rebel against lawful Authorities, because I
take the part of Reason, and maintain that it belongs to Reason to decide and
govern. But let the Voluptuous follow their Senses; let the Ambitious suffer
themselves to be carried away by their Passions; let the generality of Mankind
live by Opinion, or follow wherever their own Imaginations lead them: But let
us endeavor to still that confused Noise which sensible Objects cause in us;
let us retire into our selves, and consult the inward Truth, yet let us take
great care not to confound its Answers with the malignant Influences of our
corrupted Imagination. For it is better, infinitely better for a Man to obey
the Passions of those who have a right to command and guide him, than to be
wholly his own Master, to follow his own Passions, and voluntarily to blind
himself, by assuming such an Air of Confidence in Error, as only the discovery
of Truth ought to give him. I have elsewhere laid down the Rules which we ought
to observe for avoiding this Miscarriage; but I shall say something of it also
in this Discourse, for without this, we cannot be solidly and rationally
Virtuous.

CHAP. III. The Love of Order does not differ from Charity. Two sorts of Love,
one of Union, and the other of Benevolence. The former is due only to Power, to
God alone: The latter ought to be proportioned to personal Merit, as our Duties
to relative Merit. Self-love enlightened is not contrary to the love of Union.
The love of Order is common to all Men. The Species of the love of Order,
natural and free, actual and habitual. Only that which is free, habitual and
ruling renders us just in the sight of God. Virtue consists in nothing but a
free, habitual and ruling Love of the immutable Order.
I. THOUGH I have not expressed the Principal or Mother Virtue by the authentic
name of Charity, I would not have any one imagine that I pretend to deliver to
Men any other Virtue than that which Christ himself has established in these
Words: All the Law and the Prophets depend on these two Commandments: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, Mat. 22.37.
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self:
And of which St. Paul has given us the elogy in that admirable Chapter of his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, which begins thus: 1 Cor. 13.1.
Though I spoke all Languages, even that of Angels themselves, yet if I had not
Charity. I should be but like sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. The ways of
Speaking are different according to the diversity of Persons spoken to. The
Scripture which is written for all the World, expresses the Truths it contains,
in such Terms only as are authorized by the most common Use. But he that would
convince and inform the most obstinate Persons, I mean those Men of strong
Reason as they fancy themselves, and those whom they call Philosophers, People
that find difficulties in every Thing, must endeavor to explain his Sentiments
by Terms that as far as may be are free from an equivocal Signification.

II. These Words, [ Thou shall Love God with all thy Strength, and thy
Neighbor as thy Self] are clear, but it is chiefly to those who are inwardly
Taught by the Unction of the Spirit: For as to others, they are more obscure
than is commonly imagined. To [Love] is an equivocal Term: It signifies two
Things among many others, First, to unite our selve by the Will to any object
as to our Good, or the cause of our Happiness; and Secondly to wish Well to any
one. We may love God in the first Sense, and our Neighbor in the Second. But
it would be Impiety, or at least Stupidity or Ignorance to love God in the
latter Sense, and a kind of Idolatry to love our Neighbor in the former.

III. The word [God] is likewise Equivocal, and much more than it is thought to
be: A Man may fancy he loves God, when indeed he loves only a vast immense
Phantom which he has formed to himself. He may think he loves God when at the
same time he lives in Disorder, or without loving Order above all Things. But
he is mistaken; for he is so far from loving him, that he does not so much as
know him. 1 John 2.4, 5.
For he that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Lier,
and the Truth is not in him: But whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the
love of God perfected, or he perfectly loves God, v. 3.
says St. John. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments.

IV. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Strength. The word [all] is
clear enough; but [thy Strength] may Minister occasion of Error to those who
either have no Humility, or a false and mistaken one. The former may draw from
it some ground of Vanity, and the latter of a sinful Negligence. [And thy
Neighbor as thy self.] Our Savior tells us in the Parable of the Samaritan,
that all Mankind is our Neighbor. So that the word [Neighbour] is not very
clear; and so we find the Jews always took it in a wrong Sense. [As thy self.]
Certainly there are none but those that love the true and real good, who fulfill
this Commandment in loving their Neighbor as themselves. For a Father who
loves his Son with the greatest Tenderness, and carefully procures for him all
sensible good Things, what love soever he may have for him, is very far from
loving him as God commands us to love our Neighbor.

V. These words then, [Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc.] are obscure: But
in Truth they are obscure only to those who have a mind to Dispute, or who will
not retire into themselves, to behold this Commandment written there with the
Finger of God: The Holy Scripture is a closed Book only to those who are not
instructed by the unction of the Spirit. For pious Men though never so Dull and
Stupid, understand this Precept very well. They know that all the application
of our Mind, and all the motions of our Heart ought to tend toward God; that we
should employ our Thoughts on nothing but him, as far as it is possible: That
we do not truly Love him, if we are not nice and exact in doing our Duty: And
that to violate the order of Justice, or the immutable Order, is in effect to
offend against the Divine Majesty. They are so far from loving Men as capable
of doing them Good, that they are afraid to come near great Persons, and are
only pleased to be amongst those who stand in need of their Assistance. They
love Men not as their Good, nor as capable of enjoying transitory Goods with
them, Goods which only serve to cause division every where: But they Love them
as Coheirs of the true Goods; true Goods, because they are possessed without
division, enjoyed without satiety, and loved without any fear of losing them,
like the Pleasures of this present Life. The Father loves his Son; but he had
rather see him Deformed than Disorderly. He had rather see him Sick, Dead, or
at the Gallows, than see him Dead in the Eyes of him, who never had a more
agreeable Sight than that of his only Son fastened to the Cross to re-establish
Order in the World. Pious Men understand the Law of God, because they are
instructed by the same Spirit that dictated it. But because this Discourse is
intended chiefly for Philosophers, and it lies not in my Power to communicate
that holy Unction which produces Light in the Minds of Men; I think my self
obliged to endeavor to prove by Reason, and explain as far as I am able in
clear Terms, those Truths of which perhaps they are not sufficiently Convinced.

VI. I think then I may say, that justifying Charity, or that Virtue which
renders the possessors of it truly Just and Virtuous, is properly a ruling Love
of the immutable Order. But that I may clear those Obscurities which ordinarily
attend abstract Ideas, I must explain these Terms a little more at large.

VII. I have already said that the immutable Order consists in nothing else but
in those proportions or relations of Perfection which are between the
intellectual Ideas comprehended in the substance of the eternal Word. Now we
ought to esteem and love nothing but Perfection. And therefore our esteem and
love should be conformable to Order. From hence it is evident that Charity or
the love of God, is a consequence of the love of Order, and that we ought to
esteem and love God not only more, but infinitely more than all other Things;
for there can be no finite relation between infinite and finite.

VIII. There are Two principal kinds of Love, a Love of Benevolence, and a Love
which may be called Love of Union. A sensual Man Loves the object of his
Passion with a Love of Union; because he looks upon that Object as the cause of
his Happiness, and therefore he desires to be united to it, that it may act
upon him and make him Happy. He is carried toward it as well by the motion of
his Heart, or by his Affections, as by the motion of his Body. The Love which
we bear to Persons of Worth and Merit, is a love of Benevolence; for we love
them even when they are not in a condition to do us any good: We Love them
because they have more Perfection and Virtue than other Men. So that the power
to do us Good, or that kind of perfection which relates to our Happiness; in
one Word, Goodness excites in us a love of Union, and all other perfections a
love of Benevolence. Now God only is Good: He alone has the Power of acting on
us. He does not really communicate that Perfection to his Creatures; but only
makes them occasional Causes for the producing of some Effects: For true and
real Power is Incommunicable. Therefore all our love of Union ought to tend
toward God.

IX. We may, for Instance, bring our Body to the Fire, because Fire is the
occasional cause of Heat, which is necessary for it: But we cannot love it with
a love of Union, without offending against Order; because the Fire is so far
from having any power over that part of us which is capable of Loving, that it
has no Power at all. The same may be said of all other Creatures, even Angels
and Devils; we ought to love none of them with a Love of Union, with that Love
which is an Honor given to Power; for all of them being absolutely impotent,
we should by no means love them. When I speak of loving, I mean also fearing
and hating them; I mean that the Soul should remain unmoved in their Presence.
The Body by a local Motion may come near the Fire, or avoid the Fall of a
House; but the Soul must fear and love nothing but God; at least, it must love
none but him, with a love of Freedom, Choice and Reason: For since the Union of
the Soul and Body is changed into a dependence, it is hardly in our power to
hinder sensible Goods from exciting in us some love for them. The motions of
the Soul naturally answer those of the Body; and the Object which makes us fly
from it, or attracts us to it, almost always begets in us Aversion or Love.

X. But the Case is not the same with the Love of Benevolence, as with the Love
of Union; God is infinitely more amiable with this sort of Love, than all his
Creatures together: But as he has really communicated to them some Perfection,
as they are capable of Happiness, they really deserve our Love and Esteem.
Order it self requires that we should esteem and love them according to the
measure of Perfection which they enjoy, or rather according to that which we
know to be in them: For to esteem and love them exactly in proportion to their
being amiable, is utterly impossible; because many times their Perfections are
unknown to us, and we can never know exactly the proportions that are between
Perfections; for we cannot express them either by Numbers, or incommensurable
Lines. Nevertheless, Faith takes away a great many difficulties in this matter.
For since a finite Being by the relation it has to infinity, acquires an
infinite Value; it is evident that we ought to love those Creatures which have,
or may have a great relation to God, infinitely more, than those which do not
bear his Image, or which have no immediate union with, or relation to him: It
is plain that all other things being equal, one righteous Man, one member of
Jesus Christ deserves more of this kind of Love, than a thousand wicked Men;
and that God who judges truly and exactly of the Value of his Creatures,
prefers one of his adopted Children, before all the Nations of the Earth.

XI. It is certain, that our Duties ought to be regulated by the Love of Esteem
or Benevolence; but yet we must not imagine that we always owe more Duties to
righteous Men than to Sinners, to the Faithful than to Heretics, or even
Heathens themselves. For we must observe, that there are Perfections of several
sorts, some Personal or Absolute, and others Relative: Personal Perfections
ought to be the immediate Object of the Love of Esteem and Benevolence; but
relative Perfections do not deserve either this or any other kind of Love, but
only the Object to which these Perfections have a relation. We should love and
honor Merit wherever we find it, for Merit is a personal Perfection which
ought to regulate our Love of Esteem and Benevolence; but it ought not always
to regulate the greatness and quality of our Duties. On the contrary, we owe a
great many Duties to our Prince, to our Parents, and to all those that are in
Authority; for Authority is necessary for the preservation of Order in States,
which is the most valuable thing in the World: But the Honor which we pay to
them, the Love which we bear them ought to terminate in God alone: Colos. 3.23.
As to the Lord, and not unto Men, says St. Paul. The Honor which we give to
Power must be referred to God and not to Men; for the power of Acting is in God
alone. In like manner, if a Man have such natural endowments as may be
serviceable for the Conversion of others, though he have no personal Merit or
Virtue, we ought to love him with a love of Esteem which has a relation to
something else; and we are obliged to many more Duties toward him, than
toward another Man who has a great deal of personal Merit, but is not capable
of being useful to any but himself. But I shall explain this matter-more at
large in another place; what I have said of it here, is only to prevent the
Reader from running insensibly whither I have no design to lead him.

XII. Self-Love, the irreconcilable Enemy of Virtue, or a ruling Love of the
immutable Order, may agree with the Love of Union, which is referred to, and
honors a Power capable of acting on us; for it is sufficient for that purpose,
that this Self-love be enlightened. Man invincibly desires to be happy; and he
sees clearly that God alone is able to make him so: This being supposed and all
the rest excluded, of which I do not speak, it is evident that he may desire to
be united to God. For to take away every thing that may be equivocal, I do not
speak of a Man who knows that God rewards only Merit, and who finds none in
himself; but I speak of one who considers only the Power and Goodness of God,
or one to whom the Testimony of his Conscience and his Faith give a free
access, as I may so say, to draw near to God, and join himself to him.

XIII. But the case is different with the Love of Esteem or Benevolence which a
Man ought to bear to himself; Self-love makes it always irregular. Order
requires that the Reward should be proportionable to the Merit, and the
Happiness to the Perfection of the Soul, which it has gained by a good use of
its Liberty; but Self-love can endure no bounds to its Happiness and Glory.
Though it be never so much enlightened, yet if it be not just, it must of
necessity be contrary to Order; and it cannot be just without diminishing or
destroying it self. Nevertheless, when Self-love is both enlightened and just,
whether it be destroyed by, or confounded with the Love of Order, a Man has
then the greatest Perfection that he is capable of. For certainly he that
always places himself in the rank that belongs to him, who desires to be Happy
no farther than he deserves to be so, and seeks his Happiness in the Justice
which he expects from the righteous Judge; who lives by Faith, and rests
contented, steadfast and patient in the hope and foretast of the true Goods; he,
I say, is really a good Man, though the love he bears to himself reformed indeed
and corrected by Grace, be the natural Foundation of his Love of Order above
all Things.

XIV. We must not imagine that the love of Order is like those Virtues, or
rather particular Dispositions which may be lost or got. For Order is not a
particular Creature which we may begin or cease to love; it is the Word it
self, the natural Object of all the Motions of Spiritual Beings. We may begin
or cease to love a Creature, because we are not made for them; but we cannot
entirely renounce Reason, nor cease to love Order; because Man is made to live
by Reason, and according to Order: So that the love of Order naturally Reigns
wherever Self-love is not contrary to it. Nay, it often Reigns, though
Self-love or Concupiscence oppose it; I say, it Reigns not only in good Men,
where it has an absolute Dominion, but also in the wicked, where Self-love
bears the Sovereign sway.

XV. It is certain that a Man sees only as he is enlightened by God; he wills
only as he is animated and moved by him. Now God enlightnes him only by his
Word, he moves him only by the Love which he bears to himself: For God cannot
enlighten Man by a false Reason, nor imprint on him a Love contrary to his own.
All Light therefore comes from the Word, and all Motion from the Holy Ghost,
seeing it is God alone that acts, and that only by the Wisdom which enlightens
him, and the Love which he bears to himself. So that as long as a Man Thinks
and Loves, he cannot be totally separated from Reason, nor altogether without
the love of Order. To fall into Error, he must make an ill use of Reason; but
still he must make use of it; for he that sees nothing, and can judge of
nothing, cannot fall into Error. In like manner to love Evil, he must love
Good; for he cannot love Evil, but because he looks upon it as Good. Therefore
Self-love does not wholly destroy the Love of Order, but only Vitiates and
Corrupts it, by referring that to its self which has no relation to it. For a
Man, whether he loves the Objects with a relation to himself, or otherwise,
always loves those that are or seem to be the best; because the love of Order,
or the love of good things proportionable to their Perfection or Goodness, is a
natural and invincible Love.

XVI. This I say principally, That the Wicked may at least know themselves to
be such, and the Righteous may distrust their Virtue. For since Men, though they
are never so wretched and miserable, find in themselves some rectitude or some
natural love of Order, they imagine that they are really Virtuous. But to
obtain the possession of Virtue, it is not sufficient that we love Order with a
natural Love, but we must also love it with a free, enlightened and reasonable
Love. It is not sufficient to love it, when it agrees with our Self-love. We
must Sacrifice every thing to it, our actual Happiness, and if it should
require it of us, our very Being. For Virtue consists in a ruling Love of the
immutable Order. Our Heart is never rightly disposed, but when it is ready to
conform it self to Order in all things; and he that would have Order
conformable in some things to his particular Inclinations, has a perverted
Mind and a corrupt Heart. There is no Man, let him be never so Wicked, who does
not sometimes find a beauty in Order that charms him. In all probability the
Devils themselves have some Love for Order. They are ready to obey it, when it
requires nothing of them contrary to their Self-love: And perhaps some of them
would willingly offer some slight Sacrifice to it. They are not all equally
Wicked; and therefore they do not all equally oppose Order. Judas was a Wretch
governed by Avarice; yet it is reasonable to believe that to deliver his best
Friend from Death, he would have Sacrificed a little Money. He Sold our Savior
for thirty Pieces of Silver, but perhaps he would not have betrayed him for a
less Sum. So then to be Virtuous, it is not sufficient to love Order, but we
must love it more than all other things: We must have a firm Resolution to
follow it every where, whatever it cost us. We must be ready to Sacrifice to it
not a few inconsiderable Pleasures, or slight Pains, but our Happiness, our
Reputation, and our very Being, in hopes of receiving from God a recompense
befitting him to give.

XVII. But besides all this I must add, that a simple Resolution, though never so
strong, of following Order in all things, does not justify us in the fight of
God. For God, who makes a true Judgment of the dispositions of our Minds, does
not judge any soul according to its actual and transient Motions, but by that
which is fixed and permanent in it. Simple acts are transient: And a Man that
finds himself thoroughly affected with the Beauty of Order, and thereupon takes
a holy Resolution of Sacrificing all other things to it, ought still to be in
fear for himself. For it scarce ever happens that one single act produces the
strongest Habit, and that the actual motion of the Soul, destroys an inveterate
Disposition of obeying the inclinations of Self-love. On the contrary Habits
are permanent; and though a just Man fall seven times a Day, let him comfort
himself, God knows the bottom of his Heart. But let him take heed that he be
not seduced and corrupted by Concupiscence, and that his imagination receiving
dangerous Impressions every Moment from sensible Objects, do not some time or
other openly rebel against those severe Laws which are so damping and
disagreeable to it. For we must observe that the Habit of Charity is much more
tender, and more difficult both to acquire and preserve than sinful Habits: For
one single deliberate Act, one mortal Sin always destroys it. A Man is just in
the sight of God when his Heart is really more disposed to love good than evil,
with a free and rational Love, whether this disposition be acquired by free and
rational acts of Love, or otherwise. But because we know only that which
actually passes in our Soul, and Charity does not discover it self sensibly as
Concupiscence does, we cannot be assured of the state we are in. Therefore we
ought always to distrust our selves without desponding, and to Labor even till
Death to destroy Self-love and Concupiscence, which continually renews it self,
and to fortify the love of Order, which is weakened or destroyed when we cease
to keep a watch over our selves.

XVIII. For the right understanding of what follows, we must observe that the
acts of Love are of two sorts; natural or purely voluntary Acts, and free Acts.
All Pleasure infallibly produces in the Soul the natural motion of Love, or
makes us love the Object which causes or seems to cause that Pleasure, with a
natural, necessary or purely voluntary Love. But every Pleasure does not
produce a free Love; for free Love is not always conformable to the natural
Love. This Love does not depend upon Pleasure alone; but upon Reason, upon
Liberty, upon the Power which the Soul has to resist any Motion that presses
it. It is the consent of the Will which makes the essential difference of this
species of Love. Now these two different acts of Love produce two different
Habits. The natural Love begets in the Soul a disposition toward natural Love:
And the love of Choice leaves in it a Habit of that Love. For when a Man has
consented several times to the love of any Good, he has an inclination or
facility to consent to it again.

XIX. We must know then, that every disposition of Love, whether natural or
free, corrupts the Soul, and renders it odious to God, if the object of it be a
Creature; but if it be applied to the Creator, it makes the Soul righteous and
acceptable to God: Provided nevertheless that the disposition of natural Love
be alone in the Heart; for if there be two Habits of Love of different kinds in
the Heart, God does not regard the natural Love, but only that which is free.

XX. For Example, an Infant at his first coming into the World is a Sinner and
deserves the wrath of God, because God loves Order, and the Heart of that
Infant is irregular, or turned toward the Body by an habitual disposition of a
natural, necessary, or merely voluntary Love See l. 2. c. 1. of the Search
after Truth, and the Notes upon that Chap.
which he derives from his Parents, without any consent on his part. Adam at
the first instant of his Creation was Just, because his Heart was disposed to
love God, though he had not as yet acquired a habit of consenting to that Love.
So that a natural disposition or habit when it is alone, corrupts or justifies
the Soul. For when there is but one habitual Love in the Heart, if that love be
Good, there is nothing in it but what is amiable in the Eyes of him who loves
Order; and the contrary, if that Love be evil. But when there are two habits of
Love of different kinds, God has no regard but to that which is free. It is
probable that the Just have a much greater facility and natural disposition to
love the Goods of the Body than the true and real ones. The Pleasures of Sense
being almost continually before them, and the preventing delight of Grace much
more rare, they are more strongly disposs'd by this sort of Habit, which is a
natural consequence of Pleasure, to love sensible Objects than the true Good.
This is evident by what happens to them in Sleep, or when they are not upon
their Guard, but act without Reflection: For then they most commonly follow the
motions of Concupiscence. But these irregularities do not corrupt them, because
the Habit of Virtue is not changed; for those acts which are not free, cannot
change free Habits, but only the Habits of the same kind. From what has been
said it is plain, that the love of Order which justifies us in the sight of
God, must be an habitual, free and ruling Love of the immutable Order. And
therefore where I speak of the love of Order in the sequel of this Discourse, I
generally understand by it this kind of habitual Love, and not an actual not an
habitual natural Love, not a love which is not predominant, nor any other
motion or disposition of the Soul.

CHAP. IV. Two fundamental Truths belonging to this Treatise. I. Acts produce
Habits, and Habits Acts. II. The Soul does not always produce the Acts of its
ruling Habit. The Sinner may avoid committing any particular Sin, and the just
Man may lose his Charity, because there is no Sinner without some love for
Order, and no just Man without Self-love. We cannot be justified in the sight
of God by the strength of Free Will. The means in general of acquiring and
preserving Charity. The methodus'd in the explication of these means.
I. THat I may give a clear explication of the means of acquiring or preserving
the ruling Love of the immutable Order, I shall lay down two fundamental Truths
belonging to the first Part of this Treatise. First, that Virtues are generally
acquired and fortified by Acts. Secondly, that when we act, we do not always
produce the acts of the ruling Virtue: What I say of Virtue, must be also
understood of all Habits good or bad, and even of the Passions which are
natural to us.

II. Every one is sufficiently convinced by his own Experience, that those
Habits which have a relation to the Body are formed and preserved by Acts. Thus
it is universally agreed, that by the acts of Dancing, Playing on an Instrument
or speaking a Language, those Habits may be acquired. Most People are persuaded
that Men get a Habit of Drunkenness by drinking much; that the company of Women
makes a Man soft and effeminate, and that those who converse with Soldiers
become generally Stout or Brutish. But there are few who seriously consider,
that the Soul it self by its own Acts gets such Habits, as it cannot easily get
rid of. A Mathematician is apt to imagine, that it is in his own power not to
love the Mathematics, and to give over the Study of them: An ambitious Man
foolishly persuades himself that he is not a slave to his Passion: And every
one believes, that though he be in a miserable subjection to some vicious Habit,
he is able whenever he pleases to break the Chains that hold him in Captivity.
It is upon this Principle that Men still delay their Conversion; for seeing
there is nothing more required to Conversion, than to despise those Enjoyments
which they own to be vain and contemptible, and to love God, who certainly
alone deserves to be loved; every one persuades himself that he has, and
always shall have Reason and Strength enough to form and put in Execution a
Design so just and reasonable.

III. Besides, as the Will is never forced, we imagine that whatsoever we will,
we will just so only because we will. We do not consider that the acts of the
Will are produced in us, in consequence of our inward Dispositions; which
Dispositions being in truth certain modifications of our own proper Being, but
unknown to us, cause us to will in such a manner, that this Volition seems to
depend wholly on our selves; for we will so freely and readily, that we think
nothing obliges us to do it. It is true, indeed, that nothing obliges us to
will but our selves; but then that which we call [Our Selves] is not our Being
purely natural, or perfectly free in respect of Good and Evil; but our Being
disposed toward one of them by certain Modifications, which either corrupt or
perfect it, and render us in the sight of God either Just or Sinners; and these
Dispositions we should increase or destroy by Acts which are the natural Causes
of Habits.

IV. But to do this, we must farther suppose that other important Truth, that
the Soul does not always produce the Acts of its predominant Habit. For it is
evident, that if a Man whose ruling Disposition is Avarice, should never act
but by some Motion of Avarice; he would be so far from ever becoming Liberal,
that his Vice would continually augment; according to that Principle which we
have before laid down, that Acts produce and fortify Habits. Nay, we must
allow that it is in the power of a vicious Man to perform some Acts of Virtue,
in order to free himself from his vicious Habits, and to become a good Man; but
this Proposition requires a little further Explication.

V. I say then in respect of particular Habits, First, That a covetous Man, for
Example, may act by a motive of Ambition; this is neither difficult to believe
nor prove. Secondly, That a covetous Man may do an Action contrary to Avarice,
by which he is governed; for a covetous Man may be also Ambitious. This being
supposed, I say that if his Passion for Riches be not moved, and his Ambition
be; or if his Avarice be less excited than his Ambition, in a reciprocal
Proportion of the force of these two Passions, it is certain that the covetous
Man will do an act of Liberality, if at that instant he determines himself to
act, which is certainly in his own power to do. For a Man can will nothing but
Good; and at that instant the covetous Man will think it better to do that act
of Liberality than not do it; he will Sacrifice his love of Money to that of
Glory. Thus it is evident, that the Sinner may for Reasons of Self-love, avoid
following any certain determinate Motion of his Passions, if he can but excite
some contrary Passions, and till then suspend the consent of his Will. But
still this is not sufficient to prove that he who Sins may help Sinning; that
the Sinner may rid himself of his vicious Habits, and the just Man lose his
Charity.

VI. Indeed the Case of particular Habits, as Avarice or Liberality, is not the
same with that of the Love of Order, or Self-love; and though perhaps it may be
granted, that a covetous Man may do an act of Liberality; yet without doubt it
will not be so readily agreed, that a Heathen can do an action conformable to
Order, or for Love of Order. For my part, I shall not dispute it; but only
endeavor to explain my own Sentiments clearly. Let every one follow that which
the Evidence of Reason and the Authority of Faith oblige him to believe; and
leave me, when I go out of the Way, which should lead me in the Search of Truth.

VII. If Sinners or Heathens had no Love at all for Order, they would be
altogether incorrigible; and if the Righteous had no Self-love, they could not
possibly Sin; for according to my first Principle, Habits are formed and
preserved by Acts. The Sinner being supposed to have no Love but for himself,
cannot act but by Self-love, and therefore all his Actions must increase the
Corruption of his Heart. On the other side, if the righteous Man be supposed to
have no Love but for Order, he cannot act but by the Love of Order; and then
all his Actions must still increase his Virtue: So that upon this Supposition,
that a Sinner or a Heathen has no Love but Self-love, and a just Man no Love
but the Love of Order, the Sinner must be incorrigible, and the just Man
impeccable. But I think I have sufficiently proved in the foregoing Chapter,
that the greatest Sinners have always some disposition to love Order; and I
think it cannot be doubted, but that the best Men always retain some Relics of
Self-love.

VIII. It is true indeed, that a Heathen can never acquire Charity, nor do any
Action that may merit those Assistances that are necessary for obtaining the
ruling Love of the immutable Order; but he may do Actions conformable to Order,
he may perform good and meritorious Actions: Chap. I.
For a Heathen has always some Idea of Order; this Idea is indeleble: He has
always some Love for Order; Chap. III.
this Love is natural and immortal. Now all Love is active, when once it is
excited. And therefore if his Self-love do not oppose the Action of his Love of
Order, his Love of Order will act and produce its proper Acts: Nay, though his
Selflove should oppose his Love of Order, yet if his Love of Order be more
excited than his Self-love, in a reciprocal Proportion of the greatness of
these two habitual Loves and their actual Motion, his Love for Order would
surmount his Self-love, if at that instant he determined himself to act.

IX. For instance, an innocent Man is led to Execution. This is contrary to
Order. A Heathen knows it, and can by a word speaking, prevent the breach of
Order. I suppose that his Self-love is not at all concerned in the Life or
Death of the Man. Certainly he will prevent, or at least will have Strength and
Reason enough to speak and prevent this Offense against Order. For my part, I
do not doubt, upon the Supposition which I have made, but that he would prevent
it. For all Men naturally love Order and are so united to it, that one cannot
violate Order, without offending them in some measure. The same things being
supposed, though this Man we speak of were covetous, yet if his Passion for Money
were laid a sleep for a little while, or, though it were excited, yet if only a
Penny were desired of him to save the Life of that innocent Man, certainly he
would, or at least might do an action contrary to his Self-love; for in truth,
that opposition is but inconsiderable; but it would be a very great Offense
against Order, which he is naturally disposed to Love, if he should not offer
that small Sacrifice to it.

X. Now those actions are good, because they are conformable to Order; and they
are meritorious, because they are accompanied with a Sacrifice of Self-love to
the Love of Order: But they are not meritorious in respect of the true Goods,
nor of any thing that leads to the Possession of them, because those Sacrifices
they offer are but inconsiderable; and besides, they proceed from a corrupted
Heart, where Self-love has an absolute Dominion.

XI. A Man can have no Right to the true Goods, if he be not just in the sight
of God; and he cannot be just before God, if he be not more disposed to love
Order than to love any Thing, and even his own self; or if he be not disposed
not to love himself but according to Order. So that though we should suppose a
Heathen to love Order above all other Things with an actual Love, which cannot
be done but by the Motion of Grace; yet God who judges the Soul not according
to that which is transient in it, but according to its six'd and permanent
Dispositions, could not look upon him as Just and Holy. For one single Act of
loving God above all Things, cannot naturally change an inveterate Habit of
Self-love. This cannot be done without I shall explain this in Chap. 8.
the use of the Sacraments, which Christ has instituted for our Justification,
whereby one single Act of the love of God has power to produce a Habit of it,
which alone gives us a Right to the true Goods. And therefore none of the
Philosophers, not Socrates, nor Plato, nor Epictetus, how enlightened soever
they were, in respect of their Duties, nor even those who may be supposed to
have shed their Blood for the Order of Justice, can be saved, if they did not
receive that Grace which is to be obtained by Faith alone; because God, the
just Judge, could not judge them but according to the permanent Disposition of
their Wills; and though it were naturally possible for a Man to lay down his Neck
by an actual Motion of the love of Justice, yet this alone would not change the
natural and inveterate Habit of his Self-love, a Habit confirmed and augmented
every moment by the Motions of Concupisence, during the whole Course of his
Life.

XII. Nevertheless, since Heathens always retain some love for Order, they may
avoid the Sin which they commit, by reviving that Love, by declining every
thing that may excite Self-love, and by not consenting before they are forced
to it, as I shall show hereafter; but indeed, they cannot fulfill the
Commandments of God; they cannot love Order more than themselves in all Cases.
This Reason may convince us of, and Faith informs us that it is impossible for
them to do; only those who have Faith can do this, and even amongst them, all
have not an equal Power; there are none but the Just, to whom nothing is
wanting; for the rest, they may have recourse to Prayer, if they are sensible
of their own Weakness; they may by the assistance of their Faith, and in
consequence of the Promises of Jesus Christ, not by the necessity of the
immutable Order of Justice, merit the next degree of Power to keep the
Commandments of God upon all Occasions.

XIII. I shall repeat in a few words, those essential Truths which I have here
proved, and which are necessary for the right understanding of the sequel of
this Discourse. Habits are acquired and confirmed by Acts; the ruling Habit
does not always act: A Man may do such Acts as have no relation to it, and
sometimes such as are contrary to it; and therefore he may alter his Habits.

XIV. Again, there is no Man, let him be never so vicious, who has not some
disposition to love Order: And therefore every free and rational Man may, I do
not say become just, but correct and amend himself.

XV. But supposing the assistance of Grace, every Man may become just: For the
ruling Love of the immutable Order which justifies us in the sight of God, is a
fixed and permanent Disposition, it is a Habit. Now we may acquire this Habit
by the assistance of Grace, not only because we may by the help of actual Grace
freely perform so many or such vigorous Acts of the love of Order above all
Things, as will produce the Habit of it; but with more ease and certainty,
because we may come to the Sacraments by the motion of this Love, and the
Sacraments of the New Testament infuse into our Hearts justifying Charity.

XVI. All then that we have to do to acquire and preserve the ruling Love of
the immutable Order; or in shorter terms, the love of Order consists in
searching diligently what are the things that excite this Love and make it
produce its proper Acts, and what those are that can stop the actual Motion of
Self-love. Now I know but two Principles which determine the natural Motion of
the Will, and stir up the Habits, to wit, Light and Sense. Without one of these
Principles, no Habit is formed naturally, and those which are formed remain
unactive. If any one will take the pains to consult what he finds within
himself, he will easily be satisfied, that the Will never actually loves any
good, except the Light discovers it, or Pleasure renders it present to the
Soul: And if we consult Reason, we shall be convinced that it must be so; for
otherwise, the Author of Nature would imprint useless Motions on the Will.

XVII. There is nothing then but Light and Pleasure which produce any actual
Motion in the Soul. Light discovers to it the Good which it loves by an
irresistible impression; and Pleasure assures it, that that Good is actually
present; for the Soul is never more fully convinced of its Good, than when it
finds it self actually touched with the Pleasure which makes it happy. Let us
therefore enquire into the Means by which we may cause the Light to diffuse it
self in our Minds, and make our Hearts be touched with such Sensations as are
suitable to our Design, which is to produce in us the Acts of the Love of
Order, or to hinder us from forming those of Self-love; for it is evident, that
all the Precepts of Morality absolutely depend on these Means. In this enquiry,
I shall observe the following Method.

XVIII. First, I shall examine by what Means we may be enlightened as to our
Duties: For the Light ought always to go first; and besides, the discovery of
Good depends much more upon our selves than the relish of it. For generally our
Wills are the occasional, direct and immediate Causes of our Knowledge, but
never of our Sense. Afterward I shall enquire into the occasional Causes of
our Sensations, and the power we have over them, that by their means we may
dispose the Author of Grace and Nature to affect us in such a manner, that the
Love of Order may be excited in us and quicken us, and Self-love or
Concupiscence may remain without Motion.

XIX. I shall first speak of those Sensations which God produces in us in
consequence of the Order of Grace, because these have power to produce in us
such Acts of the Love of Order as are capable of forming the Habit of it. After
that, I shall treat of those Sensations produced in us by God, in consequence
of the Order of Nature; which cannot weaken our vicious Habits, but indirectly,
and which we are almost always concerned to avoid, that we may preserve in our
Soul the Power and Liberty of loving the true Good, and living according to
Order. For the different ways by which we avoid these Sensations, make one of
the principal parts of Morality; and most of the Names of Virtue were invented
only to express the acquired Dispositions of avoiding them.

CHAP. V. Of the Strength of the Mind. Our Desires are the occasional Causes of
our Knowledge. The Contemplation of abstract Ideas is difficult. The Strength
of the Mind consists in an acquired Habit of enduring the Labor of Attention.
The way to acquire it is to Silence our Senses, Imagination and Passions, to
Regulate our Studies, and to Meditate only on clear Ideas.
I. WE are assured both by Faith and Reason, That God alone is the true Cause
of all Things: But Experience teaches us, That he never acts but according to
certain Laws which he has prescribed to himself, and which he constantly
observes: For instance, it is God alone that moves all Bodies, which perhaps
would require a great many Words to convince some People of. But this being
supposed, as having been proved elsewhere, it is evident from Experience, that
God never moves Bodies but when they strike against one another. So that this
Impulse of Bodies may be said to be the Occasional Cause which infallibly
determines the Efficacy of that general Law, by which God produces a vast
Variety of Motions in his Workmanship.

II. Again, it is God alone that diffuses Light in all spiritual Substances;
this is a Truth which I have sufficiently explained already: But for the
Occasional Cause which determines him to communicate it to us, we must search
no where but in our selves. God by a general Law which he constantly observes,
and of which he has foreseen all the consequences, has annexed the presence
of Ideas to the Attention of our Mind; so that when we can command our
Attention, and make use of it, the Light never fails to diffuse it self in us
proportionably to our Labor. This is so true, that ungrateful and stupid Man
makes it a ground of his Vanity; he imagins himself to be the Cause of his
Knowledge, because God always answers his Desires so faithfully and constantly.
For having an inward Sense of his own Attention, and no Knowledge of the
operation of God, he looks upon the endeavor of his desires, Page 9.
which should convince him of his Impotence, as the true cause of those Ideas
which accompany that endeavor.

III. Now God must have placed the occasional causes of our Knowledge in our
selves for several Reasons, the chief of which is, that otherwise we should not
have been Masters of our Wills. For since our Wills must be enlightened before
they can be moved; if it were not in our power to Think, it would not be in our
power to Will. We should not be perfectly free, nor consequently in a condition
to merit the true Goods, for which we are Created.

IV. The attention of the Mind then is a kind of natural Prayer, by which we
obtain the illumination of Reason. But since Sin entered into the World, the
Mind often finds it self in the midst of barren and dismal Solitudes; it cannot
Pray; the labor of Attention wearies and disheartens it. Indeed the Labor is
at first very great, and the recompense but small; and besides we find our
selves continually solicited, pressed and agitated by the Imagination and
Passions, whose inspiration and motions we follow with Pleasure. However there
is a necessity for it, we must call upon Reason if we will be enlightened by it:
There is no other way to obtain Light and Understanding, but by the labor of
Attention. Faith is a Gift of God, which we cannot merit; but Understanding is
generally given only to merit. Faith is purely Grace in all Senses: But the
understanding of Truth is Grace only in such a Sense, that we must merit it by
our own Labor, or by cooperating with Grace.

V. Now those who are fitted to undergo this Labor, and are always attentive
to the Truth that should guide them, have such a disposition as without doubt
deserves a more magnificent Name than any of those that are given to the most
splendid Virtues. But though this Habit or Virtue be inseparably joined to the
love of Order, it is so little known among us, that I know not whether we have
given it the honor of a particular Name. I shall therefore take the liberty to
call it by an equivocal Name, Strength of Mind.

VI. For the obtaining this true Strength whereby the Mind is enabled to bear
the Labor of Attention, we must begin to Labor betimes; for naturally we
cannot acquire any Habits but by Acts, we cannot gain Strength but by Exercise:
But perhaps the great difficulty lies in beginning. We remember that we have
begun, and have been forced to leave off. This disheartens us, we think our
selves incapable of Meditation, and renounce Reason. If this be the case,
whatever we can say to excuse our Sloth and Negligence, we must also renounce
Virtue, at least in part. For without the Labor of Attention, we can never
comprehend the greatness of Religion, the sanctity of Morality, the littleness
of every thing but God, the ridiculousness of our Passions, and all our inward
Miseries. Without this Labor, the Soul will be in continual Darkness and
Disorder; for there is naturally no other way to obtain the Light which should
guide us; we shall be eternally disquieted and strangly perplexed; for we are
afraid of every thing when we walk in the Dark, and think our selves environed
with Precipices. Faith indeed does guide and support us; but that is because it
always produces some Light by the Attention which it stirs up in us: For there
is nothing but Light that can give us Courage and Assurance, when we have so
many Enemies to fear.

VII. What must we do then to set about our Work without being discouraged? Let
us see what it is that puts us out of Heart. We meditate with Pain, and without
recompense. The Pain on one side disheartens us, and on the other the Reward
does not sufficiently encourage us. We must then make the Pain less, and the
Reward greater. This is plain. But there is nothing more difficult: Nay, it is
impossible for the greatest part of Mankind. And for this Reason it is, that we
need a more compendious way to be assured of the Truth, and that the visible
Authority of the Church is necessary for our Conduct. For even those of the
greatest Genius, if they deviate from Faith, or abandon the Analogy of Faith,
wander out of the way which leads to Understanding; they break the Chain of
Truths, which are all linked together in such a manner, that one single
Falsehood being granted for truth, a Man may overthrow all the Sciences, if he
knows how to argue by a deduction of Consequences.

VIII. To lessen the Pain which we find in Meditation, we must avoid every
thing that takes up any room in the Mind unprofitably: And as there is nothing
that possesses it more than that which touches, strikes and agitates it; it is
evident that we must carefully avoid all Objects that please our Senses and
excite our Passions. The Senses and Passions being certain Modifications of the
proper substance of the Soul, all intellectual Ideas which do not modify it,
must of necessity disappear in the presence of sensible Objects, though we strive
never so much to retain them, and to discover their Relations. Besides, we are
persuaded that it is in our own power to recall these intellectual Ideas; but
Experience assures us that our Wills are not the occasional causes of our
Senses. And therefore we readily lay hold of those Sensations, by which we
enjoy those Delights that pass away, and cannot be recalled; and neglect the
pure Ideas whereby we discover the Truth which remains fixed, and which we can
contemplate whenever we please. For we must resolve speedily as to those Goods
which fly away from us, but we may defer the examination of those that are
stable and always present. In short we would always be actually happy: We would
never be actually Miserable. Actual Pleasure makes us actually Happy, and
actual Pain actually Miserable. Therefore every Sensation which participates of
Pleasure or Pain, possesses the Mind: Every motion of the Soul, which has
actual good or evil for its Object, governs the Will. So that we must use very
strong endeavors to contemplate Truth, when our Senses are affected, and our
Passions stirred: And since we find by Experience, that these endeavors are at
that time very insignificant, it is impossible but that the Soul being spent
and tired must be discontented and discouraged. And therefore those who treat
of Prayer, give us this weighty Admonition, to labor incessantly in mortifying
our Senses, and not to meddle with those things which do not concern us, and
which may in the sequel by our indiscreet engaging in them, excite in us a
Thousand troublesome Motions.

IX. The next thing we have to do, is to avoid as much as we can, all those
Sciences and Occupations which have nothing but show and outward splendour;
those Sciences in which the Memory only is employed, those Studies and
Occupations in which the Imagination is too much exercised. When a Man's Head
is full, he is content with his imaginary Riches, and being swelled with Pride,
he scorns the labor of Attention; or if he owns the necessity of it, it will
cost him too much Pains to remove all those false Ideas which his Memory
furnishes him with. And when the Imagination is too much exercised, the
evidence of Truth does not make a lively impression on us: For it is certain
that there is nothing more opposite to Reason, than an Imagination too well
furnished, too nice, too active, or rather a malignant and corrupted
Imagination: For the Imagination ought always to be silent when Reason Speaks;
but when we have used our selves to employ it much, it continually interrupts
and opposes it. And therefore we see that those Men of Sense I speak of, and
your great. Wits as they fancy themselves, have not much Piety or Religion; for
indeed there are no Men more blind than they. All the Light in them is
extinguished by Pride; for being always highly conceited of themselves, and
satiated or rather having no Appetite to Truth, they cannot bring themselves to
think of earning by the Sweat of their Brow the Bread of the Soul, a
Nourishment of which they have no manner of Relish.

X. A Man must labor with the Soul to maintain the life of the Soul; this is
absolutely necessary. But nothing is more servile than to employ the labor of
the Soul in getting Money or Honor. That a Mechanic should labor with the
Body to maintain the life of the Body, to get Bread, this is conformable to
Order; at least while his Body is at Work, he may feed his Mind, and employ it
in good Thoughts: But for a Magistrate, a Statesman, a Merchant, to lavish
away the strength of his Mind in getting those Goods that are many times of no
use for the life of the Body, and always dangerous to that of the Soul, is a
very great Folly. And therefore we should in the third Place avoid all such
Employments as deprive us of the liberty of the Mind, except God engages us in
them by an extraordinary Vocation. For if Charity, or the Laws of the Community
in which we live, oblige us to them, and we take upon us no more than we are
able to bear; God will make up in us an equivalent to that which we might have
obtained by the labor of Meditation. And even then we shall find time enough
to examine our selves in relation to our Duties, if we are not governed by
Ambition or Interest in the exercise of our Calling.

XI. Every Man knows well enough what things are apt to agitate and distract
his Mind; at least he may be informed by consulting Experience, or that inward
Sense which he has of himself. And therefore I shall not dwell any longer in
setting down particularly what we must do to make Meditation easy to us. It is
only the Body which makes the Soul dull and heavy: This is the ground of our
Stupidity. Now all sensible Objects work upon us only by means of the Body.
Therefore it is evident that to hearken without Pain to the Answers which Truth
pronounces within us, we have nothing to do but to silence our Senses,
Imagination and Passions; or in a Word, to still that confused Noise which the
Body makes in us. Now every Man knows by his own Experience, that the Body is
quiet enough, when nothing stirs it from without, or has not too much stirred
it before. For since it retains a long time those impressions and motions which
it has received from sensible Objects, I confess that the Imagination remains
polluted and hurt, when we have been so indiscreet as to be too familiar with
Pleasure. Notwithstanding the Wound will close up of it self, and the Brain
will return to its former state, if we carefully avoid the action of all
Objects that strike our Senses; which we are always able to do, at least in
some measure, with those necessary Helps, which I all along suppose. Let us do
what we can on our part, and we shall be so far from being out of love with
Meditation, that we shall find our selves so well rewarded, that we shall not
repent of our Pains; provided nevertheless that we observe the following Rule,
without which, notwithstanding all our Meditation, we shall never be rewarded
with a clear view of Truth. My Design here is not to teach the Art of Thinking,
nor to deliver all the Rules by which the Mind ought to regulate every step in
takes in the search of Truth. The Subject of this Discourse is Morality; a
Science necessary for all Mankind; and not Logic, which only they who would be
capable of discovering Truth in all manner of Subjects are obliged to study
thoroughly.

XII. The only Rule which I would have carefully observed, is to meditate only
on clear Ideas and undeniable Experiments. To meditate on confused Sensations
and doubtful Experiments, is lost labor; this is to contemplate nothing but
Chimeras, and to follow Error. The immutable and necessary Order, the divine
Law is also our Law: This ought to be the principal Subject of our Meditations.
Now there is nothing more abstracted and less Subject to Sense than this Order.
I grant that we may also be guided by Order made sensible and visible by the
actions and precepts of Jesus Christ: Yet that is because that sensible Order
raises the Mind to the knowledge of the intellectual Order; for the Word made
Flesh is our Model, only to conform us to Reason, the indispensable Model of
all intelligent Beings, the Model by which the first Man was formed, and
according to which we are to be reformed by the foolishness of Faith, which
leads us by our Senses to our Reason, and to the contemplation of our
intellectual Model.

XIII. A Man that is thrown down on the Ground, supports himself with the
Ground, but it is in order to rise again. Jesus Christ accommodates himself to
our Weakness, but it is to draw us out of it. Faith speaks to the Soul only by
the Body, it is true; but it is to the end that a Man should not hearken to the
Body, that he should retire into himself, that he should contemplate the true
Ideas of things, and silence his Senses, Imagination and Passions: That he
should begin upon Earth to make the same use of his Mind that he shall do in
Heaven, where Understanding shall succeed Faith, where the Body shall be
subject to the Soul, and Reason shall have the sole Government. For the Body of
it self speaks to the Soul only for it self; this is an essential Truth, of
which we cannot be too fully convinced.

XIV. Truth and Order consist in nothing else but in the relations of Greatness
and Perfection which Things have to one another. But how shall we discover
these Relations evidently, when we want clear Ideas? How shall we give to every
thing the Rank which belongs to it, if we measure nothing but with relation to
our selves? Certainly, if we look upon our selves as the Center of the
Universe, a Notion which the Body is continually putting into us; all Order is
destroyed, all Truths change their nature; a Torch becomes bigger than a Star;
a Fruit more valuable than the safety of our Country: The Earth, which
Astronomers consider but as a Point in respect of the Universe, is the Universe
it self. And this Universe is yet but a Point in respect of our particular
Being. At some certain times when the Body speaks to us, and the Passions are
excited, we are ready, if it were possible, to sacrifice it to our Glory and
Pleasures.

XV. By clear Ideas, which I make the principal Object of those who would know
and love Order, I mean not only those between which the Mind can discover the
precise and exact Relations, such as are all those which are the Object of
Mathematical Knowledge, and may be expressed by Numbers, or represented by
Lines: But I understand in general by clear Ideas, all such as produce any
Light in the Mind of those who contemplate them, and from which one may draw
certain Consequences. So that I reckon amongst clear Ideas not only simple
Ideas, but also those Truths which contain the Relations that are between
Ideas. I comprehend also in this Number common Notions and Principles of
Morality, and in a word all clear Truths which are evident either of
themselves, or by Demonstration, or by an infallible Authority; though to speak
nicely, these last are rather certain than clear and evident.

XVI. By undeniable Experiments, I mean chiefly those matters of Fact which
Faith informs us of, and those of which we are convinced by the inward Sense we
have of what passes within our selves. If we will be governed by Examples, and
judge of Things by Opinion, we shall be deceived every Moment; for there is
nothing more equivocal and more confused than the Actions of Men, and many
times nothing more false than that which passes for certain with whole Nations.
Further, it is a very fruitless thing to meditate upon that which passes within
our selves, if we do it with a Design of discovering the nature of it. For we
have no clear Ideas of our own Being, nor of any of its Modifications; and we
can never discover the nature of any Beings, but by contemplating the clear
Ideas by which they are represented to us. But we cannot meditate too much upon
our inward Sensations and Motions, to discover their Connexions and Relations,
and the natural or occasional causes which excite them; for this is a thing of
infinite consequence in relation to Morality.

XVII. The knowledge of Man is of all the Sciences the most necessary for our
purpose: But it is only an experimental Science, resulting from the reflection
we make on that which passes within us. This Reflection does not discover to us
the nature of those two Substances of which we are composed, but it teaches us
the Laws of the union of the Soul and Body, and is serviceable to us in
establishing those great Principles of Morality, by which we ought to govern
our Actions.

XVIII. On the contrary the knowledge of God is not at all Experimental: We
discover the Divine Nature and Attributes, when we can contemplate with
Attention the vast and immense Idea of an infinitely perfect Being; for we must
not judge of God but according to the clear Idea we have of him. This is a
thing not sufficiently taken notice of: For most Men judge of God with a
relation to themselves: they make him like themselves a great many ways; they
consult themselves, instead of consulting only the Idea of an infinitely
perfect Being. Thus they take away from him those divine Attributes which they
cannot easily conceive, and attribute to him a Wisdom, a Power, a Conduct, in a
word Sentiments resembling, at least in some measure those which are most
familiar to them. And yet the knowledge of our Duties supposes that of the
Divine Attributes; and our Conduct can never be sure and well grounded if it be
not built upon and governed by that which God observes in the execution of his
Designs.

XIX. The Knowledge of Order, which is our indispensable Law, is compounded of
both these, clear Ideas and inward Sensations. Every Man knows that it is
better to be Good, than Rich, a Prince, or a Conqueror; but every Man does not
see it by a clear Idea. Children and ignorant People know well enough when they
do ill; but it is because the secret Check of Reason reproves them for it, and
not always because the Light discovers it to them. For Order considered
speculatively and precisely, only as it contains the Relations of Perfection,
enlightens the Mind without moving it; if it be taken only for the Law of God,
the Law of all Spiritual Beings, and considered only so far as it has the
force of a Law, (for God loves Order himself, and irresistibly wills that we
should love it, or that we should love every Thing in proportion to its being
amiable); Order, I say, as it is the natural and necessary Principle and Rule
of all the Motions of the Soul, touches, penetrates, and convinces the Mind
without enlightening it. So that we may discover Order by a clear Idea, but we
know it also by Sensation; for since God loves Order, and continually imprints
on us a Love and Motion like his own, we must necessarily be informed by the
sure and compendious way of Sensation, when we follow or forsake the immutable
Order.

XX. But we must observe, that this way of discovering Order by Sensation or
Instinct, is often rendered uncertain by Sin, which has introduced
Concupiscence; because the secret influences of the Passions are of the same
nature with that inward Sensation. For when we act contrary to Opinion and
Custom, we often feel such inward Checks as very much resemble those of Reason
and Order. Before Sin entered into the World, the Sense of inward Reproof was a
sign that could not be mistaken; for then that alone spoke with Authority; but
since that time, the secret inspirations of our Passions are not subject to our
Wills: So that they are easily confounded with the inspirations of inward
Truth, when the Mind is not enlightened. Hence it is that there are so many
People who seriously and in good earnest maintain abominable Errors. A false
Idea of Religion and Morality, which agrees with their Interests and Passions,
appears Truth it self to them; and being convinced by a pleasing Sense within
them, which justifies their excess, they drive on their rash and indiscreet
Zeal with all the Motion of Self-love.

XXI. There is nothing then more certain and secure, than Light; we cannot six
our Attention too long on clear Ideas; and though we may suffer our selves to be
animated by the inward Sense, yet we must never be guided by it. We must
contemplate Order in it self, and permit this Sensation only to keep up our
Attention by the Motion which it excites in us; otherwise our Meditations will
never be rewarded with a clear prospect of Truth; we shall be disgusted every
moment, and being always inconstant, doubtful and perplexed, we shall suffer
our selves to be blindly led by our Fancy.

XXII. Indeed, when our Heart is corrupted, we are not in a Condition to
contemplate Order as it is in it self; we consider with Pleasure, only those
imaginary Relations which things have to our selves, and neglect those real
Relations which they have to one another. We may then love the Mathematics;
but it is because they bring us Reputation or Profit, and because they examine
only the Relations of Greatness; whereas Order Consists in the Relations of
Perfection. The Evidence of Truth is always agreeable, when it does not clash
with our Self-love; but naturally we do not love a Light which discovers our
hidden Disorders; a Light which condemns, punishes, and covers us with Shame
and Confusion. Order, the Divine Law, is a terrible, threatening and inexorable
Law: No Man can think upon it without fear and horror, when he will not obey
it; all this is true. But yet, though the Heart be corrupted, Self-love
enlightened may sometimes stop or diminish the Motion of the Passions. We do not
love Disorder for Disorder's sake; and a Man may desire his Conversion, when he
hopes to heighten his Pleasures by it. After all, I suppose the necessary
helps; for I confess, that without the assistance of Grace, we cannot labor in
our Conversion as we ought, nor so much as have one good Thought which may
contribute to the Cure of our Distempers.

CHAP. VI. Of the Liberty of the Mind. We should suspend our Assent as much as
we can, which is the great Rule. By the Liberty of the Mind we may avoid Error
and Sin, as by the Strength of the Mind we free our selves from Ignorance. The
Liberty of the Mind, as well as the Strength of it, is a Habit which is
confirmed by use. Some instances of its Usefulness in Physics, Morality, and
Civil Life.
I. WE cannot discover Truth without the Labor of Attention, because this
Labor alone is rewarded with Light. Before a Man can support and continue the
Labor of Attention, he must have gained some Strength of Mind, and some
Authority over the Body to impose Silence on his Senses, Imagination and
Passions, as I have showed in the foregoing Chapter. But how great Strength of
Mind soever he has acquired, he cannot Labor incessantly; and if he could,
yet there are some Subjects so obscure, that the Mind of Man cannot penetrate
into them. Therefore to keep him from falling into Error, it is not sufficient
to have a strong Mind to endure Labor, but he must also have another Virtue,
which I cannot better express than by the Equivocal Name of Liberty of Mind; by
which a Man witholds his Assent till he be irresistibly forced to give it.

II. When we examine any very compounded Question, and our Mind finds it self
surrounded on all sides with very great Difficulties, Reason permits us to give
over our Labor, but it indispensably requires us to suspend our assent, and to
judge of nothing, when nothing is evident. To make use of our Liberty as much
as we can, is an essential and indispensable Precept both of Logic and
Morality: For we ought never to believe, till Evidence obliges us to it; we
ought never to love that which we may without Remorse hinder our selves from
loving. I speak of Man only as he is Rational, or as he governs himself only by
Reason: For the Faithful, as such, have other Principles than Light and
Evidence. The Statesman, the Burgher, the Religious, the Soldier, have each of
them Principles of their own; and it is reasonable that they should follow
them, though they do not clearly and evidently see that they are conformable to
Reason. But when Faith gives no determination, we should believe nothing but
what we see. Where Custom prescribes no Rules, we should follow only Faith and
Reason; and though human Authority does determine, and Custom authorizes any
thing, yet if we know clearly and evidently that their Determinations are false
and erroneous, we had better renounce every thing than Reason: I say Reason,
and not our Senses, our Imagination, or the secret inspirations of our
Passions, which I desire may be taken notice of. I speak also of Authority
subject to Error, and not of the infallible Authority of the Church; which can
never be contrary to Reason. For Jesus Christ can never contradict himself;
Truth incarnate can never be contrary to Truth intellectual, nor the Head which
governs the Church to universal Reason, which enlightens all Spiritual Beings.

III. The Strength of the Mind is to the search of Truth, what the Liberty of
the Mind is to the Possession of the same Truth, or at least to Infallibility
or exemption from Error: For by the use we make of the Strength of our Mind we
discover Truth, and by using the Liberty of our Mind we avoid Error. The
Strength and Capacity of the Mind being deficient, Liberty was necessary for
it, that by suspending its Assent it might avoid Error, and that the Author of
its Being might not also be the Author of its Disorders. For the Liberty of the
Mind makes amends for its Weakness and Limitation; and he that has so much
Liberty as to be always able to suspend his Assent, though he cannot deliver
himself from Ignorance, (a necessary Imperfection of all finite Spirits,) may
yet avoid Error and Sin, which render a Man contemptible, and make him liable
to Punishment.

IV. It is certain, that if we always made use of our Liberty, as far as we are
able, we should never assent but to Evidence, which alone does never deceive,
as I have proved elsewhere, and which also obliges the Will to give its Assent.
For when the Mind sees clearly, it cannot doubt that it sees; when it has
examined every thing that there is to examine, in order to the discovery of
those Relations or Truths which it searches after, it is necessary that it
should rest there, and give over its Enquiries. In the same manner, as to Sin,
he that loves nothing but what he evidently knows to be the true Good, nothing
but what he cannot help loving, is not irregular in his Love. He loves nothing
but God; for there is nothing else which we cannot without Remorse hinder our
selves from loving. There is nothing but God which we clearly and evidently
know to be really Good, to be the true Cause of Happiness, a Being infinitely
Perfect, an Object capable of contenting the Soul, which being made for the
enjoyment of all Good, may suspend its Assent of loving that which does not
contain every thing that is Good.

V. Strength and Liberty of Mind then are two Virtues, which we may call
General, or to use the common Term, Cardinal Virtues. For since we ought never
to Love any thing, not do any Action, without good Consideration, we must make
use of the Strength and Liberty of our Mind every moment: These Virtues,
according to my Notion of them, are not natural Faculties common to all Men:
There is nothing more rare, nor is there any Man who possesses them perfectly.
I know well enough that Man is naturally capable of some Labor of Mind, but
that does not make him have a strong Mind: He can also suspend his Assent; but
his Mind is not therefore naturally free, in such a manner as I mean. The
Strength and Liberty of Mind, of which I speak, are Virtues which are gotten by
use: But because these Virtues add Perfection to the Soul, and restore it in
some measure to its original State, (for before Sin, the Mind was every way
strong and free); Men do not generally look upon them as Virtues: For they
imagine that Virtue instead of correcting and repairing Nature, ought to change
or destroy it. Nay, there are some People who think that Strength and Liberty
of Mind are Faculties of the Soul, subsisting in a kind of individual; and
judging of others by themselves, they imagine that it is impossible to be
attentive to those Subjects which frighten and discourage them, and that it is
Obstinacy not to Assent to Probabilities by which they are deceived.

VI. But the Strength and Liberty of the Mind are unequal in all Men. There are
no two Persons equally fit to retire into themselves, nor equally capable of
suspending their Assent: Nay, the same Person does not long preserve the
Strength and Liberty of his Mind in the same Condition: If they do not increase
by Use and Exercise, they must necessarily decrease; for there are no Virtues
more opposed by, and more contrary to the continual Motions of Concupiscence.
Most Virtues agree well enough with Self-love, for we may often perform a great
many Duties with Pleasure, and by a motive of Self-love. But we cannot meditate
long without Pain, and much less suspend our Assent, or the Judgment which
determines the Motions of the Soul and Body. When any Good discovers it self to
the Soul, and attracts it by its Charms, it is not at ease, if it remains
unmoved; for there is no harder Labor than to keep our selves firm and steady
in a Current; whenever we cease to act, we are carried away with the Stream.

VII. Thus we see there is scarce any Man that applies himself to Meditation;
and that those who undertake the search of Truth, often want Strength and
Courage to bring them to the place of its Habitation; tired and disheartened,
they strive to content themselves with what they already possess, or perhaps
comfort themselves with a ridiculous contempt of what they cannot attain to, or
a cowardly and mean spirited Despair. If they are deceived, they turn
Deceivers; if they are tired themselves, they infect others with Sloth and
Idleness; and but to see them, is enough to make one like themselves,
discouraged with Labor, and out of relish with Truth. For such is the Nature
of Men, that they had much rather deceive one another, than consult their
common Master; they are so credulous in respect of their Friends, and so
unbelieving or so little attentive to the Answers of the Truth within them,
that Opinion and Party are the general Rule of their Thoughts and Actions.

VIII. In order to gain some Liberty of Mind, and to accustom our selves to
suspend our Assent, we must continually reflect on the prejudices or
pre-occupations of our Minds, and the cause of them. We fancy we comprehend
things very well, when we cease to admire them; and their familiarity ridding
us of all apprehension, our Mind readily gives its assent, because it has no
interest to withold it. It signifies nothing to suspend our Assent, if we
have no design to examine; for what matter is it if we do fall into Error? But
it is great and agreeable to judge of every Thing. Now we cannot examine
without Pain; at least we must spend some time in Examination, which the Soul
created to be happy, thinks lost, when it is not kept in motion by Pleasure,
Vanity or Interest. Hence it is, that the ordinary Language is nothing but
perpetual Jargon. For every Man thinks he understands very well what he says
himself, or hears another say, when he has said it, or heard it said a great
many times over: They are only new Terms which cause uneasiness, and awaken the
Attention; and these new Terms, though never so clear and free from equivocal
Significations, are always suspected; because every one is capable of Suspicion
and Apprehension, but there are few People capable of Attention sufficient to
discover Truth, and free themselves from Apprehension. I could fill whole
Volumes with Examples of expressions which are universally received, and yet
their Sense is undetermined and confused. But every Man should take delight to
join clear Ideas, if he can, to his ordinary Discourse; for there are few
Employments more agreeable than this, or more proper to free us from our
Prejudices, and to procure us some Liberty of Mind.

IX. By the same Principle it is that most Men imagine they know well enough
the Causes of those natural Effects which are common and ordinary; and when you
ask the reason of them, they think you must be satisfied, though they tell you
nothing but what you know already; for they believe that we ought to give over
our Enquiries, when we cease to wonder, and that we should assent to every
thing, if we have nothing to fear or hope. How comes an Egg to produce a
Chicken? It Is the Heat of the Hen which Hatches it. This is clear; there is
nothing more common; you must be satisfied with this. What is it that causes a
Grain of Wheat to shoot out and make way through the Earth to spread its Root
there, and produce the Ear? It Is the Rain that does all this; What would you
have more? Or if you be not contented with these or the like Answers, those who
pass for Philosophers will tell you, that Heat and Moisture, Terms clear enough
in all Conscience, are the fruitful Principles of the generation and corruption
of all Things. They will tell you that the little Animals are engendered of
Corruption and Putrefaction; that the great ones preserve their Species by
certain seminal or prolifick Powers, which form and rank all the parts of the
Foetus: But that the Sun and Moon preside over all, or it may be a Primum
Mobile, which gives motion to all the Bodies which it contains. These fine
Things, or the like, we have heard, when we were Boys from grave Men whom we
called our Masters. And because we could never learn if we did not believe
without Examination, retain and repeat well, we have believed and repeated
these Impertinences so many times, that afterward we cannot hinder our selves
from believing them and teaching them to others.

X. If an Ox or any Animal of a new Species should drop from the Clouds, all
the Virtuoso's and curious Wits would make abundance of Reflections on a thing
that very little deserved their application. But that all Animals should come
out of the Womb of their Mothers in a uniform manner, and according to
infinitely wise Laws; this is a thing too common to be the subject of their
Reflections and Enquiries. It Is Nature that does all those wonderful Things.
This great Word explains every Thing. We rest satisfied with it; we do not
suspend our Judgment. We believe: But what is it that we believe? Why that
Nature does every Thing: Nothing is plainer. Shall we doubt of this! Shall we
examine things that we have said and heard a Thousand and a Thousand times? And
what will this bring us to? To meditate? No, that costs too much Pains. To go
to School and learn? No, that Time's past. We are now asked our Opinion: And
therefore our Province is now to determine and to judge.

XI. There would be no Atheists or Libertines, if Men would reflect a little, I
will not say on themselves, but on the least considerable of the Works of God,
on a Leaf, a Grain or a Fly. But they have seen these Wonders when they were
Children. They have been used to them before they could think in Order, before
they could reflect and suspend their Assent. They have been taught to slight
and pass them by without regard. Thus they are surrounded with wonderful Works,
and do not know it. They are themselves the Masterpiece of God's Workmanship,
and yet they think the least of any thing of examining what they are.

XII. But the advantage of suspending our Assent is much greater in matters of
Morality than in any other' Case whatsoever. For that which relates to Manners
is very little known, and very difficult to be known exactly, because the
Principles and Idea's which we have of that matter, are obscured by the
Passions, which leave us no liberty of Mind, but in respect of those Truths
which do not much concern us. So that in matters of Morality we avoid Error
almost as often as we suspend our Assent; and these Errors are always of
Consequence. Not but that we are often obliged to act, before we know clearly
what we ought to do. But whatever we ought to do, we ought never to believe,
before Evidence obliges us to it. Nor do I say that we must always remain in
doubt: For there are infinite differences between doubting and believing, which
have no particular Names. We doubt when every thing is equally probable. We
believe when every thing is evident. But as there are innumerable degrees of
Probability greater and less, the Mind must place every thing in it is proper
Rank, if it would judge rightly. And its decisions ought always to be guided by
Light and Evidence. For though a Principle be not evident, yet perhaps it is
evident that this Principle is probable. And therefore the Mind should suspend
its Assent, and examine it, if the time permits. It should look upon it as
probable, and give it that degree of probability which Light and Evidence allow
it. For in fine, the Judgments of the Will ought not to have a greater latitude
than the perceptions of the Mind: We should follow the Light step by step, and
not go before it. When we judge upon no other ground but because we will judge,
and before we are obliged to it by Evidence, this Judgment being of our own
production, and not proceeding from the action of God within us, is liable to
Error; and though it may by Chance be right, yet it is not rightly made, because,
as I have said several times, we should make use of our Liberty as much as we
can.

XIII. Let a Man spend but one Year in the Conversation of the World, hearing
every thing that is said, and believing nothing, retiring every Moment into
himself, to hearken whether the Truth within him speaks the same Language, and
still suspending his Assent till the Light appear: I shall reckon such a Man
more learned than Aristotle, wiser than Socrates, and more illuminated than the
Divine Plato. Nay, I esteem the facility which he will thereby gain of
meditating and suspending his Assent, more than all the Virtues of the greatest
Men among the ancient Heathens; for if he cultivates a Soil that is not
ungrateful, he will gain by his Labor more strength and liberty of Mind than
can be imagined. What a vast difference there is betwixt Reason and Opinion;
betwixt the Sovereign within which convinces by Evidence, and Men who persuade
by Instinct, by their Gestures, Voice, Air and Behavior; betwixt Men both
deceivers and deceived, and the eternal Wisdom, Truth it self! Let those who
have not reflected on these things condemn me if they please, and let them
begin their Censure by renouncing Reason.

XIV. But farther, if Men would suspend their Assent also touching matters of
Fact, of which they cannot be informed by consulting the inward Truth, but seem
in a manner obliged to believe what they are told; how many mistakes and
disturbances would they avoid by making a little use of their Liberty? There is
nothing does more mischief in the World than the Opinion Men have of Things:
But the Opinion they have of Persons excites also an infinite number of
Passions. Slander, Calumny and false Reports, are oftentimes the cause of the
oppression of Innocence, of irreconcilable Hatreds, and sometimes also of
Battles and bloody Wars. A Word ill understood and worse interpreted, is a
sufficient ground for a Challenge with Men of a light and hasty Disposition.
They will not submit to have Matters fairly cleared: Or if they would, People
are not always in a Humor to give them this Satisfaction. What then must we do
in this Case? We should believe nothing that is said, we should suspend our
Assent, and remember these Words of the wise Man, "He that is hasty to believe
is light in Heart: For it is the greatest mark of a weak Mind, to believe
lightly every thing that is said. Do not we know that the greatest part of
Mankind is apt to Poison the most innocent Words and Actions, I do not say out
of wilful and devilish Malice, but for their Interest or Diversion, to show
their Wit, or from the natural Malignity of their Temper? Have we not observed
that almost all common Reports prove false in the end; and that when it is the
interest of a Party, that any one should be a Man of Probity and Virtue or the
contrary, common Fame disguises and transforms him in a Moment? Let every Man
reflect but upon himself. How many false and rash Judgments has he made of
every thing that has been told him of Persons whom he does not Love? But let
him take notice, that if he once suffer himself to believe all the Ill he
hears, his Imaginations and Passions will not be quiet, but will make him
believe a great deal more. For the Imagination and Passions never cease to
communicate their own Dispositions and malignant Qualities to the Objects which
excite them; as the Senses imprint on Bodies those sensible Qualities with
which they themselves are affected: For else how could the Passions justify all
the Extravagances and Wrongs they commit? We must not always attribute to
others what we feel within our selves: This miscarriage is so frequent, that
whenever any one speaks of another, we have reason to be apprehensive of
falling into it, and to fear that he does not speak so much what is true, as
what he believes to be true. So that if we would not be deceived in our
Opinions of Persons, we should suspend our Assent, and look upon that which is
said of them only as probable. Prudence requires us to distrust Men, and to be
always on our guard against their Malignity. But we are not allowed to condemn
them within our selves: We must leave the quality of Judge and searcher of
Hearts to God alone, if we will not run the hazard of committing a thousand
Wrongs.

XV. That we may clearly comprehend the necessity of endeavoring to gain some
liberty of Mind, or some facility of suspending the assent of the Will; we must
know that when two or more Goods are actually present to the Mind, and the Mind
determines its choice in relation to them, it never fails to choose that which
at that instant appears to be the best; supposing an equality in every thing
else. For the Soul being capable of loving only by the natural tendency which
it has toward Good, must of necessity love that which has the greatest
conformity with what it loves irresistibly.

XVI. But we must observe, That the Soul may still suspend its Assent, and not
determine it self finally, even when it does determine it self; especially in
regard of false Goods. (I suppose the room which it has for thinking, not to
be taken up by any over-violent Sensations or Motions.) For in fine, we may
withold our Assent, till Evidence obliges us to yield it. Now we can never
evidently see that false Goods are true ones, because we can never evidently
see that which is not. So that though we cannot hinder our selves from
determining in favor of the most apparent Goods, yet by suspending our Assent,
we may love none but those that are most solid. For we cannot suspend our
Judgment without exciting our Attention; and the Attention of the Mind dispels
all those vain appearances and probabilities, which deceive the negligent and
weak, those servile Minds which are sold to Pleasure, and will not fight for
the preservation and enlargement of their Liberty; in a Word, those who cannot
undergo the labor of Examination, but assent imprudently to every thing that
pleases their Concupiscence. There is nothing then more necessary than the
liberty of the Mind to make us love none but the true Good, live according to
Order, inviolably obey Reason, and to procure us true and solid Virtue. And all
such Occupations as may any way contribute to gain the Mind a liberty of
suspending its Assent, till the light of Truth appears, are always very
profitable to Men, who have a natural inclination to judge boldly and
adventurously of every thing, and by consequence are extremely liable to fall
into Error and Disorder.

CHAP. VII. Of Obedience to Order. The means of acquiring a firm and ruling
Disposition to obey it. It cannot be done without Grace. How far the right use
of our Strength and Liberty contributes toward it, by the Light it produces in
us, by the contemptible Opinion it gives us of our Passions, and by the Purity
which it preserves and establishes in our Imagination.
I. THE facility of rendering the Mind attentive, and of withholding its
Assent, till Evidence obliges it to give it, are Habits necessary for such as
would be substantially Virtuous. But solid Virtue, Virtue every way complete,
does not consist only in those two noble and extraordinary Dispositions of the
Mind; there is required besides an exact Obedience to the Law of God, a general
Nicety in all our Duties, a firm and governing disposition of regulating all
the motions of our Hearts and all the actions of our Life by the known Order;
in a Word, the love of Order. For what advantage is it to a Man to have
strength and liberty of Mind sufficient to discover the most hidden Truths, and
to avoid even the smallest Errors, if he does not govern his Actions by his
Light, if he opposes or forsakes the Truth which he knows, and withdraws
himself from the Obedience which he owes to Order, the inviolable, the eternal
and divine Law? Certainly this will serve only to render him more Criminal, and
to enhance his Guilt in the Eyes of him who invincibly loves Order, and
indispensably punishes every breach of it.

II. But how must we gain this fixed and ruling Disposition of governing all
the motions of our Heart, and all the actions of our Lives by the known Order?
What we are to do for this end is evident from that which has been said in the
fourth Chapter. Habits are formed by Acts: We must therefore frequently make
firm and constant resolutions of obeying Order, and sacrificing every thing to
it. For by often repeating these actual Resolutions, and pursuing them at least
in part, we may by degrees gain some kind of habitual Disposition. This is easy
enough to be conceived; but it is by no means easy to be practiced. For which
way can we frame this heroic Resolution of sacrificing even our predominant
Passion to the divine Law? Certainly it is not possible to be done without the
assistance of Grace. A Man without Grace may kill himself, he may desire to
return again into Nothing: But Nothing is not so terrible as that disconsolate
condition of living without that which we love. Nothing is a middle state
between Happiness and Misery: So that we may wish not to be, when we are
miserable, and desperate in our Misery. But we cannot wish to be miserable,
because the desire of Happiness is invincible and irresistible. And therefore
without a firm Faith, and the hope of enjoying a Happiness more solid than that
which we part with, Self-love though never so much enlightened, cannot beget in us
a bare resolution of sacrificing our predominant Passion. This is without
Dispute.

III. Now that this Faith and Hope are the Gifts of God (...) be proved by
several Reasons, the chief of which I take to be this, That it is naturally
impossible for a Man who is continually distracted by Objects which please his
Senses, and excite his Passions, to have so much command over himself, as to
examine the Truths of Religion, with that attention and perseverance which is
necessary to be fully convinced of them and submit to them, unless God by a
particular favor make him find some delight in this kind of application.
Nevertheless, since we may make Nature subservient to Grace a great many ways,
we should, out of a Principle of Self-love enlightened, endeavor to retire into
our selves, to confirm our Faith, and increase our Hope. But these Truths
require a fuller explication.

IV. Every Man invincibly desires to be Happy, but with a solid and durable
Happiness. No Man would be deceived, especially in a matter of so great
consequence as eternal Salvation. And therefore every Man who has already
gained some force and liberty of Mind, or indeed every Man who is not so much a
Slave to Sin, and so much in subjection to actual Pleasure, that he cannot make
any reflection on the way which leads' to Life, should and may satisfy himself
once for all, whether his Being is immortal or not; whether there be a jealous
and inexorable God; whether Order is an inviolable Law, and whether every
Action conformable or contrary to that Law shall be infallibly rewarded or
punished. Self-love enlightened, and the desire of being substantially happy, is
without doubt a sufficient Grace to incline us to make some examination of the
Truths of Religion. We may deprive our selves for a moment of a slight
Pleasure, to look after the enjoyment of a solid and durable one. For nothing
is more reasonable and more agreeable to Self-love enlightened, than to be
willing to cease from being actually happy for some time, that we may be
solidly happy to all eternity.

V. It is not in a Man's own choice to have the Gospel preached to him. It does
not depend on his own election to happen into a Conversation, or to light of a
Book, which may convince and convert him by means of the favorable
circumstances of Grace and of his present Condition. But it is, or has been in
his own power to preserve some strength and liberty of Mind, and not suffer his
Imagination to be corrupted to that degree, as to render Grace when it is given
him ineffectual; and to make him in a manner insensible of the taste of true
Good and spiritual Delight, through the abundance, the sprightliness and force
of sensible Pleasures which disturb and captivate him. For, as I have already
said, it is by the means of this spiritual Delight, that the Truths of Religion
make a lively impression on the Mind. Without this we read the Scripture, like
the Jews, with a Vail over our Eyes. The Preacher speaks to the Ears; Miracles
and Prodigies astonish the Senses; but God does not speak to the Heart. It is
Attention that is the natural cause of Light. But most commonly, as soon as
Pleasure ceases, the Attention also fails; at least that kind of favorable
Attention which renders the Light agreeable and lovely, and prepares the Soul
for a tendency toward Good; because Pleasure is the natural Characteristick of
Good, and the Soul invincibly desires to be always happy.

VI. Nevertheless, as we desire to be solidly happy, we may in some measure
sacrifice false Pleasures, though present, to solid Pleasures, though future: Nay,
we may seek the latter rather than the former, when the actual hope and the
actual appearance of Good are in a reciprocal proportion to each other.
Experience teaches us these Truths; for we often quit a slight Pleasure when we
hope to enjoy one more solid. But because we invincibly desire to be happy, and
to be actually happy, we cannot long resist the actual and continual allurement
of sensible Pleasures, how great Strength and Liberty of Mind soever we have
acquired: We cannot be willing to put off our Happiness till after Death, which
the Imagination looks upon as a true annihilation; the Imagination, I say,
which without Grace is always the Mistress of Reason, the Governess of the
Passions, and the inward Principle of all the violent Motions which shake the
Soul. Thus it is evident, that on the one side, he that commits Sin, and does
not labor to maintain the Strength and Liberty of his Mind, deserves
Punishment; and on the other, that neither the most enlightened Law, nor the
clearest Philosophy, can impart to the Soul, corrupted and weakened by original
Sin, sufficient soundness and strength to walk in the way which leads to
Happiness: This St. Paul shows all through his Epistle to the Romans.

VII. It is necessary then that Man who is capable of Reason and Happiness,
should make use of all the Strength and Liberty of Mind that is left him, to
inform himself of those things that may increase his Faith and strengthen his
Hope, which may put him in the way to Happiness; and without which, as I have
shown, it is not possible for him so much as to form a Resolution of
Sacrificing his predominant Passion. But what! must we Sacrifice our
predominant Passion to be happy? This is a Contradiction; at least, it is very
harsh and terrible: It is so; but that is when our Passion appears dressed in all
its Charms; we must therefore strip it of them. I do not say, that we must
Sacrifice it with all those Ornaments which disguise it: On the contrary,
seeing we would not be deceived, seeing we would be solidly happy; I say we
must endeavor to know it for what it really is, to discover the Ridiculousness
of it, which may make us despise it, or the Deformity of it, which may create
in us an aversion for it. This I say, that we should and may by the Strength of
our Hope and Faith bring our Mind to such a Temper, that with the help of
Grace, it may perform this Sacrifice which appears so terrible, with Pleasure,
or at least with Joy and Satisfaction: After all, there is a necessity for it.
We must either unavoidably perish together with our imaginary Riches, or throw
them overboard to arrive happily at the Port, where we shall find solid and
substantial Wealth, not subject to Storms and Tempests.

VIII. For this end, we must study the Nature of Man; we must know our Selves,
our Greatness, our Weakness, our Perfections and Inclinations; we must be fully
satisfied of the Immortality of our Being; we must carefully examine the
difference between the two Parts of which Man is composed, and the admirable
Laws of their Union; from thence we must raise our Minds to the Author of these
Laws, and the true Cause of all that passes within our selves, and in the
Objects that are about us. We must contemplate God in those Attributes which
are contained in the vast and boundless Idea of an infinitely perfect Being,
and never judge of him with relation to our selves; but support the View of our
Mind, if there be occasion, in so abstracted and profound a Subject, by the
visible Effects of the universal Cause: Above all, we must examine the
Relations which the Conduct of God has to the Divine Attributes, and find out
how his Conduct ought necessarily to be the Rule of ours: Finally, we must
penetrate into his eternal Designs, and know at least that he is himself the
end of his working, and that the immutable Order is his Law. Then we must go
back again to our selves, compare our selves with Order, and discover that we
are wholly corrupted; we must be sensible and ashamed of our low and unworthy
Inclinations; and condemn our selves as guilty, as Enemies of our God, as not
engaging in his Designs, as not obeying his Law, but the filthy Law of Flesh
and Blood; we must humble our selves and tremble before a God jealous of his
Glory, and a punisher of Crimes; we must dread his just and terrible Vengeance,
Death and Hell; seek for a Mediator with the greatest concern, and find him at
length in the Person of Jesus Christ, the only Son of God; who was once offered
as a Sacrifice upon the Cross, for the Sins of the World, and is now seated at
the right hand of the living God, made Lord of all things, and consecrated a
High Priest of the true Goods; once put to death as a Malefactor without
Jerusalem, and now within the Temple, in the Holy of Holies, before his Face of
the Father, always living to make intercession for Sinners, and to shower down
Blessings and Graces upon them; but after all, their inexorable Judge in the
day of the Vengeance of the Lord; that eternal Day which shall put an end to
all Time, and fix the measures of Good and Evil to all Eternity.

IX. Can we think of these great Truths, and be convinced of them by frequent
Meditations, and yet find our Passions still the same? Can that sensible Pomp
and those Charms which surround them; can they, I say, bear that strong and
penetrating Light which diffuses it self in the Mind, when we think of Death
and Hell, and the World to come, that heavenly Jerusalem enlightened with the
Splendour of God himself, and environed with the River of his Pleasures?
Certainly, the thought of Death alone must change the whole Face of things in
those who have any Sense left, or retain any Strength and Liberty of Mind. But
that unavoidable Alternative of two Eternities, so opposite to each other,
which succeed our latest Moments, must needs break all the Designs, and blot
out all the Ideas which our Passions represent to us; at least, they cannot
possibly justify their Extravagancies and Irregularities in these times of
Reflection.

X. If to those Truths which Reason discovers when it is guided by Faith, we
add that which Reason by it self informs us, of the difference between the Soul
and the Body, and of the Laws of the Union of these two Substances; it will not
be so difficult to discover the Malignity of the Passions, and to despise their
flattering Caresses which irresistibly seduce weak Minds. For when we reflect
seriously on the movement and working of our Machine, we sometimes choose
rather to govern the Springs of it our selves, than to be carried along with
its Motions; and when we are fully convinced, that all the Splendour and all the
Charms of sensible Objects depend only on the manner in which the Fermentation
of the Blood and other Humors represent them to us, the desire which we have
of being solidly happy carries our Thoughts another way, and sometimes makes us
loath and abhor those vain Objects; vain and contemptible without doubt, as
well because the Splendour of them vanishes, when the Fermentation abates, or
when the Circulation of the Blood supplies the Brain with Spirits of a
different Quality, as for a great many other Reasons which need not here be
alleged; they pass away, and that is sufficient. But they pass away in such a
manner, that they draw along with them those that fasten themselves to them,
and destroy them for ever.

XI. Let every one then examine his predominant Passion by the Principles of
the true Philosophy, and those Truths which Faith teaches him, of which he
ought to satisfy himself by a good use of Grace and Liberty; (for nothing is
more reasonable than Religion, though we stand in need os some help to make us
thoroughly comprehend it, and submit our selves to it;) let every one, I say,
examine by the Light of Reason and of Faith, the Passion which holds him in
Captivity; and he will find in himself, some desire, at least, to be delivered
from its Tyranny: The Enchantmens which bewitched him, will vanish by degrees;
he will be ashamed of himself for being so easily seduced, and if the
Fermentation of the Blood and Humors ceases for a little while, and the animal
Spirits change their Course, he will find himself so displeased with the Object
of his Inclinations, that he will not be able so much as to endure the Presence
of it.

XII. But notwithstanding this, we must not cease to watch over our selves, to
distrust our own Strength, and to meditate on those Subjects which render out
Passions ridiculous and contemptible; for we must not imagine our selves at
liberty, because we are not actually ill used by them. Our Imagination remains
a long time polluted by the impression of the Passion which has once reigned
in us; for the Wounds which the Brain has received from the Action of Objects
and the Motion of the Spirits, are not easily cured; the animal Spirits flowing
naturally to those parts of the Brain which are most open or lie most ready to
receive them; it is impossible to heal the Wounds of the Imagination, but by
continually turning the Course of the Spirits which renews them; as it is
impossible for a Wound in the Body to close up, if you thrust the Sword which
made it, every moment into it, or any thing which renews and enflames it.

XIII. But the Spirits do not only of themselves, and as it were fortuitously,
flow into the Wounds which the Brain has received from the Action of sensible
Objects; they are determined also to pass thither continually, by the Pleasure
which the Soul receives from thence, and especially by the admirable
Construction of the Machine, which goes on in its Motion, without expecting the
Orders of the Will, and many times by reason of Sin, contrary to them. So that
whenever we cease to resist and divert the Course of the Spirits, the Passions
renew and increase their Strength. Now the only way to make a Diversion and
Revulsion in the Spirits, is to set before our Minds those Objects, and employ
our selves in those Thoughts to which different courses of the animal Spirits
are joined, by the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body: For the Course of
the Spirits does not depend immediately on our Will; but only because the
Thoughts which determine the Motion of the Spirits depend on it, as I have
shown in the Fifth Chapter. It is impossible then to deliver our selves from
our Passions, if we do not carefully avoid the Objects which excite them, and
employ our Minds in such Thoughts as are proper to make them ridiculous and
contemptible. But I shall treat of this more particularly hereafter.

XIV. To make Men reflect yet farther on the Truths which I have here set down,
I think my self obliged to add this in particular, That neither the Prayer of
Invocation, nor good Works, no nor the Grace of Jesus Christ, does heal the
Wounds which the Brain receives from the violent and irregular Motion which the
Passions excite in the animal Spirits: No, the most sublime Grace of Christ,
that of Baptism, that which the Soul receives in the Holy Communion, when it
comes to it with the most sanctified Dispositions, do not cure this kind of
Distempers without a Miracle. It is true, indeed, that the Grace of
Justification gives us a Right to those Succors which are necessary to resist
the actual Assault of the Passions; but it does not deliver us from their
Attacks, it does not close the Wounds which the Brain has received from the
Action of sensible Objects. God does not work Miracles on our Body when he
justifies us; he still leaves us all our Weaknesses: Baptism does not free us
from our Concupiscence; and the new Christian who is tormented with the Gout,
or disquieted with any Passion, does not find himself cured of those
troublesome Distempers; he only receives the assistance necessary to make him
bear patiently the Pain which afflicts him, and uneasily, tho bravely, the
Caresses of the Passion which Courts and Flatters him.

XV. The same thing almost may be said of Prayer and good Works; they obtain of
God the Succors necessary for the Fight, but they do not deliver us from our
Miseries; unless it be that continual fighting and resisting naturally makes
the Spirits take another Course, and then the Wounds close up and heal of
themselves; for to cure the Wounds of the Brain, as well as those of the other
parts of the Body, it is sufficient that there be nothing to hinder the
separated parts from reuniting.

XVI. Now the Reason why Grace does not deliver us from our Passions, nor
Baptism from the continual Assaults of our Concupiscence, is because the power
of the Grace of Christ appears much more by the continual Victories which the
Just obtain over their Domestic Enemies; the Merit of the Saints by this means
becomes more pure and illustrious; and since Glory is proportioned to Merit,
the holy City, the eternal Temple, the great work of Christ receives
innumerable Beauties, which it would not have, if our Passions did not give us
continual Assaults. St. Paul was just, but yet he found in his Flesh a Law
opposite to that of the Spirit, by which he was animated: He often besought
Christ that he would deliver him from that which he calls, A Thorn in the
Flesh. But Christ answers him; 2 Cor. 12. v. 8, 9.
My Grace is sufficient for thee; for it is in Weakness that my Power appears,
and that Virtue purifies it self. Therefore St. Paul gloried in Infirmities, in
Persecutions, in Reproaches, that the Power of Christ, as he says, might rest
upon him.

XVII. Let us not wonder therefore if the Sacraments leave the Body in the same
condition in which they found it, and strengthen only the inward Man, of which
we have no perfect Knowledge; nor let us despair, because we see our selves
still insulted and ill-us'd by sinful Passions, if we always continue steadfast
in our Faith, contented with our Hope, and thereby unshaken in our Resolution
of Sacrificing all Things to God. But if we would, as indeed we ought, (for we
ought always to avoid Dangers;) if we would, I say, deliver our selves from
those troublesome Motions which the Passions excite in us, we must absolutely
make use of that Remedy which I have prescribed, and fill our Minds with such
Thoughts as may make a Diversion and Revulsion in the animal Spirits, and
render the Passions ridiculous and contemptible; there is no other way. But
those who either upon Philosophical grounds, or by motives of Self-love
enlightened, condemn the Passions as Criminal, must not presently imagine that
they are just in the sight of God, nor too hastily esteem themselves above
their Brethren. We must, as much as we can, make Nature subservient to Grace;
but we must still remember, that Nature does not justify, and that Grace many
times operates in Men's Minds and converts them, and yet they perceive no
alteration in them.

CHAP. VIII. The Means which Religion furnishes us with to gain and preserve
the Love of Order. Jesus Christ is the occasional Cause of Grace: we must call
upon him with confidence. When we come to the Sacraments, the actual Love of
Order is changed in (...) habitual, in consequence of the permanent desires of
^rist: The Proof of this Truth being essential to the Conversion of Sinners.
The fear of Hell is as good a motive as the desires of eternal Happiness. We
must not confound the Motive with the End. The desire of being Happy, or
Self-love, should make us conformable to Order, or obedient to the Law of God.
I. WE cannot obtain nor preserve Virtue or the Love of Order, but by actual
resolutions of Sacrificing every Thing to it; because naturally Habits are got
and maintained by Acts: But we cannot frame a resolution of Sacrificing our
predominant Passion, without a lively Faith, and a firm Hope; especially when
this Passion appears with all its Charms and Allurements. And therefore since
it is Light and Understanding which illuminates Faith, strengthens Hope, and
discovers to the Mind the ridiculousness and deformity of the Passions, we
should continually meditate on the true Goods, and seek and carefully lay up in
our Memory the Motives which may induce us to love them, and to despise
transient Enjoyments; and that with so much the greater diligence, because the
Light is subject to our Wills; and if we live in Darkness, it is most commonly
our own fault. I think I have sufficiently proved these Truths.

II. But when our Faith is not lively, nor our Hope strong enough to make us
resolve to Sacrifice a Passion, which has got such a Dominion over our Heart,
that it corrupts our Mind every Moment, and draws it to its Party; the only
thing we ought to do, and perhaps the only thing we can do in this Case, is to
seek for that in the fear of Hell, and the just Indignation of an avenging God,
which we cannot find in the hope of an eternal Happiness; and in the Motion
which that Fear excites in us, to pray to the Savior of Sinners, that he would
increase our Faith and Confidence in him, not ceasing in the mean time to
meditate on the Truths of Religion and Morality, and on the Vanity of
transitory Enjoyments; for without this we cannot be sensible of our Miseries,
nor call upon our Deliverer. Now when we find in our selves st^^ngth enough to
form an actual resolution of Sacrificing our Passions to the Love of Order;
then, though according to the Principles which I have laid down in the foregoing
Chapters, we may through the assistance of Grace, by repeating the like Acts,
absolutely acquire Charity, or the habitual and ruling Love of the immutable
Order; yet it is better, without delay, to come to the Sacraments, and in that
actual Motion which the Holy Ghost inspires in us, to wash away our Sins by
Penance. This is undoubtedly the most compendious and certain way to change the
Act into a Habit; the Act, I say, which is transient and does not work
Conversion, into a Habit which remains and which justifies. For God does not
Judge us according to that which is actual and transitory, but according to
habitual and permanent Dispositions; and by the Sacraments of the New
Testament, we receive justifying Charity, which gives us a Right to the true
Goods, and the assistances necessary for the obtaining of them. These Truths I
shall here explain either by certain Principles, or by Evidence, or by Faith.

III. I think I have shown in several places, and by several ways, That God
always executes his Designs by general Laws, the Efficacy of which is
determined by the action of occasional Causes. I have proved this Truth by the
Effects of those second Causes which are known to us, and I think I have
demonstrated it from the Idea of God himself, because his Action ought to bear
the Character of his Attributes. And therefore I refer the Reader for this
Matter to my other Writings. But if Reason could not lead us to this Truth, yet
the Holy Scripture would not suffer us to doubt of it, in relation to the
Subject which I now treat of: For the Scripture teaches us that Jesus Christ,
as Man, is not only the meritorious, but also the distributive or occasional
Cause of all Graces; that by his Sacrifice of himself he has gained a Right
over all the Nations of the World, to make use of them as Materials in building
the Spiritual Temple of the Church, of which the stately Temple of Solomon was
but a Shadow and a Figure; and that now, and ever since the day of his
Ascension, he makes use of that Right, and raises that eternal Temple to the
glory of his Father, by the Power which he received from him in the day of his
Victories, when he was made High Priest of the true Goods, after the
irrevocable Order of Melchisedech. Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
Christ is the Head of the Church; he continually infuses into the Members of
which it is composed, 1 John 2.1. 1 T^m. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.23. Heb. 7.25. Joh. 11.42.
Mat. 28.18. Joh. 13.5.
the Spirit which gives it Life and Holiness: He is the Advocate, the Mediator,
the Savior of Sinners: He is in the Holy of Holies, always Living to make
intercession for us, and all his Prayers and Desires are heard. In a word, he
himself tells us, That all Power was given to him in Heaven and in Earth. Now
he did not receive this Power, as God equal to the Father, but as Man like unto
us; and God communicates his Power to the Creatures no farther, than as he
executes their Wills, and by them his own Designs; for God alone is the true
Cause of every thing that is done both in Nature and Grace. Thus it is certain
from the Scripture, that Jesus Christ as Man is the occasional cause which
determines the efficacy of that general Law, whereby God would Save all Men in
and by his Son.

IV. It is necessary that we should be well convinced of this Truth which is
essential to Religion, by reading the New Testament, and particularly the
Epistle to the Hebrews: And having, as I think, sufficiently proved it in my
Treatise of Nature and Grace, and in my Christian Meditations, I shall not
insist any longer upon it. I write for Philosophers, but they are Christian
Philosophers, such as receive the Scripture and the infallible Tradition of the
Universal Church; and I endeavor to explain the Truths of Faith by clear and
unequivocal Terms. This makes me say, that Jesus Christ as Man and High Priest
of the true Goods, is the occasional cause of Grace. I might have called him
the natural, instrumental, second, distributive Cause, or have made use of some
other more common Term: But the commonest Terms are not always the clearest.
Though People fancy they understand them perfectly, yet commonly they scarce know
what they say, when they use them; and if they would take the pains to examine
these which I have mentioned they would find that the Term of natural Cause
raises a false Idea; that that of instrumental is obscure; that of second so
general, that it gives no distinct Idea to the Mind; and that of distributive
at least equivocal and confused. Whereas this which I have made use of, [the
occasional cause of Grace] has, I think, none of these defects, at least as to
those Persons for whom alone I writ the Treatise of Nature and Grace, though many
others have taken upon them to judge of it who scarce understand the Principles
which I have there laid down. For this Term denotes precisely that God who does
every thing as the true cause, which I think I have proved in several places,
imparts his Grace only by Jesus Christ, the Sacrifice once offered on the
Cross, and now glorified and consummated in God, the High Priest of good Things
to come, the Head of the Church, and the Architect of the eternal Temple. It
clearly denotes that the general Law of the Order of Grace is that God would
Save all Men in and by his Son: A Truth which S. Paul repeats upon all
occasions, as being the Foundation of the Religion which we profess. It may be
I have not light on the proper Word to express clearly that which Faith teaches
us concerning Jesus Christ. But let not any one therefore be offended with me,
I am willing to be Taught, and shall never contend with Heat and Obstinacy for
Terms. When any one will give me better, I will make use of them. But I think
that the clearest are the best. For we should consider, that Words are designed
only to express our Thoughts. So that those Words which clearly express false
Conceptions, are in themselves preferable to those which express the most solid
Thoughts confusedly: Especially when Men make use of them as I do, with a
design to explain and prove clearly those Truths which Philosophers themselves
do not very well comprehend.

V. But I desire that the World would do me that Justice, or have so much
Charity for me as to believe, that my introducing some Ideas which I make use
of in this Treatise, proceeds neither from a resentment against any Persons,
nor from a desire of justifying my own Notions or ways of Expression. I believe
that those who have not done me Justice, had no design to injure me; and that
if they judged a little too hastily of my Opinion from Terms which they do not
understand, it was their love to Religion which prompted them to it: A Love
which cannot be too great, and which is hard to be kept within Bounds, when it
is so fervent as I know it to be in some of my Adversaries. The Reader will
pardon this short Digression, I return to my Subject.

VI. God never acts without Reason, and there are but two general Reasons which
determine him to act: Order, which is his inviolable Law, and those general
Laws which he has established, and which he constantly observes, that so his
Actions may bear the Character of his Attributes. Therefore seeing that nothing
happens in the Creatures, which God does not do, and that as to Sinners, the
immutable order of Justice does not require that God should do any good to
them; the Sinner cannot obtain any Good, much less Grace, without having
recourse to the occasional cause, which determines the true cause to
communicate it to Men. So that there is a kind of necessity that we should know
distinctly and precisely what is that occasional cause, that so we may make our
applications to it with confidence, and obtain those assistances, without
which, as I have showed, it is not possible so much as to form a resolution of
sacrificing our predominant Passion to the Law of God.

VII. When a sick Man is in fear of Death, and is fully satisfied that there is
but one certain Fruit which can restore him to his Health again; his Fear is
sufficient to make him use some endeavors to get that Fruit. The first Man was
immortal only because he knew that the Fruit of the Tree of Life could preserve
vigor and give Immortality, and that it was in his power to Eat of it. So when
we are in fear of Hell, and know distinctly that Christ is the Tree of Life,
whose Fruit gives Immortality, or to speak clearly and unequivocally to
Philosophers, when we know that Christ is the occasional cause of Grace, the
actual fear of eternal Death is sufficient to make us call upon him, and pray
that he would with relation to us, form such desires as may determine God the
true cause to deliver us from our Miseries.

VIII. I say once again, for we cannot imprint this Truth too deeply in our
Minds, that Jesus Christ as Man is alone the occasional cause of Grace, and it
is more certain that his desires procure for us the Spirit which quickens us,
than it is that to Morrow the Sun will diffuse its Light, or the Fire its Heat
and Motion. The Fire has sometimes respected the Bodies of Martyrs; the Sun is
often eclipsed, and every Night leaves us in Darkness: But Christ never prayed
in vain. For if before he had completed his Sacrifice, by which he merited the
Glory he now possesses, speaking to his Father, Joh. 11.42.
he said of himself; I knew that thou hear me always; Certainly now that he
is entered by his Blood into the Holy of Holies, and is ordained a High Priest
of true Goods, it would be a very great infidelity to want confidence in him.
But it may be objected, that the Fire communicates its Heat by the necessity of
natural Laws, and that we cannot come near it without feeling its action;
whereas on the contrary it depends on the Will of Christ whether he will Pray
for those which call upon him. This difference is true. But what! Shall we
doubt of the goodness of Christ? Can we forget that he bears the Character of
the Savior of Sinners? Shall we distrust the promises which he has made us in
so many places of his Gospel? Heb. 4.14, 15, 5, 9.
Let us remember that we have in him a High Priest who has experienced our
Miseries, and sympathizes with our Infirmities: That he desires nothing so much
as to finish his great Work, the eternal Temple, of which we should be living
Stones; Luke 15.7.
and that, as he says himself, there is Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that
repents: And in those Thoughts let us approach with Confidence the Throne of
his Grace, the true Mercy-seat. Let us ask, and we shall receive: Let us seek,
and we shall find; let us knock, and we shall at last have leave to enter.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be Saved. Joel 2.32.
The Scripture teaches us these Truths.

IX. So then, supposing that a Man fears the terrible Judgments of the living
God, believes in Christ, and calls upon him as his Savior, and that in fine he
has received from him sufficient Strength to form that noble resolution of
renouncing his predominant Passion: That which he ought to do in this case, is
to come without delay, and throw himself at the Feet of the Priest, that by the
Sacrament of Penance he may receive absolution of his Sins, and justifying
Charity, which Sinners receive by this Sacrament, when they come to it in the
motion which the Holy Ghost inspires, though he does not yet dwell in them.

X. To prove the Truth of what I here assert, I say, that Christ after his
Resurrection appeared to his Apostles, and said to them: Peace be unto you.
Joh. 20.21.
As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he
breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose Sins ye do remit,
they are remitted unto them, etc. From whence it is manifest, first that the
Apostles, and consequently Priests have power to forgive Sins; this I think
cannot be denied. Secondly, that this Sacrament as also all those of the New
Testament, though for other Reasons than these which I here make use of, do
confer justifying Charity, or an habitual and ruling Love of the immutable
Order. For God does not judge of a Man by that which he knows to be transient
and actual in him, but by fixed and permanent Dispositions. Therefore an actual
love of Order does not justify, but only an habitual Love. For God who
inviolably loves Order, cannot love a Heart that is irregular, and more
disposed toward evil than toward good. Now the Priest has power to forgive
Sins: Therefore he has power to render a Sinner acceptable to God. His
Absolution then changes the Act into a Habit and a permanent Disposition. For
the Priest cannot judge of the state of the Penitent, but only of his actual
Resolution. He cannot judge of the Penitent but only by the declaration which
the Penitent himself makes to him, and the Penitent himself cannot tell whether
the love which he has for Order be habitual or not. For a Man cannot judge of
himself but by the inward sense he has of himself, and this sense represents
to him only the acts which he actually perceives, and not the Habits if they be
not formed in him.

XI. From hence it is evident, that it is a pernicious Error to believe that
the Absolution of the Priest delivers the Penitent only from the eternal
Punishment due to Sin. For the Priest having no way to be morally assured that
a Penitent is justified in the sight of God, could never give Absolution but at
a venture, if the Sacrament did not change the Act or the actual resolution of
which we have an inward sense, into an habitual Disposition, which is not
perceived. And besides, how could this be a power of forgiving Sins, to leave
the Sinner in the Death of Sin, and to do good only to the Righteous? It is
certain then that there is in Jesus Christ a permanent and efficacious desire
in consequence of the power which God has given him, by making him the
occasional cause of Grace; that the state of the Penitent is changed by the
absolution of the Priest; and that he is delivered from the guilt of Sin, as
well as from the eternal Punishment which is due to it.

XII. Certainly, if we compare God's two Covenants with Men together, to
discover their several relations, the Blessings promised by the Law, with those
which Christ has merited for us, and of which he is the dispenser; we shall
see plainly that as the Author of the Law gave a Right by his promises to
temporal Goods, so Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant must also give
a Right to real and eternal Goods: And therefore our Sacraments must operate,
in those who receive them Grace or justifying Charity, which alone gives a
Right to these true Goods. For it is certain, that God who loves Order, cannot
give Heaven to those who are more disposed to Evil than to Good, and are
actually in Disorder. After all, the Council of Trent has determined the same
thing which I here assert. Sess. 7. Can. 8 Sess. 14. Chap 4. Cap. 5.
It is an Article of our Faith, that the Sacraments of the New Testament
operate Grace, or justifying Charity; and that the Sinner who comes to the
Sacrament of Penance by the motion which the Holy Ghost inspires in him, a
motion which does not justify, for the Holy Ghost does not yet dwell in him, as
the Council declares, and for those reasons which I have set down; that the
Sinner, I say, truly receives the habitual Charity of Justification by the
efficacy of the Sacrament, which the Savior of Sinners has instituted to
deliver them from the captivity of Sin.

XIII. So then it is evident, that the Sinner who is made contrite by any
motive whatsoever, for it matters not what it is, when he feels himself touched
with Repentance, and has obtained by his Prayers or otherwise, sufficient
strength to form the generous resolution of sinning no more, or of renouncing
his predominant Passion, ought speedily to have recourse to Penance, that so he
may receive by this Sacrament, that which in all probability he could never
obtain by the ordinary way of Prayer.

XIV. I know very well that many People condemn the fear of Hell, as a motive
of Self-love which can never produce any Good: Notwithstanding I have made use
of it, as being the most lively and the most common Motive to excite us to do
those things which may contribute to our Justification. I know that they reject
this motive as useless, and on the contrary approve only of the hope of an
eternal Reward, as a holy and reasonable Motive, by which most good Men are
animated to Virtue, according to those Words of David, who was always so full
of Fervor and Charity; I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes always,
Psalm. 119.112. (...). Sept. propter retribuionem Vulg. Lat.
because of the Reward. Notwithstanding, to desire to be Happy, or to desire
not to be Miserable, is the same thing, there is nothing more easy to be
conceived than this. The fear of Pain and the desire of Pleasure are both of
them but motions of Self-love. Now Self-love in it self is not Evil. God
continually produces it in us. He irresistibly enclines us to Good, and by the
same Motion irresistibly diverts us from Evil. We cannot hinder our selves from
desiring to be Happy, and consequently from desiring not to be Miserable. So
then the fear of Hell, and the hope of Heaven are two Motives equally Good:
Only that of Fear has this advantage over the other, that it is more lively,
strong and efficacious: because generally, supposing all other things equal, we
fear Pain, more than we desire Pleasure: Of this every Man may consult himself.
Nor let any one say that the eternal Reward comprehends in it the vision of
God; and therefore the hope of Reward is a good Motive: For the same Reason
will serve for Fear. Hell excludes the Vision of God; and the fear of not
enjoying God, is the same thing with the desire or hope of enjoying him. So
that if we compare Pleasure with Pain, the loss of God with the enjoyment of
him, fear is as good a Motive as desire or hope. But besides, it has this
advantage, that it is proper to awaken the most drowsy and stupid; and for this
reason it is that the Scripture and the Fathers make use of this By Motive I
understand that which excites in the Soul any actual motion of that kind of
Love which I called before love of Union.
Motive upon all occasions. For after all, it is not properly the Motive which
regulates the Heart, but the love of Order. Every Motive is grounded on
Self-love, on that invincible desire of being happy, which God continually
inspires into us, in a Word on our own Will; for we cannot Love but by our
Will. And a Man that burned with a desire of enjoying the presence of God, to
contemplate his Perfections, and have a share in the felicity of the Saints,
would still deserve the punishment of Hell, if he had a disordered Heart, and
refused to sacrifice his predominant Passion to Order. As on the contrary, one
that was indifferent as to eternal Happiness, if that were possible, but in all
other things was full of Charity, or the love of Order in which Charity is
comprehended or of the love of God above all other things, he I say, would be a
just Man and solidly Virtuous; for as I have already proved at large, true
Virtue, or a conformity to the Will of God, consists wholly in an habitual and
ruling Love of the eternal and divine Law, the immutable Order.

XV. A Man ought to love God not only more than this present Life, but also
more than his own Being: Order requires it. But he cannot be excited to this
love any other way, than by the natural and invincible love which he has for
Happiness; He cannot love but by the love of Good or his own Will. Now he
cannot find his Happiness in himself: He can find it only in God, because there
is nothing but God alone capable of acting on him, and making him happy. Again,
it is better not to be than to be Miserable: It is better then, not to be than
to be out of favor with God: Therefore we ought to love God more than our
selves, and pay him an exact Obedience. There is a difference between the
Motives and the End. We are excited by the Motives to act for the End. It is
the greatest Crime imaginable to place our End in our selves. We should do
every thing for God. All our Actions should be referred to him from whom alone
we have the power to do them: Otherwise, we violate Order, we offend God, and
are guilty of Injustice. This is undeniable. But we should seek for the motives
which may make us love Order, in that invincible Love which God has given us
for Happiness, For since God is Just, we cannot be happy, if we are not
obedient to Order. It matters not whether those Motives be of Fear or of Hope,
if they do but animate and support us. The most lively, the most strong, solid
and durable are the best.

XVI. There are some People that make a Thousand extravagant Suppositions, who
for want of a true Idea of God, suppose, for instance, that he has designed to
make them eternally Miserable. And in this Supposition, they think themselves
obliged to love this Chimera of their own Imagination above all Things. This
perplexes them extremely: For indeed how is it possible to love God, when they
deprive themselves of all the rational Motives of loving him; or rather, when
instead of him, they represent to themselves a terrible Idol with nothing in it
capable of being Loved? God would have us Love him such as he is, and not such
as it is impossible for him to be. We must love an infinitely perfect Being,
and not a dreadful Phantom, an unjust God; a God, powerful indeed, absolute and
supreme, such as Men wish to be, but without Wisdom or Goodness, Qualities
which they do not much esteem. For the ground of these extravagant Fancies,
which frighten those that form them, is that they judge of God by the inward
sense which they have of themselves, and without considering imagine that God
may form such Designs as they find themselves capable of forming. But they have
no Reason to fear; if there were such a God as they Fancy, the true God, who is
jealous of his Honor, would forbid us to adore and love him: They should
endeavor to satisfy themselves, that perhaps there is more danger of offending
God, in giving him so horrible a form, than in despising that Phantom of their
own. We should continually seek for those Motives which may preserve and
increase in us the love of God, such as are the Threatenings and Promises which
relate to the immutable Order; Motives proper for Creatures who invincibly
desire to be happy, and of which the Scripture also is full; and not destroy
those reasonable Motives, and render the Fountain of all Good odious. For the
reason why the Devils cannot love God, is because they have now, through their
own fault no motive to Love-him: It is decreed, and they know it, that God will
never be good in respect of them. For since it is impossible to love any thing
but Good, or that which is capable of giving Happiness, they have no motive to
love God, but they have to hate him with all their power as the true but most
just cause of the Miseries which they suffer. They cannot love God, and yet
they are obliged to love him, because Order requires it; Order, I say, which is
the inviolable Law of all intelligent Beings, in what state soever they be,
Happy or Miserable. Therefore, since they deserve that which they suffer, they
are in a state of disorder, and will be incorrigible in their Wickedness to all
eternity. What I have said of this matter is only to show, that nothing can be
Evil, nor ought to be rejected, which may make us love God, have recourse to
Jesus Christ, and live according to Order. If I am deceived, I desire to be
better informed, for this is a matter of great consequence.

CHAP. IX. The Church in its Prayers Addresses its self to the Father by the
Son, and why. We should Pray to the Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints, but not
as occasional causes of inward Grace. The Angels, and even the Devils have
power over Bodies, as occasional causes. By this means the Devils may tempt us,
and the Angels promote the efficacy of Grace.
I. JESUS CHRIST considered in his humane Nature, being alone the true
Propitiatory, or the occasional cause of Grace, as I have shown in the former
Chapter, it is evident that we must apply our selves to him alone for the
obtaining of it. Nevertheless we may call upon God, nay, we must Worship or
call upon none but him as the true cause of our Good. We may Pray to the
Blessed Virgin, to Angels and Saints, not as true causes, nor as occasional or
distributive causes of Grace, but as Friends of God, or intercessors with Jesus
Christ. We may also Pray to the Angels, as our protectors against the Devil, or
as occasional causes of certain effects, which may dispose us to receive inward
Grace profitably. But I must explain those Truths more at large, for they are
of the greatest Importance; for regulating our Prayers, our Worship, and all
our Duties.

II. The Church being guided by the Spirit of Truth generally addresses her
Prayers to the Father by the Son; and when she addresses them to the Son, she
considers him as equal to the Father, and consequently calls upon him not
simply as he is Man, but as he is God and Man. This appears from the ordinary
conclusions of our Prayers: Through Christ our Lord, or, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, or, who live and reignest one God, etc. For since God alone is the
true cause, who by his own power can do all that we desire, it is necessary
that the greatest part of our Prayers and all our Worship should be referred to
him. But as he never acts but when the occasional causes which he has
appointed determine the efficacy of his Laws, it is fit that the manner of our
calling upon him should be conformable to this Notion of him.

III. If Jesus Christ as Man did not intercede for Sinners, it would be in vain
for them to call upon him. For since Grace is not given to Merit, the immutable
Order of Justice does not oblige God to grant it to Sinners who Pray for it. It
must therefore be the occasional cause which obliges him to do it, in
consequence of the Power given to this cause by the establishment of the
general Laws of the Order of Grace: Because, as I said before, God never acts
but when the immutable Order requires it, or when the occasional or particular
Causes oblige him to it. But though Christ alone as Man be the particular cause
of the good Things which we receive, yet if the Prayers of the Church were
always Addressed directly to him, this might give Men some occasion of Error,
and induce them it may be to Love him as he is Man, with that kind of Love
which is due only to the true Power, and to Worship him even without regard to
the divine Person in which his humane Nature subsists. Now Adoration and Love
of Union, which are Honors belonging to Power, are due to the Almighty alone:
For Christ himself challenges our Adoration and this kind of Love, only as he
is at the same time both God and Man.

IV. Therefore the Church has very great reason to Address her Prayers to God,
the only true Cause; but through Christ, who is the occasional and distributive
Cause of the good Things which we Pray for. For though Sinners never receive
Grace, but when Christ Prays for them by his Desires either Actual or Habitual,
Transient or Permanent, yet we must always remember that it is God alone who
gives it as the true Cause, that so our Love and Devotion may be ultimately
referred to him alone. Nevertheless, when we apply our selves to the true and
general Cause, it is the same thing as if we did it to the particular and
distributive Cause: Because Christ as Man being the Savior of Sinners, Order
requires that he should be acquainted with their Prayers; and he is so far from
being Jealous of the Honor which we give to God, that he himself as Man always
acknowledges his Impotence and Subordination; and will never hear those, who
like the Eutychians, look upon his humane Nature as transformed into the
Divine, and so take from him the qualities of Advocate, Mediator, Head of the
Church, and High Priest of the true Goods. Thus we see on one side, that to
make our Prayers effectual, it is not absolutely necessary that we should know
the Truths, which I have here explained so precisely and distinctly; and on the
other, that the Churches proceeding agrees perfectly with the fundamental
Virtue of Religion and Morality, namely, that God alone is the final Cause of
all Things, and that we cannot have access to him, but by Jesus Christ our
Lord. This I think will easily be granted.

V. But the case of the Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints, has somewhat more
difficulty in it. Nevertheless the sense of the Church is, that they know our
Necessities when we call upon them, and that being in favor with God, and
united to Christ their Head, they may by their Prayers and Desires solicit
him to deliver us from our Miseries. Nay it seems to be beyond Dispute from the
example of S. Paul and all the Saints, who constantly recommended themselves to
one another's Prayers. For if the Saints on Earth as yet full of Imperfection,
can by their Prayers be beneficial to their Friends; I see no sufficient reason
to deny the Saints in Heaven this Power. Only we must observe, That they are
not occasional causes of inward Grace. For this Power was given to Christ
alone, as the Architect of the eternal Temple, the Head of the Church, the
necessary Mediator, in a Word as the particular or distributive cause of the
true Goods.

VI. So then we may Pray to the Blessed Virgin, to Angels and Saints, that they
would move the love of Christ on our behalf. And probably there are some
certain times of Favor for each particular Saint, such as are the Days on
which the Church celebrates their Festivals. It is possible also, that as
natural or occasional Causes, they may have a Power of producing those effects
which we call Miraculous, because we do not know the Causes of them; such as
the curing of Diseases, plentiful Harvests, and other extraordinary changes in
the position of Bodies, which are Substances inferior to Spirits, and over
which it should seem that Order requires or at least permits them to have some
Power, as a reward of their Virtue, or rather as an inducement to other Men to
admire and imitate it. But though this be not altogether certain as to Saints,
yet I think it cannot be doubted as to Angels. This Truth is of so great
Importance on several Accounts, that I think it necessary to give a brief
explication of it from the manner of God's proceeding in the execution of his
Designs.

VII. God could not act but for his own Glory; and not finding any Glory worthy
of himself but in Jesus Christ, he certainly made all Things with respect to
his Son. This is so evident a Truth, that we cannot possibly doubt of it, if we
do but reflect a little on it. For what ^elation is there between the Action of
God and the product of that Action, if we separate it from Christ by whom it is
Sanctified? What proportion is there between an unhallowed World which has
nothing of Divinity in it and the Action of God which is wholly Divine; in a
Word, between Finite and Infinite? Is it possible to conceive, that God who
cannot act but by his own Will, or the Love which he bears to himself, should
act so as to produce nothing worthy of himself, to create a World which bears
no proportion to him, or which is not worth the Action whereby it is produced?

VIII. It is probable then, that the Angels immediately after their Creation,
being astonished to find themselves without a Head, without Christ, and not
being able to justify God's design in Creating them, the Wicked ones imagined
some Worth in themselves with relation to God, and so Pride ruined them: Or
supposing, which seems most probable, that the eternal Word, to justify to them
the Wisdom of God's proceeding, acquainted them that he had a Design to make
Man, and to join himself to the two Substances of which Man is composed, Soul
and Body, thereby to Sanctify the whole Work to God, which is also composed of
none but these two sorts of Beings: The wicked Angels opposed this Design, and
would not Worship Jesus Christ, nor submit to one whom they thought their
equal, or even inferior to them in his own Nature, how much soever that might
be exalted by the hypostatick Union. Upon this, two opposite Parties were
formed in the Workmanship of God, S. Michael and his Angels, and Satan and his
Ministers, the Foundation of the two eternal Cities, Jerusalem and Babylon.

IX. The Angels then having a Power over Bodies, either by the Right of their
own Nature, for Order seems to require that superior Beings should act on those
that are below them: Or rather by the Decree which God had established, to
execute his own Designs by them as occasional Causes of certain Effects, to
build the holy City, the heavenly Jerusalem, his great Work, in which the
Angels are employed under the Wise and only Architect our Lord Jesus Christ,
according to the Holy Scriptures: And by this means to manifest the Power of
his well-beloved Son, who wanted Enemies to Fight with and overcome; which
Power of his never appeared more illustrious, than when he dethroned the rebel
Prince who had brought all the World under subjection to his Laws. (For the
Power of a Deliverer is never more Conspicuous, than when our Enemy has gained
an absolute Dominion over us, when we have no Power to resist him, and have
groaned a long time under his Tyranny.) The Angels, I say, having an immediate
Power over Corporeal Substances, and by them an indirect Power over spiritual
Substances, as soon as our first Parents were Created, the wicked Angels
tempted the Woman in that manner which we all know, probably grounding their
Temptations on the known Design of God, that the World should unite it self to
the Soul of Man to Sanctify him, as may be gathered from these Words, Ye shall
be as Gods, knowing Good from Evil. Genesis 3.5.
For I do not see that illuminated Minds could have any other Motive formally
to disobey God, but that of being translated from a profane State to one Divine
and worthy of God, by a particular union with the universal Reason, the Eternal
Word, for whom and by whom they knew that they were first formed, and by whom
they were to be formed anew, they who were all of their kind upon the Earth,
and the Heads of that Posterity which might spring from them. Thus the Devils
conquered them, and became Masters of them and all their Posterity: And
thereby, though indeed they promoted the Design of the Incarnation of the Word,
for the Sin of the first Man made it necessary upon several Accounts, yet they
thought they had overthrown it; imagining belike that the Union with God was to
be merited by an exact Obedience to his Orders.

X. We must know, that not only for Reasons which I have given in my Search of
Truth, 2d Part of the 1st Remark.
when the first Man had Sinned there was a necessity in consequence of the Laws
of the union of the Soul and Body, and the immutability of Order, that his
Flesh should rebel against his Mind, and also that Concupiscence should be
transmitted to all his Posterity, but for other Reasons which I have examined
in another Place of the same Book. See the Remark on original Sin.
Now Concupiscence is the universal Instrument of that Iniquity which overran
the whole Earth. And being in the Hands of the Devil, who has a Thousand ways
to stir it up by the Power which he has over Bodies, he reigned by the help of
that till the coming of Christ, who by his Sacrifice merited the quality of
High Priest of the true Goods, and of the occasional cause of inward Delight,
which alone can counterpoise the force of Concupiscence, and render that
Instrument of the Devils Conquests useless to him: For since Man invincibly
desires to be happy, there is nothing can cure his Heart corrupted with
sensible Pleasures, but the Unction of Grace, the Earnest or Fore-tast of true
Joys. For the good Angels having no Power to infuse into the Heart of Man the
Grace of Sense, and the bad ones having a Power to stir up Concupiscence in it;
Sin must necessarily have reigned, not only among the idolatrous Nations, but
even among the Jews also. And therefore we find that that People was very Gross
and Carnal, always prone to Idolatry, and frequently relapsing into it,
notwithstanding the extraordinary Miracles which S. Michael and his Angels
wrought in favor of them, and in spite of the Promises and Threats of
temporal Good and Evil, which were the Objects of their Concupiscence. For the
Angels themselves preserved the Worship of the true God, among those that
followed their Conduct, and kept them in their Duty, only by motives of
Self-love, and by promising them such Enjoyments, as true Christians think
altogether unworthy of their Love.

XI. There are several Reasons why the Law did not promise the true Blessings;
but one of the chiefest is, that since this sort of Enjoyments cannot be the
Object of Concupiscence, the knowledge and worship of the true God would have
been soon lost among the Jews, and that chosen People reduced to a Handful of
Men, belonging to Christ, and Sanctified in every Age by inward Grace. But it
was necessary that the knowledge of the true God should be preserved with some
luster among the Jews, a prophetical People, and an unexceptionable Witness of
the Truths of Religion, in spite of all the Power and Artifices of the Prince
of this World, till at length the only begotten Son of God, for and by whom all
things were made, should come down from Heaven to change the Face of Things
over all the Earth, and to open the surprising and wonderful Scene of God's
Conduct. A Scene which will end with the indissoluble Marriage of the Bride and
Bridegroom, who shall enjoy together in Heaven an eternal Felicity in the midst
of the divine Brightness, singing Songs of Praise without ceasing to the Glory
of him, who shall have put all their Enemies under their Feet by the invincible
Power of his Arm, and by ways perfectly suitable to his Wisdom and other
Attributes.

XII. These great Truths do without doubt deserve to be proved and explained
more at large, but this is not a place for it. My Design here is chiefly to
show, Heb. 1.14.
that the Angels are Ministers of Jesus Christ, sent forth, as S. Paul says,
to Minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation: And that, as occasional
Causes; for God communicates his Power no other way to the Creatures; they have
a Power, not of giving inward Grace, but of producing in the Bodies, and by
their means in the Souls wihch are united to them, certain effects, which may
promote the efficacy of Grace, and keep Men from those Stumbling Blocks which
the Devils continually lay in their way: For, as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
91.11, 12.
He has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They
shall bear thee up in their Hands, lest thou dash thy Foot against a Stone.

XIII. So then we may pray to the Angels, and desire their protection against
that roaring Lion; who, as St. Peter says, walks about, seeking whom he may
devour: Ephesians. 6.12.
Or, to use St. Paul's words, Against those Principalities and Powers, against
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, those Princes of the World full of
Darkness and Error, against spiritual Wickedness in high places, those evil
Spirits which are scattered through the Air; For we wrestle not against Flesh
and Blood only. But we must not look upon the Angels as distributive Causes of
Grace, nor give them that Worship which is due to Christ alone. Col. 2.18, 19.
Be not deceived, says St. Paul, by those who in a voluntary Humility, pay a
superstitious Worship to Angels, who meddle with those things which they do not
understand, being dazzled by the vain Imaginations of their fleshly Mind; and
not keeping themselves united to the Head, from which the whole body of the
Church receives the Spirit which gives it Growth and Life, v. 15.
even to Jesus Christ, who having spoiled Principalities and Powers, which he
had vanquished by his Cross, made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it.

CHAP. X. Of the Occasional Causes of the Sensations and Motions of the Soul
which resist the Efficacy of Grace, either of Light or Sense. The Union of the
Soul with God is immediate, not that of the Soul with the Body. An Explication
of some general Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, necessary for the right
understanding the rest of this Treatise.
I. IN the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters, I have spoken at large of the
occasional Cause of Light; and in the two last, I have endeavored to show what
is the occasional Cause of the Grace of Sense, and what we must do to obtain
it. And therefore, seeing there is nothing beside Light and Sense which
determines the Will, or the tendency which the Soul has toward Good in
general; all that now remains in relation to the Means of acquiring or
preserving the habitual and ruling Love of the immutable Order, is to explain
the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, or the occasional Causes of all
those lively and confused Sensations, and those indeliberate Motions which
unite us to our Body, and by that to all the Objects which are about us. For,
to make us love Order and to acquire Virtue, it is not sufficient to obtain the
Grace of Sense, which alone can stir the Soul and put it in Motion toward the
true Good; but we must also manage our selves so, that this Grace may work in
our Hearts with its full Efficacy. For this end we must carefully avoid the
occasional Causes of those Sensations and Motions which resist the Operation of
Grace, and sometimes render it altogether ineffectual. This is the most general
Principle of all that I shall say in the First Part of this Discourse.

II. The Soul of Man has two essential and natural Relations; one to God, the
true Cause of all that passes within him; the other to his Body, the occasional
Cause of all those Thoughts which relate to sensible Objects. When God speaks
to the Soul, it is to unite it to himself; when the Body speaks to it, it is
only for the Body to unite the Soul to sensible Good: God speaks to the Soul to
enlighten and render it perfect; the Body only to darken and corrupt it, in
favor of it self: God by the Light, conducts the Soul to its Happiness; the
Body by Pleasure, involves the whole Man in its ruin, and throws him headlong
into Misery. In a word, though it is God that does every thing, and though the Body
cannot act upon the Soul, no more than the Soul can upon the Body, but as an
occasional Cause, in consequence of the Laws of their Union, and for the
Punishment of Sin, which without meddling with those Laws, has changed the
Union into a Dependence; yet we may say, that it is the Body which darkens the
Mind, and corrupts the Heart; for the Relation which the Soul has to the Body
is the Cause of all our Errors and Disorders.

III. Notwithstanding we should be thoroughly convinced of this, and never
forget it, that the Soul can have no immediate Relation but to God alone, and
that it cannot be united directly to any thing but to him; for the Soul cannot
be united to the Body, but as it is united to God himself. It is certain for
very many Reasons, that if I feel, for instance, the pain of a Scratch, it is
God that acts in me, though in consequence of the Laws of the Union of the Soul
and Body; for those Laws derive their force from the Operation of the Divine
Will, which alone is capable of acting in me: But the Body by it self cannot be
united to the Soul, nor the Soul to the Body. They have no Relation to one
another, nor any one Creature to another: I speak of Relations of Causality,
such are those which depend on the Union of the Soul and Body. It is God that
does every thing; his Will is the Union of all Unions; the Modifications of
Substances depend on him alone, who gives and preserves their Being. This is an
essential Truth, which, I think, I have sufficiently proved in another place.

IV. But though the Soul cannot be united immediately to any Thing but God, yet
it may be united to the Creatures by the Will of God, who communicates his
Power to them, in making them occasional Causes for the production of certain
Effects. My Soul is united to my Body, because on one side my Will is made the
occasional Cause of some changes which God alone produces on it; and in the
other, because the changes which happen in my Body are made occasional Causes
of some of those which happen in my Soul.

V. Now God has established these Laws for many Reasons which are unknown to
us. But of those which we do know, one is, that God in following them, acts in
a uniform and constant manner, by general Laws, by the most simple and wisest
ways; in a word, he Acts in such a manner as admirably bears the Character of
his Attributes. Another Reason is, because the Body of Man is his proper
Sacrifice; for it seems to Sacrifice it self by Pain, and to be Annihilated by
Death. The Soul is in a State of Probation in the Body; and God who desires in
some measure to be merited, and to proportion Rewards to Merits, does by the
Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, a simple, general, uniform and constant
Method, furnish us with various ways of Sanctifying our selves, and Meriting
the true Goods. I have explained these Truths elsewhere, but it is necessary to
remember them here.

VI. This kind of Union of the Soul with God, which has no Relation to the
Creatures, is looked upon by many People as a groundless Imagination. For the
Operation of God not being sensible, we think we answer and reprove our selves,
when it is the universal Reason which answers and reproves us in the most
secret part of our selves. It is certain, that he who knows not what Truth and
Order is, knows not this Union, though perhaps it may act in him; as he who does
not love Truth, nor obey Order, breaks the Union, though perhaps he knows it.

VII. But as for that kind of Union of the Soul with God, which relates to the
Creatures, we believe it real, but we have a wrong Notion of it. For we imagine
that we receive from the Objects that which comes from God alone: The Cause of
this Mistake is the same with that of the former: The Divine Operation not
being visible, we attribute to the Objects which strike our Senses, all that we
feel in their Presence; though they are no otherwise present to the Soul, than as
God, who is more present to us than we are to our selves, represents them to us
in his own Substance, which is the only intellectual Substance, the only
Substance capable of acting on us, and of producing in us all those Sensations
which render intellectual Ideas sensible, and make us judge confusedly, not
only that there are Bodies, but also that they are those Bodies which operate
on us, and make us happy, which is the most general Cause of all our
Miscarriages.

VIII. We would always be happy, and never miserable: Actual Pleasure causes
actual Happiness, and Pain, Misery. Now we feel Pleasure and Pain in the
presence of corporeal Objects, and believe those Objects to be the true Causes
of them. So that there is a necessity almost that we should fear and love them:
Nay, though we are convinced by Metaphysical and certain Demonstrations, that God
alone is the true Cause; yet this does not give us Strength enough to slight
and disregard them, when we actually enjoy them. For the judgments of the
Senses work more powerfully on us than the most solid Reasons; because it is
not Light, so much as Pleasure which stirs the Soul and puts it in Motion.

IX. So then it is evident, that to preserve a ruling Love of the immutable
Order, we must on the one hand use all our endeavors to strengthen this kind
of Union of the Soul with God, which has no Relation to sensible Objects; and
on the other, we must slacken, as much as we can, that kind of Union which
relates to Bodies, Substances inferior to ours, which are so far from being
able to make us perfect, that they have no power to act on us, nor corrupt us;
but only because the Sin of our first Parent has brought in Concupiscence,
which consists wholly in the Loss we have sustained of the power to stop, or
suspend the Laws of the Communication of those Motions, by which the Bodies
that are about us act on that Body which we animate, and by that on our Mind,
in consequence of the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body.

X. Christian Meditat, 13, 14, etc.
I think I have sufficiently proved already, at least as to some Persons, that
since all the Motions of the Soul depend on Light and Sense, to excite in us
that Motion which carries us toward God, and keeps us united to him; it is
necessary that we should continually exercise our selves in the Labor of
Attention, the occasional Cause of Light; and frequently call upon Jesus
Christ, the occasional Cause of the Grace of Sense. I shall now examine the
Means whereby we may diminish the Union that is between Us and the Creatures,
and hinder them from having any share with God in our Mind and Heart: For we
are so placed between God and corporeal Objects, that we cannot move toward
them, without departing from God; and the breaking off our Correspondence with
them, is sufficient to unite us to God, through the continual influence which
Christ sheds on his Members.

XI. That which I shall say of this matter is not so necessary for those that
have read and considered the Principles which I have laid down in the Search of
Truth: And if all Men were capable of so much Reason as to think methodically,
or at least had so much Justice as to believe that an Author has thought of
the Subject he treats of more than they; I should not be obliged to repeat in
general, what I have already said or proved in other places, and in various
manners. No body reads Apollonius or Archimedes, that has not learnt Euclid;
because he can understand nothing of Conical Sections, without knowing the
common Elements of Geometry; and in Geometrical matters, when a Man does not
understand a thing, he knows he does not understand it. But in matters of
Morality or Religion, every one, I know not why, thinks himself sufficiently
capable of comprehending whatever he reads: So that everyone takes upon him to
judge, without considering, that Morality, for instance, I mean Morality
demonstrated or explained by Principles, is to the Knowledge of Man, what the
Science of curve Lines is to that of strait Lines.

XII. Wherefore I think it requisite in this place, to suppose certain
Principles which I have proved elsewhere, and which are necessary for the
sequel of this Discourse. This will perhaps illustrate many Things which I have
said, and which I very much fear have not well been understood; but these
suppositions are not designed for those who have considered the Principles
which I have elsewhere explained, or fully comprehend what I have said
hitherto. They may go on to the next Chapter, and save themselves a needless
Labor.

XIII. First then, I take it for granted, that to have a right Notion of the
Union of the Soul and Body, we must not confound the Ideas of these two
Substances, as most do, who join them together by extending the Soul to all the
parts of the Body, and attribute to the Body all the Sensations which belong to
the Soul. The Union of the Soul and Body consists in the mutual and reciprocal
Action of these two Beings, in consequence of the Operations of the Divine
Will, which alone can change the modifications of Substances. The Soul thinks,
and is not exended. The Body is extended, and does not think: Therefore the
Soul cannot be united to the Body by Extension, but only by Thinking; nor the
Body to the Soul by Sensation, but only by Situation and local Motion. The Body
is wounded, but the Soul feels it. The Soul fears an Evil, and the Body flies
from it. The Soul would move the Arm, the Arm immediately moves it self; and
the Soul sees and feels it. Thus there is a mutual Correspondence between
certain Thoughts of the Soul, and certain Modifications of the Body, in
consequence of those natural Laws which God has established, and which he
condantly observes. Herein consists the Union of the Soul and Body: The
Imagination may raise other Ideas of all this: But this Correspondence is
undeniable, and is sufficient for my purpose. So that I neither do, nor ought
to build on uncertain Foundations.

XIV. Secondly, I suppose it to be known, that the Soul is not joined
immediately to all the parts of the Body, but only to one part, which answers
to all the rest, and which I call, without knowing what it is, the Principal
Part; so that, notwithstanding the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, a
Man may have his Arm cut off, and yet have no thought arise in his Soul
Correspondent to it; but it is not possible that the least change should happen
in the Principal Part of the Brain without causing also some alteration in the
Soul. This is verified by Experience; for sometimes parts of the Body are cut
off without being felt, because then the Motion of the Amputation does not
communicate it self to the Principal Part. As on the contrary, those that have
lost an Arm, often feel a real pain in that very Arm which they have not,
because there is the same Motion in the Principal Part of the Brain, as if the
Arm was hurt!

XV. The first Man before his Sin, had an absolute power over his Body; at
least he could, when he pleased, hinder the Motion or Action of Objects from
communicating it self to the principal part of the Brain, from the Organs of
the Senses which might be touched by those Objects; and this he did probably by
a kind of revulsion, somewhat like that which we make in our selves, when we
would fix our Attention on those Thoughts which disappear in the presence of
sensible Objects.

XVI. But I suppose in the Third place, that we have not now that power; and
therefore to obtain some Liberty of Mind, to think on what we will, and love
what we ought, it is necessary that the principal part should be calm and
without agitation, or at least that we should still be able to stop and turn it
which way we please. Our Attention depends on our Will; but it depends much
more on our Senses and Passions. It is a very difficult thing not to look upon
that which touches, not to love that which pleases; that which touches, I say,
and pleases the Heart. The Soul is never sooner tired, than when it fights
against Pleasure, and makes it self actually Miserable.

XVII. Fourthly, I suppose it to be known, that the principal part is never
touched or shaken in an agreeable or disagreeable manner, but it excites in the
animal Spirits some Motion proper to carry the Body toward the Object which
acts upon it, or to separate it from it by flight; so that those Motions of the
Fibers of the Brain which relate to Good or Evil, are always followed by such a
course of the Spirits as disposes the Body rightly with relation to the present
Object; and at the same time those sensations of the Soul which are
correspondent to those agitations of the Brain, are followed by such motions of
the Soul as answer to this course of the Spirits. For the impressions or
motions of the Brain are in respect of the course of the Spirits, what the
sensations of the Soul are in respect of the Passions; and these Impressions
are to the Sensations, what the motion of the Spirits is to the motion of the
Passions.

XVIII. Fifthly, I suppose that Objects never strike the Brain without leaving
some marks of their Action, nor the animal Spirits without leaving some Tracks
of their Course; that these Tracks or Wounds are not easily closed up or
effaced, when the Brain has been often or forcibly struck, and when the Course
of the Spirits has been violent, or has often begun again in the same manner:
That Memory and corporeal Habits consist in nothing else but those Tracks or
Impressions which cause in the Brain and other parts of the Body, a particular
facility of obeying the Course of the Spirits; and that by this means the Brain
is hurt, and the Imagination polluted, when we have had the enjoyment of
Pleasures, without apprehending the danger of Familiarity with sensible Objects.

XIX. Lastly, I suppose that we conceive distinctly, that when many of these
Tracks have been made at the same time, we cannot open any one of them, without
opening all the rest in some Measure; whence it comes to pass, that there are
always many accessory Ideas which present themselves confusedly to the Mind,
having a Relation to the principal Ideas to which the Mind particularly applies
it self: There are also many confused Sensations and indirect Motions that
accompany the principal Passion which moves the Soul, and carries it toward
some particular Object. There is nothing more certain than this connection of
Impressions, with one another, and with the Senses and Passions. Any one that
has but the least Knowledge of the Nature of Man, and will make but the least
reflection on the inward Sense he has of what passes within himself, may
discover more of these Truths in an Hour, than I can tell him in a Month;
provided he does not confound the Soul with the Body, in making the Union
betwixt them, and carefully distinguishes the Properties of which the thinking
Substance is capable, from those which belong to the extended Substance. And I
think it necessary to Advertise the Reader, That this kind of Truths is of very
great importance, not only for the distinct Conception of what I have hitherto
said, and shall hereafter say, but generally for all the Sciences that have any
Relation to Man. Having handled this Subject at large, in the Search of Truth,
particularly in the Second Book, I thought not to have said any thing of it
here; and if these Suppositions seem obscure to the Reader, and do not give him
light enough to comprehend clearly what I shall say in the remaining part of
this Treatise, I must refer him to that Book; for I cannot persuade my self to
give a long Explication of the same thing over and over.

CHAP. XI. What kind of death we must die to see God, to be united to Reason,
and to deliver our selves from Concupiscence. It is the Grace of Faith that
gives us this happy death. Christians are dead to Sin by Baptism, and alive in
Christ by his Resurrection. Of the Mortification of the Senses, and the use we
should make of it. We should unite our selves to corporeal Objects, or separate
our selves from them without loving or fearing them. But the surest way is to
break off all Correspondence with them, as far as is possible.
I. DEath is a compendious way to be delivered from Concupiscence, and to break
off at once, that unhappy Union which hinders us from being reunited to our
Head. But it is needless to prove here that to procure our own Death, is a
Crime, which will be so far from reuniting us to God, that it will for ever
separate us from him. It is lawful to despise Life, and even to wish for Death,
that we may be with Christ, as St. Paul does: Having a desire to be dissolved,
Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. But we are obliged to preserve our Health and Life; and
it is the Grace of Christ that must deliver us from Concupiscence, or that Body
of Death, which joins us to the Creatures. The same Apostle cries our, O
wretched Man that I am! Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? The Grace of God through Jesus
Christ.

II. It is certain, Exodus 33.20.
that we must die before we can see God and be united to him; for no Man can
see him, and live, says the Scripture. But we truly die, so far as we quit the
Body, as we separate our selves from the World, and silence our Senses,
Imagination and Passions, by which we are united to our Body, and by that to
all those that surround us. We die to the Body and to the World, when we retire
into our selves, when we consult the inward Truth, when we unite our selves and
are obedient to Order. Job 28.21.
The eternal Wisdom is hid from the Eyes of all Living. But those who are Dead
to the World and to Themselves, who have crucified the Flesh with its
disordered Lusts, who are crucified with Christ, and to whom the World is
crucified; Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5.8. 1
Cor. 13.12.
in a word, those who have a clean Heart, a pure Mind, and an unspotted
Imagination, are capable of beholding Truth. Now they see God but confusedly
and imperfectly, in Part, through a Glass, in a Riddle; but they see him truly,
they are closely and immediately united to him, and shall one day see him Face
to Face; for we must know and love God in this Life, to enjoy him in the next.

III. But those who live not only the Life of the Body, but also the Life of
the World; who live in the enjoyment of Pleasures, and spread themselves as it
were over all the Objects that are about them, can never find out Truth. Job
28.13.
For, as the Scripture says, Wisdom does not dwell with those that live
Voluptuously; Non invenitur in terra suaviter viventium. We must then procure
our selves not that Death which kills the Body, and puts an end to Life, but
that which brings the Body under, and weakens Life; I mean the Union of the
Soul with the Body, or its dependence on it. We must begin and continue our
Sacrifice, and expect from God the Consummation and Reward of it. For the Life
of a Christian here on-Earth is a constant Sacrifice, by which he continually
offers up his Body, his Concupiscence and Self-love, to the Love of Order; and
his Death, which is precious in the Sight of God, is the day of his Victories
and Triumphs in Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, the forerunner of our
Glory, and the model of our eternal Reformation.

IV. Romans 6.6.
St. Paul tells us, That our old Man is already crucified with Christ; for by
the Sacrifice which Christ has offered on the Cross, he has merited for us,
for us, I say, particularly who have been washed in his Blood by Baptism, all
the Graces necessary to balance, and even to diminish, by degrees, the weight
of Concupiscence; so that Sin no longer reigns in us but by our own Fault. Let
us not therefore think to excuse our Slothfulness by imagining that we are not
able to resist the Law of the Flesh, which continually rebels against the Law
of the Mind. The Law of Sin would have an absolute Dominion over the Motions of
our Heart, if Christ had not destroyed it by his Cross. But we who are dead and
buried to Sin, by Baptism; Romans 6.4, v. 11.
who are justified and raised to life again in Jesus Christ glorified; who are
animated by the influence of our Head, by the Spirit of Christ, and by a Power
wholly Divine; we, I say, ought not to believe that Heaven forsakes us in our
Combats; and that if we are overcome, it is for want of Succors. Christ never
neglects those that call upon him; it is impious to believe it; for all the
Scriptures say, Act. 2.^1. Rom 10.13. Joel 2.34.
That whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

V. It is certain, that we could never be glorified and seated in Heaven with
Jesus Christ, we could not have eternal Life abiding in us, we could not be
Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ, Citizens of the holy City, and
adopted Children of God himself, all which things the Apostles say of
Christians, if God were not faithful in his Promises, if he suffered us to be
tempted above our Strength; 1 Cor. 10.13.
which St. Paul also forbids us to believe. But we may truly say, That we are
already glorified in Christ, etc. because in effect it depends only on our
selves, to preserve by Grace, the Right which the same Grace gives us to future
Blessings; and it is a kind of brutish stupidity in a Man, which one would
think should astonish a rational and spiritual Being, to lose infinite
Happiness by his own Fault, and incurr eternal Damnation through his own
Negligence.

VI. This Truth being supposed, as undeniable, let us awaken our Faith and
Hope, let us search after the Means to secure our Salvation; and let us Act in
such sort, that the Grace which God cannot infuse into us, with any other
design but to sanctify and save us, may effectually sanctify us, and make us
worthy to enjoy the true Good. Ye are dead, says St. Paul, (...)
and your life is hid with Christ in God, Mortify therefore your Members which
are upon the Earth. We are dead to Sin, because living in Christ our Head, we
should, and by his influence may kill the old Man; it lies in our own power to
do it. But to put this Design in execution, according to the Advice which St.
Paul here gives, we must labor all our life in the Mortification of our
Senses, we must endeavor with the utmost Diligence to keep our Imagination
pure and undefiled, we must regulate all the Motions of our Passions by Order;
in a word, we must diminish the weight of Sin, which by the actual Efforts of
Concupiscence provoked and stirred up, is able to balance the strongest Graces,
and to separate us from God. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the
Earth. If we do what depends on us, Grace will work in our Heart with its full
Efficacy, we shall die in the sense of St. Paul, and our life being hid with
Christ in God, shall appear with Glory, when Christ himself shall appear
clothed with Majesty and Honor. Col. 3.4.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in Glory.

VII. Of all the Exercises proper to promote the Efficacy of Grace, there is no
one more necessary than that of the Mortification of the Senses; for it is our
own Body alone that unites us to all other Bodies. It is chiefly by the Senses
that the Soul stretches it self, as I may say, to all the parts of the Body,
and by the Imagination and Passions it is carried abroad, and extends it self
to all the Creatures. But as Objects are presented to the Mind by the Senses,
the Imagination and Passions suppose and depend on them. For it is certain,
that the corporeal Image of a sensible Object (I do not here speak of
Mathematical Figures) is nothing but the Impression and Motion which that
Object has made in the Brain by means of the Senses; which Impression is
renewed by the Action of the Imagination, or the Course of the Spirits. And as
for the Passions, they cannot be excited but by the Motion of the animal
Spirits, which always supposes that the Brain, the Magazene of these Spirits,
is shaken either by the Senses or the Imagination: So that he who mortifies his
Senses, attacks the very Foundation of the Union of the Soul with the Body, or
rather of its dependence on it; he weakens the animal Life, and diminishes the
weight of Sin, Concupiscence; he promotes the Efficacy of Grace, which alone
can reunite us to our first Principle: Finally, he procures himself that kind
of Death, without which, as the Scripture speaks, it is not possible to see God.

VIII. The most capacious of all the Senses, that which ministers to all the
rest, and without which, the Imagination and Passions would be but faint and
languishing, is the Sight. We need but reflect a little on our selves, and on
the use we may make of our Eyes, to be convinced that they expose us daily to a
thousand Dangers. One indiscreet look is certainly sufficient to throw us into
Hell. It made David fall into an Adultery, which afterward engaged him in a
Murder: Eve suffered her self to be seduced by the Devil, because she ventured
to look fixedly on the forbidden Fruit, and found it pleasant to the Eyes. Genesis
3.6.
If they had distrusted their Senses, as fallacious, and rejected their
Testimony, they had, both of them, preserved their Innocence. I think it not
much to my present purpose, to enlarge on the mischievous effects of the Sight,
and from thence to prove the necessity of shutting our Eyes in many Cases. I
rather choose to examine Things in their first Principles, and to show the use
we may lawfully make of all our Senses in general, which I shall confine within
the straitest Bounds that can possibly be set to it.

IX. One of the Principles which I think I have demonstrated several ways in
the First Book of the Search of Truth, is this; That our Senses are given us
only for the preservation of our sensible Being: In relation to this end, they
are perfectly well regulated; but with respect to the use which the World makes
of them, there is nothing more false, deceitful and irregular. To prove this,
we must consider that we are composed of a Soul and a Body, and that we have
two sorts of Good to look after, that of the Soul and that of the Body. The
Good of the Soul is found out by the Light; for it is the true Good: That of
the Body is discovered by Sense, for it is a false Good; or rather no Good at
all. If Men knew sensible Objects only as they are in themselves, and without a
sensible perception of that which is not really in them, they could not
possibly seek after them and fill themselves with them, without regret and a
kind of detestation; and if they had a sense of the true Good, different from
what it really is, and without knowing the true Nature of it, they would love
it sensually and not meritoriously. For the Soul neither can, nor ought to live
but by the intellectual Substance of Reason; and the Body cannot receive
Nourishment and Growth but from Bodies. Intellectual Goods do not suit with the
mechanical Frame of the Body, and sensible Goods disorder the Soul: Thus Light
and Evidence are to the Goods of the Soul, what Sense and Instinct are to those
of the Body. This, I think, cannot be denied.

X. The reason of all this is, that God created the Soul only for himself: He
did not make it that it should employ it self about sensible Objects, nor that
it should preserve and govern by Reason the Body which it Informs. If we would
know distinctly and rationally, the infinite Relations that are between the
Bodies which surround us, and that which we animate; if we would know, for
instance, when we ought to eat, how much, and what kind of Food is precisely
necessary to preserve our Health and Life, we must do nothing else but study
Physics; and certainly we should not live very long, at least Children would
not, because they want Experience. But Hunger informs us of the necessity of
Food, and thereby regulates the quantity of it pretty near the matter. Once it
did it truly and exactly, and would do so still, if we would eat the Fruits of
the Earth just as God provides them for us. The Taste is a short and
unquestionable Trial, whether such and such Bodies are proper for Nourishment
or not. Without knowing the Texture of a Stone or a strange Fruit, we need only
present it to the Tongue, the faithful Doorkeeper, at least before Sin, of all
that ought to enter into the House, to be assured whether it will make any
disturbance within. The same may be said of all the other Organs of our Senses.
Nothing is quicker than the Touch, to inform us that we are burnt, when we
touch a hot Iron without our Knowledge. Thus the Soul leaving the Government of
the Body to the Senses, may apply it self to the search of the true Good,
contemplate the Perfections and works of its Maker, study the Law of God, and
govern all its motions by that. The Senses should only inform it with respect,
and cease to interrupt it, when it imposes Silence on them. Thus it was once,
but the Sin of our first Parent has changed that admirable Order; and the
union of the Soul and Body remaining still the same, the Soul is reduced to a
dependence on the Senses, and is checked and controlled by them, because, as I
have often said, it has lost the power to command them.

XI. The Senses then were ordained to furnish us with short and certain ways to
distinguish Bodies with respect to the preservation of our Health and Life.
Therefore we may make use of them to unite our selves by the Body to sensible
Objects, or to separate our selves from them; this is agreeable to Order. I say,
to unite or separate our selves: Not to love or fear them. For Love and Hatred
are Motions of the Soul which should never be determined by confused
Sensations; they ought to be guided by Reason, and not by Instinct. It is
indifferent to the Body whether the Soul loves Bread or not. If we Eat it
without loving it, the Body will nevertheless be nourished by it; and if we
love it without eating it, the Body will be never the stronger; but the Soul
will thereby be corrupted and disordered. For every motion of the Soul, which
instead of tending toward him who continually imprints this Motion on it, that
it may love him alone, tends toward Bodies, dead, inferior and impotent
Substances; is blind, irregular and sensual. These are not abstracted Chimeras,
but necessary Truths, immutable Laws and indispensable Obligations.

XII. But what! Can we unite our selves to Bodies without loving them? Can we
fly from our Enemy without fearing him? Yes without doubt we may: For I speak
principally of free and voluntary Motions, which certainly we may hinder from
following the natural Motions. But supposing we could not: What then must we
conclude from thence, but that the Heart of Man is so Corrupted, that his
Disease is incurable, and that he cannot make use of his Senses, without
inflaming and renewing his Wounds; and consequently that the mortification of
the Senses is the most necessary thing in the World in that condition to which
Man is reduced? For after all, can it be doubted that God acts only for
himself, that he imprints no motion on the Soul but for himself alone, that all
love of corporeal Objects is Vicious and Irregular, in a Word, that we are
indispensably obliged to love God with all our Heart, with all our Soul and
with all our Strength?

XIII. When the Soul is penetrated with the presence of God, and beholds him
Working continually in the Objects which strike the Senses; when the Mind is
actually convinced of the impotence of the Creatures in general, and applies it
self to govern the Heart according to the Light it has received; without doubt
it may at that instant unite it self to Bodies, or separate it self from them,
without loving or fearing them. Indeed this time of Reflection cannot last
long. The Mind is soon tired with attention to its Duty; and when the Senses
come to be touc'h with any Object that pleases them, the Soul being struck with
the first appearance of Good and contented with it, constantly follows by its
own Motion, that of the Humors and Blood. All Pleasure excites and determines
the natural motion of the Soul; and because Man would always be happy, the free
motion of the Will readily conforms it self to the natural Motion which is
excited by the Senses. We must resist, if we would not follow that Motion: But
we are soon tired with resisting, we lose our beloved ease and become
Miserable, when we cease to follow the attraction of Pleasure, which makes us
happy.

XIV. It is better to get out of a Stream which carries us away with it, if we
cease but one Moment to strive against it, than to remain there in continual
action; at least this is the surest way. It is better to break off, as far as
we can, the correspondence which we maintain by the Senses with sensible
Objects, than to expose our selves to innumerable Dangers, by relying on our
own Strength which is vain and deceitful. The Imagination may magnify it, the
Pride of Man may defend it; but Experience overthrows it, Faith condemns it,
and makes it weak and despicable. At least let us take the safest course: The
thing in question is Eternity, the dreadful alternative of the Felicity of the
Saints, or the punishments of the Devils for infinite Ages. We may successfully
stop the Passages by which this dangerous Correspondence between the Senses and
false Goods is maintained. The motion of our Hands and Feet is subject to our
Will. It is in our own Power to bend our Eyes downward, to turn our Head, and
Fly. Thus we may avoid the Blow levelled at us by a murtherous Object. But if we
stand to receive it, it wounds the Brain, it defiles the Imagination, it
penetrates and corrupts the Heart. Whatever effects the force of that Blow
produces in the Brain, and in the Nerves which excite the Passions, they are in
no wise subject to our Will. So that we may without much difficulty prevent the
Mischief by the mortification of our Senses, but we cannot cure it without
infinite Conflicts. How happy should we be, if we would learn so much Wisdom by
costly Experience, as to hinder it from spreading, and throwing us headlong
into Hell!

XV. Let us endeavor then to convince our selves thoroughly, that our Senses
are false Witnesses, which constantly give their Testimony against us in favor
of our Passions: That if we are permitted to hearken to them for the good of
the Body, nothing is more dangerous than to consult them for the good of the
Soul: That if it be very ridiculous to go to prove by Reason, that Gold, for
instance, or precious Stones are not proper for Nourishment; it is also
contrary to Order and good Sense, to examine by the Taste, whether Wine be an
Object worthy of our Love and Application: That the motions of the Soul should
be governed by Light, and the motions and position of the Body by Pleasure and
Instinct: That Light never deceives, and that it leaves the Mind at liberty,
without driving it forcibly toward the Good which it presents, that so the Mind
may love it with Freedom and Reason; that Pleasure on the contrary is always
deceitful, that it takes away or abridges the liberty of the Mind, and carries
it naturally not toward God the true Author of that Pleasure, but toward the
sensible Object which seems to be the cause of it. Let us remember these
Principles, and draw this consequence from them, that the mortification of the
Senses is the most necessary exercise for him that designs to live by Reason to
follow Order, to labor for Perfection, and to secure to himself a solid
Happiness, and an eternal Felicity.

XVI. Having proved at large in the first Book of the Search of Truth, that our
Senses generally speaking deceive us in every thing, I think I need not insist
any longer on demonstrating what I have here laid down. I rather fear that
those who have read and considered my other Writings, will find Fault with me
for repeating the same things over and over. But this Treatise being designed
for all sorts of People, it could not be avoided: For all these Truths have a
connection and relation to one another. We must know the Nature of Man and his
Diseases, at least in some measure, before we can comprehend the Remedies of
them, and understand Morality by Principles. If I should lay down as known all
those Truths which I have elsewhere proved, every Reader would not understand
what I meant by them, many perhaps would be afraid of them as dangerous, and
this Book would in all probability have the same Fate with the unfortunate
Treatise of Nature and Grace, which, though it were written only for those who
had a distinct conception of the Truths which I had before sufficiently
explained, as I then declared; underwent so furious a Censure, that those very
Heresies were charged upon me, which I had there overthrown in their first
Principles.

CHAP. XII. Of the Imagination. This Term is obscure and confused. What it is
in general. Several sorts of Imagination. Its effects are dangerous. Of that
which the World calls Wit. That quality is very opposite to the Grace of
Christ. It is fatal to those who possess it, and to those who esteem and admire
it in others, though they have it not themselves.
I. Though the Senses are the first original of our Disorders, or the foundation
of that union of the Soul and Body which now separates the Soul from God; yet
it is not sufficient to regulate the use of them, that Grace may operate in us
with its full Strength, but we must also silence our Imagination and Passions.
The Imagination does depend indeed on the Senses, as well as the Passions; but
it has its particular Malignity. When it is stirred up by the Senses, it
produces of it self extraordinary effects: And many times though the Senses do
not actually move it, it acts by its own Strength. Nay sometimes it disturbs
all the Ideas of the Soul by the Phantoms which it produces, and enrages the
Passions by the violence of the Motions which it excites. But for fear lest
some Persons may not clearly comprehend these Truths, I must give a more
distinct explication of them.

II. This Term Imagination is very much used in the World: But yet I can hardly
believe that all those who pronounce the Word distinctly, join a distinct Idea
to it. I have said already, and say again, for there is no harm in reflecting
on it more than once; that the commonest Words are the most confused, and that
Men's ordinary Discourse is many times nothing but an empty sound of Words
without Sense, which they hear and repeat like Echo's. If a Conversation does
but entertain them agreably, and serves them to communicate their Affections,
and to create a mutual esteem of one another, they are satisfied with it. They
make the same use of Words as they do of a Man's Air and outward Behavior.
They unite themselves to one another by the Senses and Passions; and many times
Reason has no other share in the Society, than to promote their unjust
Designs. For Truth is of no use in this World. Those that employ themselves in
the search of it are Enthusiasts, singular and dangerous Persons, who must be
shunned like an infectious Air. Thus Words, whose, chief use should be to
represent the pure Ideas of the Mind, generally serve only to express Ideas of
Sense and those motions of the Soul which are but too apt to communicate
themselves by the outward demeanor, the Air of the Face, the Tone of the
Voice, and the Posture and Motion of the Body.

III. Imagination is one of those Terms which Use has made current, without
clearing the signification of it. For common Use explains only those Words that
excite, sensible Ideas. Those by which it expresses pure and intellectual
Ideas, are all of them either equivocal or confused. Thus the Imagination not
being sensible but only by its Effects, and the nature of it being hard to
understand, every one makes use of the same Word, without having the same Idea;
nay perhaps many People have no Idea of it at all.

IV. The Imagination may be considered in a twofold respect, either as to the
Body, or as to the Soul. In relation to the Body, it consists of a Brain
capable of Impressions, and of animal Spirits fit to make these Impressions. We
may conceive the animal Spirits to be whatever we will Fancy them, provided we
understand them to be Bodies, which by their motion are capable of acting in
the substance of the principal part of the Brain. In relation to the Soul, the
Imagination consists of Images that answer to the Impressions, and of Attention
capable of forming these Images or sensible Ideas. For it is our Attention,
which as the occasional cause determines the course of the Spirits whereby the
Impressions are formed, to which Impressions the Ideas are annexed: And all
this in consequence of the Laws of the union of the Soul and Body.

V. These Images or Impressions which are formed as well by the strength of the
Imagination, as by the action of Objects, dispose the Brain, the Storehouse of
the Spirits, in such a manner, that the course of these Spirits is determined
toward certain Nerves, some of which run to the Heart and other Viscera, and
cause there Fermentation or Refrigeration, or in short, produce different
Motions according to the quality of the Object which is present to the Senses,
or the Imagination: The rest of the Nerves answer to the external Parts, and by
them the Body is placed in such a Position, and disposed to such a motion as
the present Object requires.

VI. The course of the animal Spirits toward those Nerves which answer to the
internal parts of the Body is accompanied with Passions on the part of the
Soul: Which Passions arising originally from the action of the Imagination, do
by the great abundance of Spirits which they send up to the Head, fortify the
Impression and Image of the Object which produced them. For the Passions
excite, support and strengthen the Attention, the occasional cause of that
course of the Spirits, whereby the Impression of the Brain is formed, which
Impression determines another course of the Spirits toward the Heart and other
parts of the Body, to keep up the same Passions; all this proceeds also from
the admirable constitution of the Laws of the union of the Soul and Body. This
is sufficient to give a slight Idea of the Imagination, and of the relation it
has to the Passions. I have handled this matter more at large in another
place. But this I think is sufficient to make attentive Readers understand in
some measure what I mean by Imagination in general.

VII. In particular by a defiled and corrupt Imagination, I understand a Brain
which has received some Impressions so deep as to carry the Soul and thereby
the Body, to Objects unworthy of and unbecoming the dignity of Man's Nature;
and by purity of Imagination, I mean a sound and entire Brain without any of
those vicious Impressions which corrupt the Mind and Heart.

By a weak and tender Imagination, I mean a Brain whose principal part, on
which the course of the Spirits depends, is easy to be penetrated and shaken.

By a nice and curious Imagination, I understand a Brain whose Fibers are of so
fine and curious a Texture, that they receive and preserve the least
Impressions made between them by the course of the Spirits.

By a strong and lively Imagination, I mean that the animal Spirits which form
the Impressions are too much agitated in proportion to the consistence of the
Fibers of the Brain.

By a large and spacious Imagination, I understand such an abundance of Spirits
as is able to keep wide open a great many Tracks or Impressions of the Brain at
once.

By a regular and well ordered Imagination, I mean a Brain whose principal part
which should obey the attention of the Mind has none of its Fibers broken by
the Passions or any other accident.

By an Enthusiast or visionary, I mean one whose attention does indeed
determine the course of the Spirits, but cannot moderate their force, nor stop
their motion. He thinks on what he pleases; but he sees nothing as it is. For
the Impressions being too large or too deep, nothing appears to him in its
natural shape: Whatever he says must always be taken with some allowance or
deduction. In this sense every Man is an Enthusiast in respect of some Things:
Those that know them best are the Wisest.

By a senseless and stupid Man, I mean one whose Attention can neither stop nor
determine the course of the Spirits.

By a contagious and headstrong Imagination, I understand such an abundance of
animal Spirits, and those so agitated, that they diffuse over all the Body,
especially the Face, an Air of Confidence which persuades others. All Men when
they are moved with any Passion, and Enthusiasts at all times, have this kind
of Imagination.

VIII. The substance and disposition of the Fibers of the Brain being different
in different Persons, and in the same Persons at different Ages, and the animal
Spirits being more or less subtle, in greater or less quantity, more or less
agitated; it may easily be judged that there are a great many more sorts of
Imaginations than those I have here mentioned, and that we have not Terms
enough to denote exactly the differences of them. For this word Imagination is
a comprehensive Term expressing not only many Ideas, but also an infinite
number of Relations arising from the comparison of these Ideas; which relations
make the particular character of the several sorts of Imaginations. The Brain
of it self in such or such a disposition, considered without the relation it
has to the motion, abundance or solidity of the Spirits, does not make such or
such a particular sort of Imagination; but the relation which arises from the
quality of the Spirits compared with the substance of the Fibers of the Brain.
For a Man that has a great abundance of Spirits very much agitated and very
solid, has not therefore a lively and spacious Imagination, if the Fibers of
his Brain are too solid, too moist, too much interwoven one within another, etc.

IX. These things being granted, I say that the Imagination produces as
dangerous effects as the Senses; and consequently that it is necessary to keep
it silent, if we desire that Grace should operate in us with all its efficacy.

X. For First, the Imagination, as well as the Senses, speaks only for the good
of the Body; for naturally whatsoever comes to the Soul by the Body, is only
for the Body. This is a great and Fundamental Principle.

XI. Secondly, the Imagination, when it is heated, continually interrupts the
Soul: It often forces the Mind to answer and discourse with it to the prejudice
of Reason. Besides, we may easily avoid the action of sensible Objects, and by
that means make our Senses silent: For it is in our own Power to shut our Eyes;
or betake our selves to Flight. But we cannot easily dispel the Phantoms raised
by the Imagination; the Mind cannot avoid contemplating whatever passes in the
Brain.

XII. Thirdly, the Senses represent sensible Objects near enough to the Life:
But the Imagination extends and enlarges them in such a manner, that the Mind
is sometimes charmed and sometimes terrified with them. A Man whose Heart is
corrupted by the irregular desires which the Imagination of its self has
stirred up in him, sometimes finds him self cured by the accomplishment of those
Desires. The actual enjoyment of the Object of his disorders, delivers him at
least for some time from a Passion which owed all its force and vehemence to
the Imagination.

XIII. Fourthly, the Senses join us only to certain Objects that lie round
about us, and are within their Sphere: But the Imagination makes the Mind a
Slave to every thing. It unites it to the past, present and future, to
Realities and Chimeras, to possible Beings, and to those which neither God
himself can create, nor the Mind comprehend. It forms dreadful Phantoms, and
then is scared at them. It raises delightful Apparitions, and is pleased with
them. It alters and destroys the nature of all Beings, and forms a Thousand
extravagant Designs in a World of its own making, composed of Realities and
Fictions.

XIV. Lastly the Imagination, without going so far as downright Madness,
disturbs and dissipates all the true Ideas, and corrupts the Heart by
innumerable ways. It would be too long to set down the different effects of the
several kinds of Imagination. But that which is most opposite to the efficacy
of the Grace of Christ, is that which in the Language of the World is called
Wit; for the better the Imagination is furnished, the more dangerous it is;
subtilty, delicacy, vivacity and spaciousness of Imagination, great qualities
in the Eyes of Men, are the most prolifick and the most general causes of the
blindness of the Mind and the corruption of the Heart. What I here assert being
a Paradox, I must not expect to be believed without Proof.

XV. The Soul is rational only by Reason: It is regular only by Order: It
derives its perfection wholly from the immediate and direct union it has with
God. On the contrary, its union with the Body fills it with Darkness, and puts
it in disorder: Because in our present Condition we cannot strengthen this
union without weaking that which is opposite to it. Now it is by the
Imagination that the Soul dilates and spreads it self over the Creatures; for
it is united to Truth only by pure Ideas free from all imaginary and
fantastical Appearances. So that the more strength, vivacity and extent the
Imagination has, the more the Mind employs it self about sensible Objects; all
this I have said before. Now when the Imagination is beautiful, easy, clear and
sprightly, the Images which it forms are lively, animated and delightful,
always drawn to the Life and even beyond it. Thus he who by the strength of his
Imagination raises a great variety of different Objects in his Mind, who makes
his Phantoms always appear in a fashionable Dress, and puts them into certain
regular and harmonious Motions which give an agreeable agitation to the whole
Brain: He, I say, is charmed with his own productions, and instead of
contemplating things as they are in themselves and as their Ideas represent
them, delights continually in seeing his own Farces acted, and applauds the
Fictions of his own Brain.

XVI. It is natural for all Men to seek Admirers, and the Man of Wit never
fails of them. When he speaks, as he speaks well, all the World hearkens to him
with Esteem; as he speaks agreably, they hear him with Pleasure; as he advances
only certain sensible Truths, which are really false ones (for that which is
true to the Senses, is false to the Mind) every one applauds him. Now is it
possible for one who knows, or rather by the air and behavior of his Auditors,
is strongly and sensibly persuaded that they admire, love, honor and respect
him, is it possible, I say, for such an one to distrust his own Thoughts, and
believe that he is mistaken? Can he avoid uniting himself not only to his own
Visions which enchant him, but also to that World which applauds him, to those
Friends which caress him, and to those Disciples which adore him? Can he be
closely united with God who has so many ties and relations with the Creatures?

XVII. The Wit is a Man of Honor, I allow it: Yet he may be a Cheat, and there
are as many of them of that Character, as any other. He is not Vicious, I grant
it: Though there are Debauchees among them, and a great many too. But certainly
the Man of Wit is many ways allied to the World: For how can he be Dead to the
World, when the World is so much Alive to him? He is continually agitated by
motions of Vanity: For every one that he converses with does nothing but
provoke in him the Concupiscence of Pride. The Man of Wit, I speak still of
such a one as lives in a select and chosen World, one whose whole design is to
gain an advantageous Post in Men's Minds, or by the Reputation he has already
gotten, is become in reality the Slave of all those who look upon him as their
Master: He, I say, is separated from God at a greater distance than any other,
and there is no likelihood of his return. The delight of Grace may diffuse it
self in his Heart ten times a Day; it will always find that Heart filled with
Sensations and Motions that will choke it. The Light may illuminate his Mind,
and dispel its Phantoms; the Imagination will easily produce them again. There
are too many Fetters to break, too many Chains to burst, before this Captive
can be delivered. But he is in love with his Chains, he is not sensible of his
Slavery, or he glories in it.

XVIII. The Debauchee is not always actually in a Debauch; his Blood and
Humors cannot hold out to maintain it; and when the Fermentation ceases, he is
ashamed of his Disorders. But the Blood is always in a condition to furnish
Spirits enough to keep up the Lust of Pride. What time then can be favorable
for the efficacy of Grace? The Cheat feels continual checks of Conscience which
trouble and disquiet him, but the Wit feels no remorse. He will say, is it a
Crime to have Wit, and to merit the esteem of Persons of Worth and Reputation?
No, it is no Crime to have Wit, but it is an Error to take the Imagination for
the Mind. It is not a Crime to merit the esteem of others, but it is an
illusion to think that a Man merits it, I will not say, for having abundance of
animal Spirits in his Head, or a just proportion of the Fibers of his Brain to
the Spirits, but even for being united to Reason in the purest and closest
manner that is possible. There is no Merit in the sight of him who alone can
judge of, and reward Merit, but by a conformity to Order, and a right use of
Liberty: A use which cannot be well regulated without the assistance of Grace,
and of which he who values himself upon it loses the Merit, because he does not
render to God alone the Glory which is due to him. Do we think that God has
created other Men to employ their Thoughts and bestow their Love on us; to turn
toward and admire us; to run after and rely upon us? Certainly God would be
worshipped by his Creatures. But how! by prostrating themselves before his
Altars, by burning Incense, by joining Voices with Instruments, and making the
Churches resound with harmonious Airs composed in his Praise? No, without doubt
God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. He will have the
whole Man, his Thoughts, Motions and Actions. But the Man of Wit, more than any
one, attracts the Eyes of other Men, and fixes their Motions on himself.
Instead of putting himself in a posture of Adoration, and turning the Minds and
Hearts of others toward him who alone ought to be worshipped, he exalts
himself, and assumes an honorable Place in Men's Minds, he enters even into the
Sanctuary of that Holy Temple, the principal Habitation of the living God, and
by the sensible Pomp and Splendour which surrounds him, he prostrates weak
Imaginations at his Feet, and makes them pay him a true and spiritual Worship,
a Worship which is due to God alone.

XIX. Now can he who seeks the esteem of Men, and robs God of that which he
most values in his Creatures, can he I say, 1 Pet. 5.5.
draw down upon himself the favors of Heaven? Will God who resists the Proud
prevent him with his Blessings? The Spirit of God willingly rests on such as
are humble, such as the World despises, These Truths the Scripture assures us
of. He enlightens those that retire into themselves: This Experience shows. But
he blinds those lively and sparkling Imaginations, which are always roving
abroad: For Truth dwells within us. Besides, the Grace either of Light or
Sense, does not work its effect in the Mind and Heart of those who are united
to every thing that is about them: This is evident from what has been here
said. So then the Man of Wit who seeks after Glory, shall find only a vain and
transitory one, and shall fall for ever with those proud and ambitious Spirits,
into the disgrace which he deserves.

XX. But this beautiful ornament of Wit; so fatal to those who possess it and
value themselves upon it, is also very dangerous to those who esteem and admire
it in others without possessing it themselves. This is a Truth necessary to be
known. There is nothing more contagious than the Imagination; and those in whom
it is strong and governing, are always Masters of those that look intently on
them. Their Air and Behavior, do, as I may say, diffuse conviction and
certainty in all that behold them: For they act every thing with so much
Passion and Life, that if a Man does not retire into himself, to confront that
which they say with the answers of inward Truth, which is very hard to do in
their Presence; he is convinced, without knowing precisely what it is he is
convinced of; because he is struck, he is dazzled, and subdued by force.

XXI. Nevertheless, we must know, that those that have this lively and
domineering Imagination, are of all Men the most subject to Error, their
Sentiments are the most dangerous, and their Motions the most irregular. For
the fuller the Brain is of Spirits, the more rebellious the Imagination is, the
Passions are the more violent, the Body speaks in a higher Tone, which never
speaks but in favor of the Body, to unite and subject the Soul to the Body,
and to separate it from him who alone is able to give it that perfection it is
capable of. We should therefore endeavor to silence our own Imagination, and
be upon our guard against those that please and excite it. We should as much as
is possible avoid the Conversation of the World. For when the Lust either of
Pride or Pleasure, is actually provoked, Grace cannot operate in us with its
full efficacy.

XXII. Man is subject to Two sorts of Concupiscence, one of Pleasure, and the
other of Grandeur. This is a thing not sufficiently taken notice of. When a Man
enjoys sensual Pleasures, his Imagination is polluted, and carnal Concupiscence
exerts and fortifies it self. In like manner, when he goes abroad into the
World, and seeks to advance himself in it, when he procures Friends, and gains
Reputation, the Idea which he has of himself stretches and grows larger in his
Imagination, and the concupiscence of Pride gains new and greater Strength.
There are some impressions in the Brain naturally formed for maintaining civil
Society, and advancing a Man's private Fortune; as there are others relating to
the preservation of his Life, and the propagation of his Species. We are united
to other Men by a thousand Relations, as really as we are to our own Body: and
every union with the Creatures disunites us from God in the State we are now
in, because the impressions of the Brain are not subject to our Wills.

XXIII. All Men are well enough convinced of the pravity of carnal
Concupiscence, they have some fear and abhorrence of it, and in some measure
avoid every thing that may provoke it. But there are very few that seriously
reflect on the concupiscence of Pride, or apprehend the danger of raising and
augmenting it. Every one rashly throws himself into the Conversation of the
World, and embarks without fear on that tempestuous Sea, as S. Augustine calls
it. We suffer our selves to be governed by the Spirit that reigns in the World,
we aspire to Greatness, and pursue Honor: For indeed how is it possible to
remain unmoved in the midst of that Torrent of People that surrounds us, who
insult and domineer over us, if they leave us behind them? In fine we get a
Name, but it is such a Name as makes a Man the more a Slave, the more Pains he
has taken to deserve it; a Name which straightly unites us to the Creatures, and
separates us from the Creator; a Name illustrious in the esteem of Men, but a
Name of Pride which God will destroy.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Passions. What they are. Their dangerous effects. We must
moderate them. The conclusion of the first Part.
I. THE Senses, Imagination and Passions go always in company together: We
cannot examine and condemn them apart. That which I have said of the Senses and
Imagination, naturally reaches the Passions also. So that the Reader may easily
judge what I am going to say, by what I have already said: For I shall only
explain a little more at large what I have been already obliged to say in part,
by reason of the close union that is between all the parts of our Being.

II. By the Passions I do not mean the Senses, which produce them, nor the
Imagination which excites and keeps them up: But I mean those notions of the
Soul and animal Spirits which are caused by the Senses and Imagination, and act
reciprocally on the cause which produced them: For all this is nothing but a
continual circulation of Sensations and Motions which mutually produce and
fortify one another. If the Senses produce the Passions, the Passions in
return, by the Motion which they excite in the Body, unite the Senses to
sensible Objects. If the Imagination stirs up the Passions, the Passions, by a
Counter-motion of the Spirits raise the Imagination; and each of them is
reciprocally supported or produced anew by the effect of which it is the Cause;
so admirable is the economy of Man's Body and the mutual Relation of all the
parts which compose it. But this matter deserves a fuller Explication, in
respect of the Consequences which we should draw from it.

III. The Passions are Motions of the Soul which accompany that of the Spirits
and the Blood, and produce in the Body, by the mechanical Frame and
Constitution of it, all the dispositions necessary to support and keep up the
Cause from whence they arise. At the sight of any Object which moves the Soul,
(we will suppose that Object to be some Good) the animal Spirits which come
from the Brain to the other parts of the Body, divide themselves into two
Branches or Courses. One of these Courses runs, or has a tendency to run to
the external parts, the Legs and Arms; or if they are unserviceable, then to
the Lungs and Organs of the Voice, in order to dispose us and those that are
with us, to unite us to the Object. The other part of the Spirits goes into the
Nerves belonging to the Heart, Lungs, Liver and other Viscera, to proportion
the Fermentation and Course of the Blood and Humors, to the quality of the
present Good. By this means the Impression which the presence of any Good, or
the Imagination forms in the Brain, and which determines the two Courses of the
Spirits, is preserved and maintained by new Spirits, with which the latter
Course endeavors to supply the Brain by the repeated and violent Shocks
wherewith it shakes the Nerves that encompass the Vessels containing the
Humors and Blood, the Matter of which the Spirits are continually made.

IV. The Nerves which are distributed into the Limbs being full of Spirits,
from their origin in the Brain, even to their extremities; and the Impression
of the Object forcibly driving the Spirits into all the parts of the Body, to
give them a violent and extraordinary Motion, or put them into a forced
Position, the Blood must of necessity ascend up to the Head speedily and in
great abundance, by the Action of the Nerves which surround, and compress or
dilate the Vessels wherein it is contained. For if the Brain did not send a
sufficient quantity of Spirits into the Members of the Body, we could not long
preserve the Air, Posture and Motion necessary for the acquisition of Good and
the avoidance of Evil. Nay, we should fall into Swounings and Faintings; for
this constantly happens when the Brain wants Spirits, and when the
Communication which it has by their means with the other parts of the Body is
interrupted.

V. Thus the Body is an admirable Machine, composed of an infinite number of
Pipes and Cisterns, which have all innumerable communications with one another.
The wonderful operation of this Machine depends wholly on the Course of the
Spirits, which is differently determined by the elastick force of the several
Springs, and the opening and shutting of the Passages by the Action of Objects
on the Senses, and the Motion of the principal part of the Brain; which Motion
depends partly on the Will, and partly on the Course of the Spirits, excited by
the Impressions of the Imagination and Memory.

VI. But that which I would have chiefly observed here, is, That the Course of
the Spirits in the Nerves, belonging to the Viscera, which drives the Blood up
into the Head for the production of Spirits, necessary to dispose the outward
parts of the Body, with relation to the present Object, acts with choice, and
furnishes the Brain only with such Humors as are proper for the preservation
of that Impression by which the Passion is excited; or, which comes all to one,
the Blood and Humors which ascend up to the Head, divide themselves in such a
manner, that so much of them as is fit for the production of Spirits, agreeable
to the prevailing Passion, remains there, and the rest returns by the
circulation, to the places from whence it came. These Spirits being made, are
presently determined toward the Impression which is the original Cause of all
these Motions, to preserve it, and also to revive all the accessory Impressions
which may any way fortify and confirm it. From those Impressions both the
Principal one and the Accessories, the new Spirits do also receive their
direction, and are divided, as the first were, into two Branches; one for the
outward, and the other for the inward parts of the Body: For as long as the
Passion lasts, this admirable Circulation of the Spirits and Blood is
continually made, which sets the Machine a going, according as the present
Object requires, with a wonderful Regularity and Order.

VII. From hence it appears, that the Passions which are most wisely ordained,
with relation to their proper end; namely, the preservation of Health and Life,
the conjunction of Man and Woman, Society, Commerce, and the acquisition of
sensible Goods, are extremely opposite to the acquisition of the true and
spiritual Goods, the Goods due to Virtue and Merit.

VIII. For 1. The Passions are not subject to our Wills: Nothing is more
difficult than to govern them, because we have lost that Power by Sin, which
otherwise we should have had over our Bodies.

2. They are so contrary to Virtue and Merit, that a Man must sacrifice and
destroy them, if he would deserve the Name and Reward of a truly virtuous Man,
or a perfect Christian.

3. Every Motion which they naturally excite in the Soul, is only for the good
of the Body, according to this Maxim, That whatever happens to the Soul by the
Body, is only for the Body.

4. When they are raised, they take up the whole content of the Mind and Heart.
The impressions and agitation of the Brain, which they fortify by the
Contributions they draw from the Intestines, and send up speedily and
abundantly into the Head, disturb all our Ideas; and the Shock and Motion they
give the Will by that lively and agreeable Sensation which accompanies them,
corrupts our Hearts, and throws us into innumerable disorders.

But 5. when their Agitation is ceased, yet the Imagination remains polluted by
the Impressions which they have made on the Brain, whose Fibers have been bent
or broken by the violence of the Spirits which they have put in Motion. These
Impressions often dissipate the attention of the Mind, and generally revive the
same Passions which produced them, when the Blood is impregnated again with
Particles fit to raise such a Fermentation as may produce abundance of Spirits
agreeable to the nature of those Passions.

6. The Passions by their rapid Course make a smooth and easy way for
themselves into the Nerves which go to the Heart and other inward parts of the
Body, and there excite such Motions as are proper to revive them again; so that
the least thing that shakes the Brain, is capable of renewing them.

7. Lastly, all the Passions justify themselves in such a manner, that it is
not possible at the time that they agitate the Mind, to make a solid and
impartial Judgment of the Objects which excite them; for such is their
malignant quality, that they are not satisfied if Reason too does not give
Judgment in favor of them.

IX. For I. They confirm the Judgment of the Senses, though they are so far from
being competent Judges in the Eye of Reason, that they are false Witnesses. II.
They show only the wrong side of Objects, and always represent them in that
deceitful Shape which suits best with their Interest. III. They revive all
those Impressions and accessory Ideas which side with them, and suppress all
the rest. IV. They cover their irregular Proceedings and vicious Designs, with
the specious appearances of Reason, Justice and Virtue. The covetous Man, for
instance, conceals from himself the Shamefulness, Injustice and Cruelty of his
Avarice: He disguises his Passion with notions of Temperance, Moderation,
Prudence, Penance, or it may be of Charity, Liberality and Magnificence, by
forming imaginary Designs which he will never put in execution; for the
Passions are cunning enough to make even the Virtues opposite to them serve for
their Justification. V. Lastly, the Passions are always accompanied with a
certain pleasant Sensation, which bribes their Judge, and if he favors them,
pays him to his content; whereas if he condemns them, they handle him very
cruelly: For what Present can be offered more grateful and charming, to one
that irresistibly desires to be happy, than Pleasure, when it is actual
Pleasure that gives actual Happiness? And what Treatment can be more rough,
than that which the Soul receives from the Passions, when it would Sacrifice
them to the Love of Order? We cannot strike them without wounding our selves;
for when they are upon their Guard, the blow which we aim at them, if it takes
away their Life only for a little while, recoils back upon our selves and
mortally Wounds us; or rather reduces us to such a condition, as often seems
worse than Death it self.

X. So then it is evident, that those who are so far from moderating their
Passions, that they do all they can to gratify them, who live by Humor, and
act by Inclination, and judge of every thing by Fancy; in a word, those who
follow all the motions of the Machine, and suffer themselves to be led, without
knowing who it is that leads them, or whither they go; are continually
departing from their true good, and by degrees lose sight of it quite; they
blot out the very Remembrance of it, and blindly run headlong into the Abyss
where all Evils dwell, and the eternal Privation of all Good.

XI. It is true, indeed, that sometimes Grace is strong enough to stop in his
full career one that abandons himself to the motions of his Passions, and that
God in goodness speaks to the Soul in Thunder and Lightning, and with a
terrible Voice, which overthrows the Man and the Passion that hurries him away.
But Christ very rarely bestows such Favors; and that Man is very senseless,
who throws himself into a Precipice, in expectation that God should work a
Miracle to save him from death.

XII. What then must we do to moderate our Passions? I have already spoke of
this in the Seventh Chapter and elsewhere; but I shall sum it up here in few
words. I. We should avoid the Objects which excite them, and mortify our
Senses. II. We should keep our Imagination within the bounds of that respect
which it ows to Reason, or makes a continual revulsion in the animal Spirits,
which by their Course keep up, and fortify the sinful Impressions. III. We
should seek after the means to make our Passions appear ridiculous and
contemptible, we should examine them by the Light, confront them with Order,
and use our utmost endeavors to discover the foulness, injustice and
irregularity of them, and their fatal consequences, as well in respect of this
life as the other. IV. We should form no Design when they are excited, nor ever
enter upon any Business by their direction or influence. V. We should get a
Habit, and lay an Obligation on our selves of consulting Reason in every thing;
and whenever we have neglected to do it, either by surprise or for any other
reason, we should change our manner of proceeding, and at least take upon us
the shame we deserve, for having acted like Brutes by the construction and
motion of the Machine; much less should we justify the foolish step we have
made by continuing in a vicious and sinful Course. VI. We should labor to
augment the strength and liberty of our Mind, that we may be able to undergo
the labor of Attention, and to suspend our Assent till Evidence forces it from
us. Without these two Qualifications, we cannot receive from Reason any certain
Rules for the Government of our selves. VII. Lastly; that we may be in a
capacity to follow those Rules which destroy the Passions, we should, above all
things, have recourse to Prayer, and with confidence and humility draw near to
him who came to deliver us by the strength of his Grace, from that Body of
Death, or that Law of the Flesh which rebels every moment against the Law of
the Spirit. For I have often said already, and do not stick to repeat it here
again, because I think there is no fear of reflecting on it too much, That
neither Reason by it self, nor all the helps which Philosophy affords us, can
without the influence of the second Adam deliver us from the malignity of the
first.

XIII. The sum of what has been said relating to the First Part of this Moral
Essay, is this; First I showed, that Virtue consists precisely in an habitual
and ruling Love of the immutable Order. Then I spoke of the two principal
Qualities necessary for the acquisition of Virtue. After that I laid open the
occasional Causes of Light and inward Sense, without which we cannot acquire or
preserve the Love of Order. And lastly, I examined into the occasional Causes
of certain Sensations which are contrary to those of Grace, and abate the Force
and Efficacy of them, that we may avoid them. So that, I think, I have omitted
nothing necessary for the acquisition and conservation of Virtue in general. I
come now to the Second Part, which treats not of Virtues, but of the Duties of
Virtue: For I know of but one single Virtue, which renders those that possess
it truly and substantially Virtuous; namely, an habitual and ruling Love of the
immutable Order.

A TREATISE OF Morality.
PART II. Of DVTIES.
CHAP. I. Good Men often do wicked Actions. The Love of Order must be
enlightened to make it regular. Three Conditions required to make an Action
perfectly Virtuous. We should study the Duties of Man in general, and take some
time every day to examine the Order and Circumstances of them in particular.
I. THE Actions of those that have attained to the true and solid Virtue, are
not therefore all solidly and substantially Virtuous. There is in a manner
always some deficiency or imperfection in them; nay, many times they are really
sinful. The reason of this is, because a Man does not always Act by the
influence of his predominant Habit, but sometimes by the operation of the
Passion, which is actually excited in him. For if the predominant Habit be
asleep, as I may say, and the rest awake, the Actions of a good Man may be many
ways sinful: But besides, though the predominant Habit of the Love of Order be
actually excited in a good Man, yet at the same time his Actions may be
defective and imperfect, and even directly opposite to Order which he actually
loves, and designs to follow. For, beside the difficulty of paying an exact
Obedience to the Order which we do know, indiscreet and ill governed Zeal often
makes us Act contrary to the Order which we do not know. Wherefore that an
Action may be completely Virtuous, it is not sufficient that it proceed from a
good Man, nor from a Man actually moved by the Love of Order, but it must also
be conformable to Order in all its Circumstances; and that too not by a kind of
Chance luckily determining the actual Motion of the Soul, but by the strength
of Reason, guiding and governing us in such a manner as to make us fulfill all
our Duties.

II. So then, though it be sufficient to make us just and acceptable to God, that
the Love of Order be our predominant Habit; yet if we would be perfect and
complete, we must be able to govern this Love by an exact Knowledge of our
Duties. Nay, I may say, that he who neglects or slights this Knowledge, what
Zeal soever he may find within himself for Order, his Heart is by no means
rightly disposed. For Order would be loved by Reason, and not altogether by the
Heart and fervency of Instinct, which often fills with indiscreet Zeal those
whose Imagination is too brisk and lively; who are not used to retire into
themselves, but are continually apt to mistake the secret inspirations of their
Passions, for the infallible Answers of the inward Truth.

III. Indeed, those whose Mind is so weak, and their Passions so strong, that
they are not capable of giving Counsel to themselves, or rather of taking
Counsel of him who enlightens all Men, are excusable before God; if they
sincerely desire and follow the Advice of such as they believe to be the best
and wisest Men. But those who have or pretend to have Wit and Sense, are guilty
in the sight of God, if they undertake any Design without consulting him, that
is, without consulting Reason, how fervent soever the Zeal may be which
transports them. For we must distinguish the Answers of the inward Truth which
illuminates the Mind by the Evidence of its Light, from the Language and secret
Inspirations of the Passions, which confound and deceive it by such Sensations
as are indeed lively and agreeable, but always obscure and confused.

IV. The Love of Order therefore requires of us three Conditions to make any of
our Actions conformable to it: First, That we examine the Action in it self,
and all its Circumstances, as far as we are able. Secondly, That we suspend our
Assent till Evidence forces it from us, or the Execution, till Necessity
obliges us to defer it no longer. Thirdly, That we readily, exactly, and
inviolably obey Order as far as it is known to us. Strength of Mind must make
us courageously undergo the labor of Attention: Liberty of Mind must moderate
and wisely govern the desire of Assent: Submission of Mind must make us follow
the Light step by step, without ever going before it, or forsaking it; and the
Love of Order must animate and quicken these three Faculties; by which, though it
be hid in the bottom of our Heart, it discovers it self to the Eyes of the
World, and sanctifies all our Actions in the sight of God.

V. But since it is impossible for a Man that is not versed in the Science of
Morality, to discover the Order of his Duties in sudden and unexpected
Occasions, though he have never so great strength and liberty of Mind; it is
necessary for him to provide against those Occasions, which leave him no time
for Examination, and by a prudent foresight to inform himself of his Duties in
general, or of some certain and undeniable Principles to govern his Actions by
in particular Cases. This study of a Man's Duties, ought without doubt to be
preferred before all others: Its End and Reward is Eternity. He that applies
himself to Languages, to the Mathematics, to Business, and neglects the study
of the general Rules for the Government of his Life, is like a foolish
Traveller, who loiters by the way or rambles out of it, and is overtaken by the
Night, an eternal Night, which will deprive him for ever of the sight of his
Country, fill him with immortal despair, and leave him exposed to the dreadful
wrath of the Lamb, and the power of the Devils, or rather the justice of an
avenging God.

VI. He that should go about to examine in particular all the Duties belonging
to the several conditions of Men, would undertake a Work which he could never
finish, how indefatigable soever he were. For my part, I am too sensible of my
own weakness to engage in so vast and difficult a Design; and all that I here
pretend to, is to set down in general, and that chiefly for my own private use,
the Duties which all Men, as far as they are able, ought to pay to God, their
Neighbor and Themselves. Every Man must examine his own particular Duties
himself, as they relate to the general and essential Obligations, and according
to Circumstances which vary every moment: We should set apart some time for
this every day, and not expect to find in Books, nor it may be in other Men, so
much Certainty and Light as we may in our selves, if we consult the inward
Truth sincerely, faithfully and in the motion of the Love of Order.

CHAP. II. Our Duties toward God must be referred to his Attributes, to his
Power, Wisdom and Love. God alone is the true Cause of all Things. The Duties
we owe to Power, which consist chiefly in clear Judgments, and in Motions
governed by those Judgments.
I. THe immutable and necessary Order requires that the Creature should depend
on the Creator, that every Copy should answer to its Original; and that Man
being made after the Image of God, should live in Obedience to God, united to
God, and like God as far as is possible; obedient to his Power, united to his
Wisdom, and perfectly like him in all the motions of his Heart. Mat. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, says our Savior to his Disciples, even as your Father which
is in Heaven is perfect. Indeed, we shall not be truly like God, till being
swallowed up in the contemplation of his Essence, we shall be wholly penetrated
with his Light and Pleasure: But thither it is that we must tend; it is that
which Faith gives us a Right to hope for; that to which it conducts us; that
which it gives us an earnest of by the inward Reformation which the Grace of
Christ works in us. For Faith leads us to the understanding of the Truth, and
merits for us the Grace of Charity. Now Understanding and Charity, are the two
essential strokes which draw our Minds anew after our Original, who is called
in the Scriptures Truth and Love. Beloved, says St. John, 1 John 3.2, 3.
now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but
we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him
as he is. And every Man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as
he is pure. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, says Christ himself, for they shall see God.

II. To discover the Duties which we owe to God, we must attentively consider
all his Attributes, and consult our selves in reference to them: Especially, we
must examine his Power, Wisdom and Love; and on our own part, our Judgments and
Motions: For it is only by the Judgments and Motions of our Minds, that we
render to God that which we owe him; as it is chiefly on the account of his
Power, Wisdom and Love, that we indispensably owe him the greatest Duties.

III. When in thinking on God, we consider him only as a Being of infinite
Reality or Perfection, we are convinced that Order requires us to esteem him
infinitely. But we do not naturally conclude from this alone, that we ought to
worship, fear or love him, etc. The consideration of God barely in himself, or
without any relation to us, does not excite those Motions in the Soul which
carry it toward Good, or the cause of its Happiness, and produce in it fit
dispositions to receive the influence of that Good. There is nothing more
evident, than that a Being infinitely perfect ought to be infinitely esteemed:
No one can refuse God this speculative Duty; for it consists only in a simple
Judgment, which no one can suspend when the Evidence is full and convincing.
And therefore wicked Men, those that have no Religion, those that deny the
Providence of God, willingly pay him this Duty. But as they imagine that God
does not concern himself with our Affairs, that he is not the true and
immediate Cause of every thing that is done here below, and that we can have no
Communication, no Society, no Union with him, neither by a Reason, nor a Power
in some sort common both to him and us; they brutishly follow the agreeable
Motions of their Passions, and pay those Duties to a blind Nature, which are
due only to the Wisdom and Power of the Creator.

IV. These mistaken Men argue and conclude right enough, but it is from false
Principles; and you cannot easily make them understand that God requires any
Duties of his Creatures, if you do not first rid them of a great many false
Maxims; such as these, for instance. That if God concerned himself with our
Affairs, the World would not go as it does; that Injustice would never be
advanced to the Throne, and that Bodies would not be ranged so irregularly as
they are; that so deformed and misshapen a World as this is, can be nothing but
the work of a blind and unintelligent Nature, and that God does not require of
us vile Creatures, Honors unbecoming his Nature; that that which appears right
and just to us, is not so in it self or in the sight of God, who if it were,
would often Punish those that he ought to Reward; for many times we meet with
the greatest Misfortunes, when we are doing the best Actions. I have elsewhere
confuted these Principles; and if the Reader does not clearly comprehend what I
am going to say, he may read the first Eight of my Christian Meditations.

V. Wherefore that we may discover the Foundation and Original of our Duties,
it is not sufficient to consider the infinitely perfect Being, without the
relation it bears to us. On the contrary, we must above all things take notice,
that we depend on the Power of God; that we are united to his Wisdom, and that
we have no Motion but from his Spirit, from the Love which he bears to himself.
We depend on the Power of God; for we have our Existence from that alone, we
act by that alone, and can do nothing but by that. We are united to the Wisdom
of God; for by that alone we are enlightened, in that alone we discover Truth,
we are rational only by that, for that alone is the universal Reason of all
intelligent Beings. Lastly, we have no Motion but from the Spirit of God; for
as God acts only by his own Will, or by the Love which he bears to himself; so
all the Love which we have for Good, is only an Effusion or Impression of that
Love with which God loves himself. We love nothing invincibly and naturally but
God, because we love, and can love nothing but Good; and Good, I mean the cause
of Happiness, is no where but in God; for no Creature can of it self Act on
spiritual Substances. I must explain these things more at large, in order to
deduce from them the Rules of our Conduct: I begin with Power, and the Duties
we owe to it.

VI. Glory and Honor belong only to God: 1 Timothy 1.17.
All the Motions of our Souls ought to tend toward him alone, for in him alone
Power resides. All the Wills of the Creatures are of themselves impotent and
ineffectual. He alone who gives them their Beings, can give them the Modes of
their Beings; for the different Modes of Beings are nothing but the same Beings
in such and such particular Fashions or Dispositions; nothing is more evident
to one that can sedately and silently consult the inward Truth. For what can be
plainer, than that if God, for instance, will keep any Body always in one
place, no Creature can remove it into another; and that Man cannot so much as
move his Arm, but only because God is pleass'd to do that which ungrateful and
senseless Man thinks he does himself? It is the same with the Modifications of
spiritual Beings. If God creates or continues a Soul in the Modification of
Pain, no other Spirit can deliver it from that Pain, nor make it feel Pleasure,
except God gives his Assent, I am the Lord, that is my Name, (...) Glory will
not give to another, Isa. 42.8.
and co-operates with it in the accomplishment of its desires. By this
extraordinary Concession and Liberality it is, that God without losing any
thing of his Power, without diminishing his Greatness or lessening his Glory,
imparts to the Creatures his Glory, Greatness and Power.

VII. God has subjected this present World to the Angels; it is they that act,
and God that does every thing. He has given to Jesus Christ as Head of the
Church, a Sovereign Power over all the Nations of the Earth: Christ distributes
the true Goods; but it is God alone who sends them, it is he alone that acts in
our Souls, and penetrates the hardness of our Hearts. Christ as he is Man,
prays, intercedes, desires and performs the Office of Advocate, Mediator and
High Priest. But it is God alone that operates, he only has power, he is the
sole cause and beginning of all Things, and ought to be the sole end. All the
Motions of our Souls should tend toward him, and to him alone belong Glory and
Honor. This is that eternal, necessary and inviolable Law, which God has
established by the necessity of his own Being, by the love which he necessarily
bears to himself; a Love which is always conformable to Order, and makes Order
to be the inviolable Law of all spiritual Beings. When God ceases to know
himself to be what he is, and to love himself as much as he deserves, to act
according to his own Light, and by the Motion of his own Love, when he ceases
to observe this Law, then it will be lawful for us to desire Glory our selves,
or give it to any other beside God; then we may without fear, delight in and
make much of the Friendship of the Creatures; we may love and be beloved, give
and receive Worship and Adoration; we may then show our selves to the World, to
attract the Esteem and Love of the World; we may exalt and expose our selves to
View, as Objects fit to employ those. Minds and Hearts which God has made only
for himself; we may then employ our selves either about our selves, or the
imaginary Power of the Creatures.

VIII. There is nothing certainly more agreeable both to Christianity and
Reason, than this Principle, That it is God alone who does every thing; and
that he communicates his Power to the Creatures no otherwise than as he makes
them Occasional Causes for himself to act by, in such a manner as bears the
Character of an infinite Wisdom, an immutable Nature, and an universal Cause;
in such a manner, that all the Glory which the work of the Creature deserves,
is referred to the Creator alone; when the Creatures by a Power which they have
not in them, execute such Designs as were formed before their Creation. What is
more holy than this Principle, which clearly shows to such as are capable of
rightly understanding it, that in many Cases it is lawful for us to approach
the Objects of our Senses by the Motion of our Body; but that we must reserve
all the Motions of our Soul for God alone? For we may, nay and many times ought
to move toward the occasional Cause of our Sensations, but we must never leave
it: We may join our selves to other Men; but we must never adore them with the
Motion of our Love, either as our Good, or as capable of procuring us any Good:
We must love and fear only the true Cause of Good and Evil: We must love and
fear none but God in the Creatures. Jer. 17.7, 5.
Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and cursed is the Man that
trusts in Man, and makes flesh his Arm.

IX. This probably was the Philosophy of the noble Mordecai, which he taught
his adopted Daughter Esther: For the Jews had a more divine Philosophy, than
that which the Heathens have left us. In a Motion conformable to the Principles
of that Philosophy without doubt it was, that she makes this Prayer to God, and
lays before him the true Sentiments of her Heart. Deliver us, O Lord, with
thine hand, Esther 14.14, etc.
and help me that am desolate, and which have no other helper but thee. Thou
know all things, O Lord; thou know that I hate the Glory of the
Unrighteous, and abhor the Bed of the Uncircumcised, and of all the Heathen.
Thou know my necessity; for I abhor the sign of my high Estate, which is
upon mine Head, in the days whereon I show my self, and that I wear it not when
I am private by my self: And that thine Handmaid has not eaten at Haman's
Table, and that I have not greatly esteemed the King's Feast, nor drunk the
Wine of the Drink Offerings: Neither had thine Handmaid any joy since the day
that I was brought hither to this present, but in thee, O Lord God of Abraham.
This great Queen takes God to witness, That she had no joy but in him alone.
Though she were Wife to a Prince that commanded a Hundred and seventeen
Provinces, and lived in the midst of Pleasures, yet she despises her Greatness,
and abhors the Delights of a voluptuous Court: She remains unmoved in the midst
of so many Allurements, and God alone is the Object of all the Motions of her
Soul. Thine Handmaid never had any joy but in thee, O Lord God of Abraham.
What constancy of Mind! what greatness of Soul! This is it which the Law of God
teaches us; and this also is demonstrated by that Principle, that God alone
does every thing, and that the Creatures are only the Occasional Causes of that
Splendour which seems to environ them, and of those Pleasures which seem to flow
from them. But the Duties we owe to Power, which is in none but God, require a
more particular Explication.

X. All our Duties consist properly in nothing but certain Judgments and
Motions of the Soul, as I said before. For God is a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: All our outward Actions are but Consequences
of the Action of our Mind. This clear Perception, That God alone has Power,
obliges us to form the following Judgments.

1. That God alone is the Cause of our Being.

2. That he alone is the Cause of the duration of our Being, or of our Time.

3. That he alone is the Cause of our Knowledge.

4. That he alone is the Cause of the natural Motions of our Will.

5. That he alone is the Cause of our Sensations, Pleasure, Pain, Hunger,
Thirst, etc.

6. That he alone is the Cause of all the Motions of our Body.

7. That neither Men, nor Angels, nor Devils, nor any other Creature, can of
themselves do us either good or harm: That they may nevertheless, as Occasional
Causes, determine God in consequence of certain general Laws, to do us good or
harm, by means of the Body to which we are united.

8. That in like manner we can do neither good nor harm to any one by our own
strength, but only oblige God by our practical Desires, in consequence of the
Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, to do good or harm to other Men: For
we, indeed, have the Will to move our Tongue or Arm; but it is God alone who
can and does actually move them.

XI. These Judgments require of us the following Motions.

1. To love none but God with a Love of Union or Conjunction, because he alone
is the Cause of our Happiness, either small or great, transitory or durable: I
say with a Love of Union; for we must love our Neighbor not as our Good, or
the Cause of our Happiness, but only as capable of enjoying the same Happiness
with us. The word Love is equivocal, and therefore we must take care of it.

2. To have no joy but in God alone; for he that rejoices in any other thing,
judges that that other thing can make him happy; which is a false Judgment, and
can cause only an irregular Motion.

3. Never to unite our selves to the occasional Causes of our Happiness,
contrary to the Prohibition of the true Cause; for that would be to oblige God
in consequence of his Laws, to promote Iniquity.

4. Not to unite our selves to them without a particular necessity; for the
Sinner ought to avoid Pleasure, because actual Pleasure gives actual Happiness,
and Happiness is a Reward which the Sinner does not deserve; besides, the
Pleasures which we enjoy by the means of the Body, fortify Concupiscence,
disturb the Mind, and corrupt the Heart a thousand ways. This is the Ground of
the necessity of Penance.

5. To fear none but God, because he alone can Punish us. We must fear God in
this life, to keep us from offending him. The happy day will come, which
excluding Sin, shall also banish Fear.

6. To be sorry for nothing but our Sin, because nothing but Sin can oblige a
just God to make us miserable. He that grieves at the loss of a false Good,
gives Honor to it, and considers it as a true Good. And he that grieves at a
Misfortune which he cannot remedy, afflicts himself in vain. Self-love
enlightened, is grieved only for its own Disorders, and Charity for those of
others.

7. Though God alone can make us miserable, yet we must not hate him, though we may
fear him. Only he that is hardened in Sin, hates God out of Self-love; for
being sensible that he will not obey God, or knowing, as the damned do, that in
the condition which he likes and is pleased with, he has no means of access or
return to God, the invincible love of Happiness inspires him continually with
an invincible hatred against him who alone can be the cause of Misery.

8. We must not hate nor fear the occasional causes of physical Evil or Misery.
We may separate our selves from them. But we must not do that neither against
the Will of the true Cause, I mean contrary to Order or the Law of God.

9. We should will nothing but what God wills; because we can do nothing but
what God does. If we have not the Power to act, it is plain that we should not
have the Will to act. Order or the divine Law should also be our Law or the
Rule of our Desires and Actions; because our Desires are efficacious only by
the power and action of God. I cannot move my Arm by my own Strength: And
therefore I ought not to move it according to my own Desires. The Law of God
should govern all the effects of Power, not only in God, but also in the
Creatures. Order or the Law of God is common to all spiritual Beings: The Power
of God is common to all Causes. Therefore we cannot dispense with our Obedience
to that Law, because we cannot act but by the efficacy of that Power.

10. We may nevertheless desire to be happy; nay we cannot desire to be
miserable. But we must neither desire nor do any thing to make us happy, but
what Order allows of. We shall never find Happiness, if we seek it by the Power
of God contrary to his Law. It is an abuse of Power to use it against the Will
of him that communicates it. The voluptuous Man who desires to be happy in this
World, shall be so perhaps in part, in consequence of the Laws of Nature: But
he shall be eternally miserable in the other, in consequence of the immutable
Order of Justice, or by the necessity of the divine Law, which requires that
every abuse of divine Things should be eternally punished by the divine Power.
For we should take good notice, that nothing is more holy, more sacred, and
more divine than Power: And he that attributes it to himself, he that makes it
subservient to his Pleasures, his Pride, or his own particular Desires, commits
a Crime, the enormity of which God alone knows and can punish.

11. It is an abominable piece of Injustice in any Man, to be proud of his
Nobility, Dignity, Quality, Learning, Riches or any other thing. He that
glories, 2 Cor. 10.17.
let him glory in the Lord, and refer all things to him, for there is no
Greatness nor Power but in God. A Man may set some value on himself, and prefer
himself before his Horse: He may and ought to esteem other Men, and all the
Creatures. God has really imparted to them his Being. But to speak properly
and exactly, he has not imparted to them his Power and Glory. God does every
thing that we think we do our selves: He alone deserves all the Honor which is
given to his Creatures: He alone deserves all the motions of our Souls. So that
he who would be beloved, honored and feared by other Men, would put himself in
the place of the Almighty, and share with him the Duties which belong to Power.

12. In like manner, he that fears, loves and honors the Creatures, as real
Powers, commits a kind of Idolatry; and his Crime becomes very heinous, when
his fear or love runs to that excess, that they rule in his Heart above the
fear and love of God. When he is less disposed to employ himself about the
Creator than about the Creatures, by a disposition acquired by his own choice,
or by free and voluntary Acts, he is an abomination in the sight of God.

13. All the time that we lose, or do not employ for God, who is the sole cause
of the duration of our Being, is a Robbery, or rather a kind of Sacrilege. For
since God acts for his own Glory, and not for our Pleasure, we do then, as much
as in us lies, render his Action unserviceable to his Designs.

14. In general, every Gift that God bestows on us, which we render useless in
relation to his Glory, is a Robbery; and God, by the necessity of his Law, will
call us to an account for it.

15. Lastly, the Power by which God Creates us and all our Faculties every
Moment, gives him an unquestionable Right over all that we are, and over all
that belongs to us; which certainly belongs to us no otherwise, than that we
may return it to God with all possible fidelity and thankfulness, and by the
Gifts of God merit the possession of God himself, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Head, who takes us out of our profane state to sanctify us, and make us
fit to honor God, worthy to enter as his adopted Children, into the communion
of good Things with the Father and the Son in the Unity of the Holy Spirit to
all eternity.

CHAP. III. Of the Duties we owe to the Wisdom of God. It is that alone which
enlightens the Mind in consequence of certain natural Laws, whose efficacy is
determined by our Desires as occasional Causes. The Judgments and Duties of the
Mind in relation to the universal Reason.
I. HAving discovered the principal Duties which we owe to the Power of God; we
must next examine those which we owe to his Wisdom, which, though less known, are
no less due. Every Creature depends essentially on the Creator: Every spiritual
Being is also essentially united to Reason. No Creature can act by its own
Strength: And no spiritual Being can be illuminated by its own Light. For all
our clear Ideas come from the universal Reason in which they are contained; as
all our Strength proceeds wholly from the efficacy of the general cause, which
alone has Power. He that fancies himself to be his own Light and his own
Reason, is no less deceived, than he that thinks he really possesses Power: And
he that gives thanks to his Benefactor for the Fruits of the Earth, which serve
only to Feed the Body, is very ungrateful, very proud, or at least very stupid,
if he refuse to acknowledge himself indebted to God for the true and solid
Goods, the knowledge of Truth, which is the Food of the Soul.

II. The Soul of Man has two essential Relations. It is united to the
universal Reason, and by that it has, or may have a correspondence with all
intelligent Beings, even with God himself. It is united to a Body, and by that
it has, or may have a communication with all sensible Objects. The Power of
God is the sole efficacious Principle, or the bond of these two Unions: But
impotent and stupid Man imagines that it is by the efficacy of his own Will,
that he is Wise and Powerful, that he unites himself to the intellectual World,
whose Relations he contemplates, and to the visible World, whose Beauties he
admires.

III. It is God alone, who in consequence of the Laws of the union of the Soul
and Body, causes in Man all those bodily Motions which carry him to, or remove
him from sensible Objects. But the occasional cause of these Motions being only
the different desires of his Will, he attributes to himself the Power of doing
that which God alone operates in him; nay, the very endeavor which accompanies
his Desires, that painful endeavor, which is a certain mark of impotence and
dependence, an endeavor often fruitless and ineffectual, an endeavor which
God puts into him to beat down his Pride, and make him deserve his Gifts; this
sensible and confused endeavor, I say, persuades him, that he has Strength
and Efficacy. He feels within himself a Will to move his Arm, but does not see,
nor feel the divine Operation in him; and therefore the more exact and punctual
God is in answering his Desires, the more disingenuous Man is in not
acknowledging the favor and goodness of God.

IV. In like manner, it is God alone, who, in consequence of the natural Laws
of the union of the Soul with Reason, discovers to Man all the Ideas which
enlighten him, and leads him, as I may say, into the Country of Truth, the
Habitation of the Soul, to show him the Beauties and Wonders of it. But the
occasional cause of the presence or absence of Ideas being only the different
desires of our Will; we inconsiderately attribute to our selves the Power of
doing that which proceeds from the sole operation of God in us. And even the
endeavor which accompanies our Attention, that painful endeavor, the certain
Mark of impotence and dependence, an endeavor often fruitless, an endeavor
which God excites in us to punish our Pride, and make us deserve his Gifts;
this sensible and confused endeavor, I say, persuades us, like that which we
make to move the parts of our Bodies, that we our selves are the Authors of
that Knowledge which accompanies our Desires. For having no perception at all
of the operation of God, and having an inward Sense of our own Attention; we
look upon this Attention to be the true cause of those effects which constantly
and faithfully attend or follow it; for the same reason as we attribute to our
own Wills the power of moving Bodies, and the sensible Qualities wherewith we
are affected to the Objects which occasion them.

V. He that by the motion of his Body approaches toward sensible Objects, or
withdraws himself from them, feeling the Bodies which he meets with in that
Motion strike upon him, easily believes that he himself is the cause of the
removal of his own Body; but certainly he never thinks that he gives Being to
those Bodies that surround him. But he that by the application of his Mind,
leaves the Body as it were, and unites himself, wholly to Reason, imagines that
the Truths he contemplates are of his own production: He fancies that he gives
a Being to the Ideas he discovers, and that he forms, as I may say, out of his
own Substance that intellectual World, in which he loses himself. Because the
things which he then beholds do not affect his Senses, he imagines they have no
real Existence but in himself. For People judge of the reality of Beings, as
they do of the solidity of Bodies, by the impression they make on their Senses.

VI. It is certain that Man is not his own Wisdom, and his own Light. There is
an universal Reason which enlightens all spiritual Beings, an intellectual
Substance common to all intelligent Natures, an immutable, necessary and
eternal Substance. All spiritual Beings contemplate it, without disturbing one
another: They all possess it, without prejudicing one another: They all feed of
it, without diminishing any thing of its abundance. It communicates it self
whole and entire to them all, and entire to every one of them. For all of them
may as it were grasp the same Idea at the same time in different places, they
may all possess it equally, they may all penetrate or be penetrated by it.

VII. But two. Men cannot eat the same Fruit, nor embrace the same Body, they
cannot, at a distance from one another, hear the same Voice, nor many times see
the same Objects. The Creatures are all particular Beings, and therefore cannot
be one general and common Good. He that possesses these particular Goods,
deprives others of them; and thereby provokes their hatred or envy against him.
But Reason is a common Good, which unites those that possess it in a perfect
and durable Friendship. It is a Good that is not divided by possession, it is
not confined to space, nor becomes the worse for using. Truth is indivisible,
wisd. 6.12.7.10.
infinite, eternal, immutable and incorruptible. Wisdom never fades away: The
Light that comes from her never goes out.

VIII. Now this general and immutable Wisdom, Prove. 8.
this universal Reason, is the Wisdom of God himself, by which and for which we
are made. For God created us by his Power that he might unite us to his Wisdom,
and thereby give us the Honor of entering into an eternal Society with him, of
conforming our Thoughts and desires to his, and by that means of becoming like
him, as far as a created Being is capable of it. Wisd. 7.27, 28.
Wisdom remaining in her self, makes all things new, says the wise Man, and
in all Ages entering into holy Souls she makes them Friends of God and
Prophets. For God loves none but him that dwells with Wisdom. We have no way
of access to God, no Society with him, but by his Son, his Word, the universal
and intellectual Reason, which was incarnate in the fullness of time, and made
visible to enlighten gross and carnal Minds, and to lead them by the Senses, by
Faith and by a sensible Authority to Knowledge and Understanding: But still it
is Reason, still Wisdom, Light and Truth. For he that rejects the universal
Reason, rejects the Author of Faith, who is that very Reason made sensible and
proportioned to the weakness of Men, who now hear only by their Senses. Without
doubt nothing is more agreeable to Reason, than that which Faith teaches us:
The more we think on it, the more we are convinced, provided that Faith conduct
all the steps of the Mind, and the Imagination do not cross it in its way, and
by vain Chimeras or humane Thoughts dispel the Light which Faith diffuses in us.

IX. Now to find out our Duties toward God, as he is Wisdom or the universal
Reason of intelligent Beings, it is not sufficient to be thoroughly convinced of
the union of the Soul with God, but we must also carefully examine the Laws of
the union of the Soul and Body: For we are so situated between God and Bodies,
that as the union between the Soul and Body is augmented and strengthened, so
the union of the Soul with God is weakened and diminished; and on the contrary,
the less the Body acts on the Soul, the more the Soul is at liberty to consult
the inward Truth. I shall not here set down the particular Laws of the union of
the Soul and Body; they may be learnt elsewhere. But we must remember in
general, that our Senses cause our Soul to extend it self to our own Body, and
make it attentive to the necessities thereof; and that our Imagination and
Passions stretch to all those that are about us: That the Body never speaks to
the Soul but for the Body, and that it insolently draws us away from the
Presence of our inward Master, who never speaks to us but for the good or
perfection of our Being: In a Word, that our union with Reason is now so weak
and tender, that the least Sensation which strikes us, breaks it entirely, though
we endeavor never so much to retire into our selves, and to retain our Ideas
which scatter and disappear.

X. The Judgments which we ought to form in honor of the universal Reason are
these.

1. There are not more Wisdoms or more Reasons than one.

2. No Man is Wisdom and Light to himself or any other, nor one intelligent
Being to another.

3. God by his Power is the cause of our clear Perceptions or Cognitions, in
consequence of our own Desires or Attention: But the intellectual and common
Substance of Truth alone is the Form, the Idea, and the immediate Object of
them. The Soul separated from Reason cannot attain to the knowledge of any
Truth. It may by the action of God upon it, be sensible of its own Pain,
Pleasure, Perception, and all the other particular Modifications of which its
substance is capable; but it cannot engross to it self the knowledge of Truths
which are common to all spiritual Beings. For Man who depends on the Power of
God to be happy and powerful, must also be united to the Wisdom of God to
become Rational, Wise, Just and completely Perfect.

4. We do not derive from the Objects the Ideas which we have of them.

5. Men whom we call our Masters are only Monitors.

6. When we retire into our selves, it is not we that answer our selves, but
the inward Master which dwells in us, which presides immediately over all
spiritual Beings, and gives them all the same answers.

XI. Mat. 23.8. See S Augustincts Treathe De M^gistro.
All those may be reduced to that general proposition of our Saviors, that we
have but one Master, even Christ himself, who illuminates us by the evidence of
his Light, when we retire into our selves; and solidly instructs us by Faith,
when we consult the visible and infallible authority of the Church, in whose
custody the sacred Treasure of his written and unwritten Word is deposited.

XII. From this great Principle the following Duties are derived.

1. Not to value our selves on our Knowledge, but to return our humble Thanks
for it to him who is the Fountain and Author of it.

2. To retire into our Selves as much as we can, and to hearken more readily to
Reason than to Men.

3. To yield only to the Evidence of Reason, and the infallible Authority of
the Church.

4. Whenever Men speak, to be sure to compare that which they say to our Ears,
with that which Reason answers to our Mind; never to believe them but in what
concerns Matters of Fact, and that too with a kind of saving and reservation.

5. Never to speak to them, at least not with an air of Confidence, before
Reason has spoke to us by its Evidence.

6. To speak to them always as Monitors, not as Masters; to question them
often, and in different manners; and to lead them insensibly to our common
Master, the universal Reason, by obliging them to retire into themselves. There
is no way to instruct them but this.

7. Never to dispute for disputing's sake, nor even to propose Truth to others,
when the Company they are in, Passion, or any other Reason give us sufficiently
to understand, that they will not retire into themselves, to hear the decision
of the impartial Judge.

8. Never to consult Reason but about such Matters as are suitable to the
dignity of it, and useful to our selves, either to conduct us to Good, or unite
us to Truth to regulate our Heart, or procure us Strength or liberty of Mind.

9. To lay up carefully in our Memory, as far as it is possible to be done,
none but certain Principles and such as abound in Consequences; none but
necessary Truths, or the precious answer of the inward Truth.

10. For the most part to neglect Matters of Fact, especially those that have
no certain Rules to be judged by, such as are the Actions of Men. They give no
light to the Mind, and often corrupt the Heart.

11. Our inviolable Law is Order, not Custom, which is many times opposite to
Order and Reason. To follow Example without confronting it with Order, is to
act like Brutes, and by Mechanism only. Nay it is better, though that be bad
enough, to make our own Pleasure our Law, than foolishly to obey pernicious and
wicked Customs. Our Life and Actions should do honor to our Reason, and be
answerable to the illustrious Characters we bear.

12. We should set no value on Subtilty, Beauty, or even Strength of
Imagination, nor esteem any of those Studies which cultivate that part of us,
which makes us so valuable and acceptable in the Eye of the World. An over-nice
or over-stock'd Imagination does not willingly submit to Reason. It is always
the Body which speaks by the Imagination; and whenever the Body speaks, it is
an unhappy necessity that Reason must be silent or not regarded.

13. To confirm us in this dis-esteem, we should frequently and with a
particular Application examine by the inward. Light that which appears bright
and sparkling to the Imagination, that so we may dissipate that false and
bewitching Luster with which it hides its Follies. We should very seldom regard
Men's outward Behavior which passes for current Payment in the World.

14. We should carefully stop up the Passages by which the Soul gets away from
the presence of God, and wanders among the Creatures. A Mind continually
distracted by the action of sensible Objects, cannot pay that respect and
attendance which it owes to Reason. It is a Contempt to Reason to give our
Senses their full liberty.

15. We should ardently love Truth, Wisdom, or the universal Reason: We should
esteem all the Gold of Peru but as a Grain of Sand in comparison of it: Wis.
7.9.
All Gold in respect of Wisdom is as a little Sand, says the wise Man We
should continually pray to it by our Attention: My delights were with the Sons
of Men, Prove. 8.31.
We should place our whole Delight in consulting it, in hearing its Answers,
and obeying its Commands; as that delights to converse with us, and to be
always among us.

CHAP. IV. Of the Duties which we owe to the divine Love. Our Will is nothing
but a continual impression of the Love which God bears to himself, the only
true Good. We cannot love Evil: But we may take that to be Evil, which is
neither Good nor Evil. So we cannot hate Good: But the true Good is really the
Evil of wicked Men, or the true cause of their Miseries. That God may be Good
in respect of us, our Love must be like his, or always subject to the divine
Law, Motions or Duties.
I. WE depend on the power of God, and do nothing but by his Efficacy: We are
united to his Wisdom, and know nothing but by his Light: But this is not all;
we are also animated and inspired by his Love in such a manner, that we are not
capable of loving any Good, but by the continual impression of the Love which
he bears to himself. This is what I must now explain, in order to give a
general view of our Duties toward God.

II. It is certain that God cannot act but for himself: He has no other Motive
but his Love of himself. He cannot Will but by his own Will; and his Will is
not like ours, an impression proceeding from, and tending toward something
else. As he is his own Good, his Love can be no other but Love of himself: His
end is himself, and can be nothing but himself. Therefore he does not produce
in spiritual Beings a Love which has a different tendency from his own, for
the love of Good in spiritual Beings proceeds only from the Will of God, which
is nothing else but the Love he bears to himself. But further, there are not
Two or more true Goods; there is but one alone; for there is but one true
Cause. Therefore there is nothing amiable, I mean with a love of Union, but
God. So then, since God cannot will that we should Love that which is not
amiable, or not Love that which is amiable, supposing that we are capable of
Loving, our Love proceeding from God, must necessarily according to the
primitive institution of its Nature, tend toward him, and be referred to him
alone.

III. God having created our Souls with a design to make them happy,
continually imprints on them a Love for Good; and as he acts only for himself,
and Good neither is nor can be in any but in him, this natural Love of Good,
does of it self carry them toward God alone. For this Love is like that which
God bears to himself. It is also invincible and irresistible; because it is a
powerful and continual Impression of the divine Love; and it is the same thing
with our Will; for it is only by the particular determinations of this Love,
that we are capable of loving all Objects that have the appearance of Good.

IV. From hence it is plain, that we cannot love Evil, and that we have no
Motion ordained for that end. Notwithstanding we may mistake Evil for Good; and
so we may love Evil by loving Good; we may love Evil out of choice, by loving
Good naturally; we may love Evil, or rather that which is neither Good nor
Evil, by a horrid abuse of that love for Good, which God continually imprints
on us, to make us Love him, as being our only Good, or alone capable of making
us happy. For we must take particular notice, that the Creatures, though they are
all Perfect or Good in themselves, are neither Good nor Evil in respect of us,
because they have not really the power to do us either Good or Harm. As they
are occasional causes of Good or Evil, of Pleasure or Pain, we may unite our
selves to them, or separate our selves from them by the motion of our Body: But
we cannot reasonably Love or Fear them; because every Motion which does not
tend toward God, the beginning and end of it, is irregular, and if it be free
and voluntary, deserves to be Punished.

V. It is also evident that we cannot hate Good; for since we invincibly desire
to be happy, we cannot separate our selves from that which makes us so; but we
may mistake Good for Evil, and so hate Good from the hatred we have for Evil.
And even this hatred is at the bottom a motion of Love. We fly from Evil only
by the motion of the Love we have for Good. For God having created us to be
happy by loving him, has given us no motion to separate us from him, but only
to unite us to him. The wicked or the damned hate God with an invincible and
irreconcilable Hatred; but this proceeds from the very Love which God has
given them for himself. For since God is not their Good, but their Evil, or the
cause of their Punishment, according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.26.
With the Pure thou will show thy self Pure, and with the Froward thou will
show thy self Froward; they hate him by that irresistible Motion, which God,
who is immutable in his proceeding, gives then for their Happiness.

VI. For the right understanding of this, it is sufficient to observe that
actual Pleasure is the formal cause of actual Happiness, as Pain is of Misery.
Now the Damned feel Pain; the hardened Sinner fears it. The Damned know that
God alone is the cause of Pain, the Sinner believes he is. Therefore both of
them, from the very desire they have to be Happy, must of necessity make a
wrong use of that Motion which God gives them to unite them to himself, and
must separate themselves from him; for the more they are united to God, the
more God acts on them, the more sensible they are of their Misery. The Blessed
on the contrary, for a like reason, cannot cease to love God. And those that
have access to God, those that expect to find their Happiness in him, Sinners
who by Faith in Christ have hope of returning and finding favor with God, may
by the invincible desire of Happiness, love and fear God. This is our condition
in this Life.

VII. Now that the natural Love which God continually imprints on us, may still
continue Love, and not be turned into Hatred; that the love of Happiness may
make us Happy, that it may carry us toward God and unite us to him, instead of
separating us from him: In a word, that God may be or continue Good in respect
of us, and not become Evil, our Love must always be conformable to or
resembling the divine Love; we must love Perfection as well as Happiness; we
must remain united to the wisdom of God, as well as to his Power. For God when
he created Man, gave him in the love of Good, and by the impression of the Love
which he bears to himself, as it were two sorts of Love, one of Happiness, and
the other of Perfection. By the love of Happiness he united him to his Power,
which alone can make him Happy; and by the love of Perfection he united him to
his Wisdom, by which alone as his inviolable Law he ought to be governed. God,
if I may so say, is divinely inspired with both these Loves: They are
inseparable in him; and they cannot be separated in us, without destroying us
utterly. For the power of God is Wise and Just: His Wisdom is all Powerful; and
he that thinks to retain the love of his Happiness, without the love of his
Perfection, without the love of Wisdom, Justice, and the immutable Order; that
love of Happiness will only serve to make him eternally Miserable. God by his
Power will not be the Good of Men, but their Evil, if by his Wisdom he is not
their Law, or the principle of their inward Reformation. For Happiness is a
Reward. It is not enough to desire the enjoyment of it, but we must also
deserve it: And we cannot deserve it, if we do not govern the motions of our
Heart by the inviolable Law of all intelligent Beings, and regulate them
according to the Model by which Man was first formed, and by which he must be
formed anew. In a word, the love of Conformity, which relates to the immutable
Order, or the Wisdom of God, must always be joined with the love of Union,
which relates to his Power, that so our Love being like the divine Love, may
carry us to all the Happiness and all the Perfection that we are capable of.

VIII. For we must observe, that in the condition we are now in, our Happiness
and our Perfection often clash; and we cannot avoid engaging on one side or the
other; either we must Sacrifice our Perfection to our Happiness, or our
Happiness to our Perfection; the Love of Order to our Pleasure, or our Pleasure
to the Love of Order. Now when we Sacrifice our Happiness to our Perfection, or
our Pleasure to the Love of Order, we Merit; for then we obey the Divine Law,
though we suffer by it, and thereby we give Honor to the Wisdom of God, or the
universal Reason; we leave that to God, which depends wholly on him, our
Happiness; and by that Submission, we give Honor to his Power. For Obedience
to the Divine Law is partly in our own Power, but the enjoyment of Happiness no
way depends on us. Therefore we should give up our Happiness to the disposal of
God, and to apply our selves wholly to our Perfection, giving this honor also
to God to believe him on his Word, to rely on his Justice and Goodness, and to
live contented by Faith in the Strength of our Hope, according to those words
of the Scripture, Heb. 10.38. Justus (...) Virg Lat.
The just shall live by Faith. God is certainly just and faithful; he will
give us all the Happiness we deserve; our Patience shall not be Fruitless. But
how great soever our Desire be, and our Application in the Search of our
Happiness, yet this will not move God to give us the Enjoyment of it, without
we deserve it. This excessive Desire will perhaps one day render us unworthy of
it, according to those admirable Words of our Savior himself: Mat. 16 24.
If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross, and
follow me. For whoever will save his Soul. (...).
life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life, for my sake shall find
it. For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his
own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? For the Son of Man
shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then shall he
reward every Man according to his Works.

IX. Now this contrariety which we find at present between our Happiness and
our Perfection, proceeds from the Union of the Soul and Body, which is changed
into a Dependence, as a Punishment of Sin. For the involuntary Motions of the
Fibers of the principal part of the Brain, are the occasional Causes of our
pleasant or painful Sensations, and consequently of our Happiness or Misery.
The Body to which we are joined, has not the same Interests with Reason: It
has its particular Wants to be supplied; it makes its Demands with boldness
and insolence, and treats the Soul roughly if it refuses to grant them. Whereas
Reason uses only Threatenings and Reproaches, which are not so lively and
pressing as actual Pleasure and Pain: We must therefore bravely resolve to be
miserable in this Life, that we may retain our Perfection and Integrity; we
must Sacrifice our Body, or rather our actual Happiness, that we may remain
inseparably united to Reason, and obedient to the Divine Law; being contented
with a foretaste of the true Enjoyments, and having a firm hope, that that
Divine Law, that Reason which was made Flesh, sacrificed and glorified in our
Nature, or our Nature in that, will certainly restore to us all that we have
lost for our Obedience to it.

X. This clear perception, that our Will, or the natural and necessary Motion
of our Love, is only a continual Impression of the Love of God, who unites us
to his Power, to make us conformable to his Wisdom, or obedient to his Law,
obliges us to form these Judgments.

1. That every Motion of Love which does not tend toward God, is prejudicial,
and leads to Evil, or makes the Cause of our Good to be the Cause of our Evil.

2. That every Motion of Love, not conformable to the immutable Order, which is
the inviolable Law both of the Creatures and of the Creator himself, is
irregular; and since God is Just, that Motion obliges him to become our Evil,
or the Cause of our Misery.

3. That we cannot unite our selves to God, as our Good, if we do not conform
our selves to him as our Law. The Converse of this is also true; we cannot
conform our selves to the Law of God, and by that conformity become Perfect;
but we must also unite our selves to his Power, and by that Union be made Happy.

XI. This Truth may be also expressed thus, according to the Analogy of Faith:
We have no way of access to God, no society with him, no share in his
Happiness, but by the universal Reason, the eternal Wisdom, the divine Word,
who was made Flesh, because Man was become Carnal; by his Flesh was made a
Sacrifice, because Man was become a Sinner; and by the offering up of his
Sacrifice was made a Mediator, because Man being corrupted, and no longer able
to consult or obey Reason purely intellectual, it could not be the Bond of the
Society between God and Him. But yet we must take particular notice, That
Reason by becoming incarnate, did not at all change its Nature, nor lose any
thing of its Power: It is immutable, and necessarily exists; it is the only
inviolable Law of spiritual Beings, and has the sole Right to command them.
Faith is not contrary to Truth; it leads us to Truth, and by it establishes ur
Society with God for ever. We must conform our selves to the Word made Flesh,
because the intellectual Word, the Word without Flesh, is a Form too
abstracted, too sublime and too pure to fashion or new-mould gross Spirits and
corrupt Hearts; Spirits, that can take hold of nothing but what has a Body,
and are disgusted at every thing that does not touch and sensibly affect them.
Every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices; wherefore it is of
necessity that the Man have somewhat also to offer, Heb. 8.3.
The Word was made a Sacrifice, because without a Sacrifice, he had nothing to
offer; he could not be a Priest, nor give Sinners any Communion with God,
without an Atonement and an Oblation. We must be conformable to him in this
Circumstance also; for besides, that it is we who are the Criminals, we are
also a part of the Sacrifice, which must be purified, consecrated and offered
up, before it can be glorified, and consummated in God to all Eternity. But the
life of Christ is our Pattern, only because it was conformable to Order, our
indispensable Pattern, and our inviolable Law. We must follow Christ, even to
the Cross, because Order requires that this Body of Sin should be destroyed for
the Honor of Reason, and the Glory of him from whom it separates us. Order
requires, that by voluntary Pain, of which the Body is the occasion, we should
deserve the Happiness of which God alone is the Cause, and which we have justly
been deprived of, for those unjust and unreasonable Pleasures which we have
unworthily and disingenuously required of a just God. These are very trite and
very common, but very necessary Truths.

XII. Motions or Duties.

1. We should love nothing but God, with a love of Union; and whenever we find
any love for the Creatures, any joy in the Creatures arising in us, we should
stifle those Sensations, and consider that Power belongs to God alone, and that
he inspires us with his Love, to unite us only to himself.

2. We should be afraid of Pleasures, for they seduce and corrupt us. Pleasure
is the distinguishing Mark of Good; God alone can give us the enjoyment of it:
But because his Operation is not visible, we look upon the Objects, which are
only the occasions of our Sensations, as if they were the Causes of them; and
when we enjoy those Objects, we love them as our Good, or at least we love
nothing but our selves, and our own Hapness. Now every Pleasure which inclines
us to the love of Bodies, Substances inferior to our own Being, perverts and
disorders us; and since the Soul is not the Cause of its own Happiness, it is
blind, ungrateful, and unjust, if it loves its Pleasure without rendering to the
true Cause of it, the Love and Respect which are due to him: But besides, how
is it possible to love God in the midst of Pleasure? How can we actually
increase our Charity, when we so many ways provoke and fortify our
Concupiscence?

3. The love of Grandeur, Elevation and Independance is abominable: He that
desires to be esteemed and loved, ought to be detested and abhorred. What I
shall those Minds which were made to contemplate the universal Reason, and to
love the Power of the true Good; shall they, I say, employ their Thoughts and
their Love on us? Weak and Impotent as we are, shall we suffer our selves to be
adored? Corrupt and Ignorant as we are, shall we seek Admirers, Imitators and
Followers? Certainly, he that does not see the Injustice of Pride, has no
Communication with Reason; and he that knows it, and yet is not afraid of
committing it, renounces Reason entirely.

4. We should love Order; it is the Law of God, he inviolably observes it, he
invincibly loves it. And can we think that we may safely dispense with our
Obedience to it? If we deviate from it, the inexorable Justice of the living
God will follow us: But if our Love be conformable to that Law, we shall be
happy and perfect both, we shall have fellowship with God, and a share in his
Happiness and Glory.

5. We cannot be Rational but by the universal Reason; we cannot be Wise but by
the eternal Wisdom; we cannot be Just and Holy but by a conformity to the
immutable Order: Let us therefore incessantly contemplate Reason, let us
ardently love Wisdom, let us inviolably obey the Divine Law: Let us fashion our
selves anew after our Model; he has made himself like us, that he might make
us like him: He is now levelled to our Capacity, he is proportioned to our
Weakness: He is before us; let us open our Eyes to see him: He is within us;
let us retire into our selves and consult him: He sollicites us continually;
let us hear his Voice, and not hearden our Hearts. Heb. 5.
But he is also in the Holy of Holies, ordained a High Priest after the Order
of Melchisedech, always living to make intercession for us, and to give us
those Succors which we extremely need. Let us therefore approach the true
Mercy-Seat of Jesus Christ the Savior of Sinners, the Head of the Church, the
Builder of the eternal Temple; in a word, the occasional Cause of Grace,
without which such is our depraved and miserable Condition, that we cannot
endeavor our Amendment, we cannot esteem and relish the true Goods, nor so
much as desire to be delivered from our Miseries.

CHAP. V. The three Divine Persons imprint each their proper Character on our
Souls; and our Duties give equal Honor to them all three. Though our Duties
consist only in inward Judgments and Motions, yet we must show them by outward
Signs, in regard of our Society with other Men.
I. THe three Divine Persons of the Holy Trinity imprint each their proper
Character on the Spirits which they created after their own Image. The Father,
whose peculiar Attribute is Power, imparts his Power to them, by making them
occasional Causes of all the Effects which are produced by them. The Son
communicates his Wisdom, and discovers to them all Truth by closely uniting
them to that intellectual Substance which he has, as he is the universal
Reason. The Holy Ghost inspires and sanctifies them, by the invincible
Impression which they have for Good, and by Charity or the love of Order, which
he sheds abroad in their Hearts. As the Father begets his Word, so the Mind of
Man, by his desires, is the occasional Cause of his Knowledge. And as the
Father with the Son is the Fountain and Original of the Substantial and Divine
Law; so our Knowledge occasioned by our desires, which are the only Things that
are truly in our Power, is with us the Principal and Original of all the
Regular Motions of our Love.

II. It is true, the Father begets his Word of his own Substance; because God
alone is essentially and substantially his own Wisdom and his own Light. The
mutual Love of the Father and the Son, proceeds from themselvees; because God
alone is his own Good, and his own Law. But we are not our own Reason, and
therefore Light and Understanding cannot be a natural Emanation of our own
Substance, We are not our own Good, nor our own Law; and therefore all the
Motion we have must proceed from, and carry us to something without us, it must
unite us to our Good, and make us conformable to our Pattern.

III. God made all Things by his Wisdom, and in the Motion of his Spirit or his
Love: So also we never act but with Knowledge, and by the Motion of Love. The
three Divine Persons have an equal share in the Production of all Things: So
also that which we do without Knowledge, and without a full and entire Will, is
not properly our own Work. The Father has, as I may say, a Right of Mission
over the Son: So it is in our power to think on what we will. The Son sends the
Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, in the unity of the same
Nature; so also our Love is grounded on Light, it proceeds from, and is
produced by it. Lastly, The Love which proceeds from a clear Perception or
Knowledge, loves it self, the Object of that Knowledge, and the Knowledge it
self; as the substantial Love infinitely loves the Divine Substance in the
Father begetting, in the Son begotten, and in the Holy Ghost himself,
proceeding from the Father and the Son.

IV. All these Relations of the Mind of Man to the holy Trinity, are but
shadows and imperfect Draughts, which can never come up to the Original of all
Beings, who by an incomprehensible property of Infinity, communicates himself
without Division, and forms a Society of three different Persons in the unity
of the same Substance. But though the Image of God which we bear, be very
imperfect in respect of our Original; yet there is nothing more great and noble
for a mere created Being, than this faint resemblance. We labor for our
Perfection, only as we maintain and keep it up; we secure our Happiness no
further, than we fashion our selves according to our Model. All our true
Judgments and regular Motions, all the Duties which we pay to the Wisdom, Power
and Love of God, are so as many Steps by which we advance toward the Fountain
of all Good; and an habitual Disposition to frame these Judgments and excite
these Motions, is the real Perfection of Man, who essentially depends on the
supreme Good, and was made for no other End, but to find his Perfection and
Happiness in doing his Duty.

V. Now as the three Persons in the Trinity are but one God, one and the same
Substance; so all those Duties which seem to relate particularly to any one of
the Persons, give equal Honor to the other two. Every Regular Motion honors
the Power of the Father, as its Good; the Wisdom of the Son, as its Law; and
the mutual Love of the Father and the Son, as its Principal and Original. On
the contrary, every Sin, or every Love of the Creatures dishonours the true
Power, opposes the universal Reason, and resists the holy Spirit: So that we
cannot absolutely separate the Duties which we owe to the Power of God, from
those which we owe to his Wisdom and to the Substantial and Divine Love; and
therefore I have been forced, in the three foregoing Chapters, to repeat the
same things after different manners.

VI. Though all the Duties which Spiritual Beings owe to God, who is a pure
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, consist only in true
Judgments, and Motions of Love conformable to those Judgments; yet Men being
composed of a Soul and a Body, living in Societies with one another, educated
in the same outward Religious Worship, and thereby tied to certain Ceremonies;
they are obliged to an infinite number of particular Duties, which have all of
them a necessary Relation to those which I have already set down in general.
All these external Duties are arbitrary and indifferent, at least in their
first Foundation and Original; but the spiritual Duties are in themselves
absolutely necessary. We may dispense with outward Duties, but we can never
dispense with the others; they depend on an inviolable Law, the immutable and
necessary Order. Outward Duties of themselves do not sanctify those that render
them to God; they receive their Worth and Value only from the spiritual Duties
which accompany them; but all the Motions of the Soul which are governed by
true Judgments, do immediately and of themselves, honor the Divine Perfections.

VII. Thus, for instance, it is a Duty indifferent in it self, for a Man to
pull off his Hat when he comes into a Church. But to enter into the presence of
God with respect, and with some inward Motion of Religion, is not an arbitrary,
but an essential Duty. He that for some particular Reason cannot be uncovered
at Mass, may be covered at the Celebration of it; Women are excused from this
Duty; and provided it be known that it is not done out of contempt, but upon
necessity, commonly their needs no dispensation for it. None but those that
have wrong Notions of things, cenforious and weak People will find fault with
it; but no one that is present at that Sacrifice can be excused from offering
up to God the Sacrifice of his Mind and Heart, Praises and Motions which honor
God. He that prostrates himself before the Altar, is so far from meriting, and
honoring God by that outward Duty, that he commits a heinous Crime, if he
designs by that Action only to gain the Esteem of the World. But he, who though
he be unmoved outwardly, is nevertheless inwardly agitated with Motions
agreeable to the Knowledge which Faith and Reason give him of the Divine
Attributes, honors God, draws near and unites himself to him. He conforms
himself to the immutable Law by Regular Motions, which leave behind them a
Habit or Disposition of Charity, and thereby truly purifies and sanctifies
himself. But there are many People whose Religion is not spiritual; they go no
farther than the outside which makes an Impression on them, and often
determines them to do that by imitation, which they had no design to do of
themselves.

VIII. Certainly it is a disrespect to the universal Reason, to separate our
selves from it by the use of Wine; or to run away from our selves, where Reason
inhabits, and where it gives its Oracles, and suffer our selves to be carried
by our Passions into a World where the Imagination reigns. In a word, to depart
voluntarily, and without any necessity, from the presence of our Good and of
our Reason, is a Motion which dishonours the Divine Majesty, it is Irreligious
and Impious. But the generality of People do not judge of things after this
manner; they judge of a Man's inward Sentiments by his outward Actions and
Behavior; they imagine it a great Crime to do some Actions in a holy Place,
though perhaps they are not indecent in themselves; and yet never consider, that
nothing is more indecent than to neglect the essential Duties of a rational
Creature in any place whatsoever. A Man that is Religious even to Superstition
passes for a Saint with them, but the Christian Philosopher is counted no
better than a Heathen, if he will not abandon Reason to agree with their
Notions, and religiously observe their Customs.

IX. Indeed the Philosopher does ill, if he neglects the external Duties, Mat.
18.6.
and thereby offends the Weak and Simple. It were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were Drowned in the depth of
the Sea. Every Man ought to testify his Faith by visible Actions, and thereby
incline other Men, who are always affected with the outward Behahaviour, to
such Motions as give honor to God. In every thing that relates to God, we
should with all Humility assume the air and posture of Adoration. Any other is
at least Foolish and Ridiculous. But it is Impious, to use such outward Actions
as are superstitious and lead Men's Minds to Judgments and Motions which
dishonor the divine Attributes. They are excusable perhaps in such as have but
a confused Idea of God: But he that is better instructed in Religion, and has
a more particular knowledge of the divine Perfections, ought not to do any
thing out of any humane Consideration, that contradicts his own Light.

X. The greatest part of Christians have a Jewish Spirit; Joh. 17.3.
their Religion is not Spiritual, and consequently not Rational. This is Life
eternal, to know the true God, and Jesus Christ his only Son: To have
Sentiments worthy of the divine Attributes, and Motions agreeable to those
Sentiments: To know Jesus Christ, who alone gives us access to the Father, and
diffuses Charity in our Hearts: To be fully convinced, that he alone is the
High Priest of the true Goods, or the occasional cause of Grace, that so we may
draw near to him with Confidence, and by his assistance excite in our selves
such Motions as are suitable to the knowledge he has given us of the true
Worship, which honors the divine Majesty. But instead of this, every one
frames to himself a Theology, a Religion, or at least a Devotion apart, of
which Self-love is the Motive, Prejudice and Possession the Foundation and
Beginning, and sensual Goods the End. The Worship of God consists many times
only in outward Sacrifices, in verbal Prayers, in Ceremonies which were at
first ordained to raise the Mind to God, but now serve only by their splendour
and magnificence to refresh the Imagination in most People, when they are tired
and out of relish with the performance of their Duties to God. Custom, human
Considerations, or Hypocrisy carry their Bodies into the Church: But their
Minds and Hearts never come there. And while the Priest offers up Jesus Christ
to God in their Presence, or rather while Christ offers up himself to his
Father for their Sins on our Altars, they on their part Sacrifice to Ambition,
Avarice or Pleasure, spiritual Sacrifices in all the places whither their
Imagination carries them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Duties of Society in general. Two sorts of Society. Every
thing should be referred to the eternal Society. Different kinds of Love and
Honor. The general heads of our Duties toward Men. They must be External and
Relative. The danger of paying inward Duties to Men. The Conversation of the
World very dangerous.
I. HAVING explained in general the Duties which we owe to God, we must now
examine those which we owe to other Men, as God has made us to live in Society
with them under the same Law, the universal Reason, and in a dependence on the
same Power, that of the King of Kings, and supreme Lord of all things.

II. We are capable of forming Two sorts of Society with other Men: A Society
for some Years, and an eternal Society: A Society of Commerce, and a Society of
Religion: A Society maintained by the Passions, and subsisting in a communion
of particular and perishing Goods, whose end is the preservation and welfare of
the Body; and a Society governed by Reason, supported by Faith, and subsisting
in the communion of the true Goods, whose end is a happy Life to all eternity.

III. The great, or indeed the only design of God, is the holy City, the
heavenly Jerusalem, where Truth and Justice inhabit. All other Societies shall
Perish, though God be immutable in his Designs: But this spiritual Society shall
continue for ever. The Kingdom of Christ shall have no end: His Temple shall be
eternal: His Priesthood shall never the changed: Psalm. 110.3.
The Lord has Sworn, and will not Repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedeck. The House of God is built on an unshaken Foundation,
on that beloved Son in whom God is well-pleased, and by whom all things shall
subsist to the Glory of him who gives them their Being.

IV. When we procure any settlement here below for our selves or our Friends,
we build on the Sand, we place our Friends in a tottering House, it will sink
under us, at the Hour of Death to be sure. But when we enter our selves as
Workmen in the building of the Temple of the true Solomon, and cause others to
come in, we then labor for Eternity. This Work shall last to all Ages. This
then is the good which we ought to procure for our selves, and other Men: This
is the chief end of all our Duties toward them: This is that holy Society which
we must begin here below, by the love which we owe to one another. For since
the design of God in these temporary and perishing Societies, is only to
furnish Christ, the Architect of the eternal Temple, with fit Materials for the
building of his Church; we cannot fail of performing essential Duties, when we
engage in the designs of him who would have all Men to be saved, and employ all
our Faculties in hastening his great Work, and in procuring to Men those good
things for which they were created.

V. So when our Savior bids us Love one another, we must not imagine that he
absolutely commands us any other thing, than to procure one another the true
and spiritual Goods. What kind of Blessings were those which he showered on his
Apostles and Disciples? Did he give them the fading and perishing Goods, such
as the pretended Friends of this World give to those that gratify their
Passions? Did he constantly deliver them out of the Hands of their Persecutors?
No certainly-Therefore the principal Duties of our Charity do not consist in
such things as these. We must assist our Neighbor, and preserve his Life, as
we are obliged to preserve our own, but we must prefer the Salvation of our
Neighbor before his and our own Life.

VI. To Love therefore is an equivocal Term. It signifies Three very different
things, which we must carefully distinguish: To unite our selves by our Will to
an Object, as our Good, or the cause of our Happiness: To conform our selves to
any thing as our pattern, or the rule of our Perfection: And to wish well to
any Person, or to desire that he may be happy and perfect. The love of Union is
due only to the power of God: The love of Conformity is due only to the law of
God, the immutable Order. No Creature is capable of acting on us: No Person can
be our living Law, or our perfect Model. Christ himself, though he was without
Sin, though he was Reason incarnate, did some things which we must not do,
because the circumstances not being the same, the intellectual Reason, the
inviolable Law, the indispensable Model of all intelligent Beings forbids us to
do them.

VII. So then we must not love our Neighbor with a love of Union, nor with a
love of Conformity. But we may and ought to Love him with a love of
Benevolence. We must Love him in that sense of the Word which signifies to
desire his Happiness and Perfection; and as our practical desires are the
occasional causes of certain effects which conduce to that end, we must use all
our endeavors to procure him solid Virtue, that he may merit the true Goods
which are the reward of it. This is the obligation that truly and absolutely
lies upon us from that Commandment which our Savior has given us in the
Gospel, to Love one another as ourselves, and as he has loved us.

VIII. To Honor is also an equivocal Word: It denotes a submission of the Mind
to the true Power, a respect or outward submission to an occasional Cause, and
a simple esteem of any thing in respect of the excellency of its Nature, or the
perfection which it does or may possess.

IX. That kind of Honor which consists in a submission of the Mi^^ to the true
Power, is due to God alone. (...) none but God directly and absolutely in the
Powers which he has ordained: And though we are obliged exactly to pay to our
lawful Superiors, those outward honors and submissions, which humane Laws and
Customs have established, yet all the submission of the Soul must be referred to
God alone. It is mean and abject to fear the most excellent of created Beings:
It is God alone whom we must fear in it. Nevertheless, we should esteem every
thing proporticnably to the excellence of its Nature, or the perfection which
it possesses or is capable of possessing. So that the love of Benevolence,
respect or relative and outward Submission, and simple Esteem, are as I take
it, the Three general Heads to which all the Duties that we owe to Men may be
reduced.

X. There is this difference between the Duties which Religion obliges us to
pay to God, and those which Society requires us to pay to Men; that the
principal Duties of Religion are inward and spiritual, because God searches the
Hearts, and absolutely speaking, has no need of his Creatures; whereas the
Duties of Society are almost all external. For besides that Men have no other
way to know our inward Sentiments of them, but by outward and sensible marks,
they all stand in need of one another, either for the preservation, of their
Life, or their particular instruction, or innumerable other things which
absolutely require a mutual assistance.

XI. Therefore to expect from other Men, inward and spiritual Duties which are
due to God alone, a pure and uncompounded Spirit, the searcher of Hearts, the
only independent and self-sufficient Being, is a diabolical Pride; this is to
affect Dominion over spiritual Substances, to attribute to our selves the
quality of searcher of Hearts, and in a Word, to exact that which is no way our
due, and which is wholly useless to us. For what signifies our inward adoration
to other Men, or what good can theirs do us? If they faithfully perform what we
desire of them, what can we complain of? If they respect God himself, if they
love and fear him in our Person, certainly we attribute to our selves power and
independence, if we are not satisfied with this. Servants, Col. 3.22.
says S. Paul, obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh; not
with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but in singleness of Heart, fearing God. It
is God that they must fear. v. 23.
And whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto Men: to
God who has the power of rewarding, and not unto Men, whose Wills are of
themselves altegether ineffectual. v. 24.
Knowing, as the Apostle goes on, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward
of the Inheritance: For ye serve the Lord Christ. Ye are bought with a Price,
(...) 7.23.
be not ye the Servants of Men.

XII. There is so strict an union between the Soul and the Body, and such a
mutual relation betwixt the Motions of these two Substances, that it is very
difficult to draw near by the motion of our Body, to any Object which is the
occasional cause of Pleasure, without uniting our selves to it by the motion of
our Love, as if it were the true cause of that Pleasure. So likewise when the
Imagination being dazzled with the splendor which envirous the Great, falls
down and prostrates it self before them, it is difficult for the Soul not to
follow that Motion, or at least not to bow and lower it self. It should indeed
prostrate it self, but then it must be before the power of the invisible God,
which it must honor in the Person of the Prince, where that Power visibly
resides.

XIII. When the Body feeds on a delicious Fruit, the Soul which finds it self
in some measure happy by the Pleasure it enjoys, should then be affected with
Love, but that Love should be addressed only to God, who alone does and can act
on it. But our Senses being grown rebellious by Sin, dislurb our Mind, they
insolently withdraw us from the presence of God, and fix all our Thoughts on
that impotent matter, which we hold in our Hands, and crush between our Teeth.
They make us believe, that the Fruit it self contains and communicates that
grateful Taste which delights us; and because the power of God does not appear
visible to our Eyes, we see nothing but the Fruit to which we can attribute the
cause of our present Happiness. Our Senses were given us only for the
preservation of our sensible Being: What matter is it then to them from whence
the Fruit comes, so they have it, or from whence the Pleasure proceeds so they
enjoy it?

XIV. So likewise when we are in the presence of our Sovereign, our Imagination
soon dissipates all those abstract Ideas of an invisible Power. The divine Law,
the immutable Order, Reason is a Fantom which vanishes and disappears when the
Prince Commands, or when he speaks with Authority. The Majesty of the Prince,
the sensible splendour of Greatness, that Air of respect and awe, which every
one does and ought to put on, so shake the Brain of an ambitious Man, and
indeed of most Men, whose Passions are then excited, that there are but few
People who have so much constancy and resolution as to consult the divine Law,
to think on the power of the invisible God, to retire into themselves, and to
hearken to the Judgments pronounced within them by him who presides immediately
over all spiritual Beings.

XV. This strict union of the Soul and Body, which Sin has changed into a
dependnece, is the cause that there is nothing more dangerous than the
Conversation and Business of Courts, and that a Man ought to have a particular
call, and strong and extraordinary reasons to make him engage in it. The
Societies which are generally formed there, are such whose beginning and end is
Ambition and Pleasure, and being governed not by Reason or Faith, but by
inconsistent and irregular Passions, they break every Day, and plunge Men in
the greatest Miseries. Therefore such as have not Courage and Constancy enough
to perform their Duties to God, in the presence of their Prince, in the hurry
and perplexity of Business, or when they have too many People looking on them;
in a Word, such as suffer themselves to be dazzled, stunned and born down by the
Conversation of the World, whatever it may be, ought to avoid it, and to place
themselves in a Station, where they may without constraint honor and love the
true Power, conform themselves to the divine Law, and render to God the inward
and spiritual Duties. These are indispensable Duties; and certainly we owe
nothing to our Neighbor which may hinder us from paying to God that which we
indispensably owe him.

XVI. But besides there is scarce any thing to be got by Men: Their Language is
as corrupt as their Heart: It raises only false Ideas in the Mind, and excites
only a love of sensible Objects. But their example is yet more dangerous. For
besides that it is not so conformable to Reason as their Discourse, it is a
living and a moving Language, which irresistibly persuades those that do not
stand upon their Guard, We often hear a thing said, whithout any Thoughts of
doing it: But we are so prone to Imitation, that we do mechanically what we see
others do. There is no obligation on a Man to do what he only hears talked of,
and does not see practiced; but it is a violation of Society, it is the way to
become Odious or Ridiculous, to be counted Whimsical and Capricious; in short,
it is looked upon as a kind of Schism, to condemn the general practice of the
World by a singular Conduct.

XVII. Nevertheless Charity and our natural Constitution oblige us many times
to live in Society. Every Man cannot bear a retired and solitary Life, and
those least of all to whom the Conversation of the World is most dangerous.
They must See and be Seen, they must Talk and hear others Talk. Conversation
without Passions refreshes and strengthens the Mind. Therefore there is a
necessity of living amongst Men. But then we should choose such as are
Reasonable, or at least such as are capable of hearing Reason, and submitting
to Faith, that so we may labor together for our mutual Sanctification. For we
must build in this Life for Eternity, we must begin the eternal Society here
below, we must make have while it is called to Day, to enter into the rest of
the Lord, and cause others to enter too; that our Society may be with the
Father and his Son Jesus Christ in the unity of the Holy Ghost by an immortal
Love, proceeding continually in relation to us, from the power and wisdom of
God, the perpetual influence of which will be the efficacious cause of our
Perfection and eternal Happiness.

CHAP. VII. The Duties of Esteem are due to all Mankind, to the lowest of Men,
to the greatest Sinners, to our Enemies and Persecutors: To Merits, as well as
to Natures. It is difficult to regulate exactly these Duties and those of
Benevolence, by reason of the difference of personal and relative Merits, and
their various Combinations. A general rule, and the most certain one that can
be given in this matter.
I. THE Three general Heads to which all the particular Duties that we owe to
other Men may be reduced, are, as I said in the foregoing Chapter, simple
Esteem, which ought to be proportioned to the excellence or persection of every
Being; Respect or a relative submission of the Mind, proportionable to the
subordinate Power of intelligent occasional Causes; and the love of
Benevolence, which is due to all that are capable of enjoying those Goods which
we may possess in common with them.

II. Simple Esteem is a Duty which we owe to all Mankind. Contempt is an
Injury, and the greatest of Injuries. There is nothing contemptible but
nothing; for every real Being deserves esteem. And as Man is the noblest of the
Creatures, it is a false Judgment, and an irregular Motion, to despise any Man,
let him be what he will. The lowest of Men may be exalted to the sovereign
Power; and the two first Kings which God gave to the Israelites, were taken as
I may say, from the Dregs of the People. Saul of the lowest Family of the least
of the twelve Tribes, found the Kingdom in seeking his Father's Asses. 1 Samuel
9.21.
Am not I a Benjamite, says he to Samuel, who promised him the Kingdom, of the
smallest of the Tribes of Israel? And my Family the least of all the Families
of the Tribe of Benjamin? And David, the youngest of the Sons of Jesse; was
taken, as he says himself from the Flocks, to be put at the head of God's
chosen People. Psalm 78.71.
From following the Ews great with Young, he brought him to Feed Jacob his
People, and Israel his Inheritance.

III. But the Gospel gives us yet another prospect of Things. It teaches us
that the Poor are the Members and the Brethren of Christ: Mat. 25.40. Luke 6
20. Luke 16.9.
That the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them: And that they have power to
receive their Friends into everlasting Habitations. For though the Rich as well
as the Poor are washed by Baptism in the Blood of the Lamb, yet they defile
themselves so many ways with Pleasure which inebriates them, and with Ambition
which makes them forget their Title of Children of God, that Christ is always
angry with them, and continually denounces woes against them in the Gospel.
Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are Rich: For you have received your Consolation. Let the
Brother of low Degree, says S. James, Jam. 1.9, 1^.
rejoice in that he is exalted: But the Rich in that he is made low; because as
the Flower of the Grass he shall pass away. Go to now ye rich Men, c. 5.1, 2, 3.
Weep and Howl for your Miseries that shall come upon you. Your Riches are
corrupted, and your Garments are Moth-eaten. Your Gold and Silver is cankered,
and the rust of them shall be a Witness against you, and shall Eat your Flesh
as it were Fire: Ye have heaped Treasure together for the last Days.

IV. Nor must we Esteem, and give outward marks of our Esteem to the Poor only
and to the lowest of Men, but also to Sinners, and to those who commit the
greatest Crimes. Their Life is abominable, their practice is odious and
contemptible, we must never approve it, though it be set off with all the
splendour of Greatness. But still their Person merits our Esteem. For nothing
deserves contempt but nothing, and Sin which is truly nothing, which corrupts
Man's Nature, annihilates his Merit, but does not destroy the excellence of his
Person. The greatest of Sinners may, by the assistance of Heaven, become pure
and holy as the Angels: He may enjoy eternal Happiness with us, and take place
of us in the Kingdom of God. We should have compassion of his Misery, not that
which afflicts and makes him uneasy, but that which corrupts him; not of his
pains, but of his disorders, which put him out of a capacity of actually
possessing with us those good Things which he may enjoy, without depriving us
of them.

V. But besides, what right have we to judge of Men's secret Intentions? It is
God alone who searches the Hearts. He that commits a Crime, does it perhaps
against his Will; his Mind is weak and disturbed, his flaming and outrageous
Passions have, it may be, deprived him in a moment of the use of his Liberty:
But supposing him to have acted freely; his contrite and penitent Heart has
perhaps obtained pardon of his Sin, or will obtain it to morrow; a day happy
for him, and it may be fatal to you, by your irrecoverable fall, for a
punishment of your Pride.

VI. Lastly, the contempt of Men's Persons is not only injurious and wrongful,
but it also puts him who is so unwise as to show it by outward signs, out of a
condition of having a charitable correspondence with the Person despised, or of
ever being serviceable to him. For Men will have no communication with those
that despise them; they do not naturally enter into Society with others, nor do
them any good, but with hope of a return; they will not follow a Trade, when
they expect always to lose, and never to get any thing by it; and they never
expect any good from those that are so unjust as to despise them: For contempt
is a certain sign, not only that they actually want Charity and Benevolence,
but also that they are very far from ever having any.

VII. As to our Enemies and Persecutors, it is certain that Esteem is a Duty
more general than Benevolence. There are some Goods which we are not bound to
wish our Enemies, for the Love which we owe to our selves, obliges, or permits
us at least not to desire that they may have the Power to hurt us: So that we
may in some measure want Benevolence for our Persecutors, without failing of
our Duties toward them. But the Persecution of our Enemies ought not of it self
to diminish the Esteem that is due to them, but rather increase it in this
respect, that we should give them more sensible and more frequent Testimonies
of it: A Man may pass by his Friend, or even his Father without saluting him;
this is no affront to them: But it is an injury to his Enemy, not to pay him
this Duty, because his Enemy has not the same Thoughts of him that other Men
have. He has reason to believe it done out of contempt, whereas a Friend will
look upon it as mere Inadvertency.

VIII. But besides, there is nothing that disunites Men so much as Contempt;
for no Man would be counted a Cipher in the Society of which he is a Member; no
Man would be the lowest part of that Body which he composes with others. So
that when Men's Minds are already irritated, when they are once separated by any
Enmity, they can never be joined again, if the contempt be open and visible.
Whereas on the contrary, deadly Enmities may be reconciled, where Men
reciprocally pay the Duties of Esteem to one another, and thereby show that
they are so far from pretending to a higher Rank in the Society which they
would form, that they willingly give it to others, and do Justice both to them
and themselves, according to the Judgment which they make of their own, and
others Merit. Self love and a secret Pride, do not suffer us long to consider
him as our Enemy, who willingly gives us Proofs that he is persuaded of our
Worth and Excellence.

IX. But if we come short in the Duties of Esteem in respect of our Enemies, or
those that make no Figure in the World, we exceed in them as to our Friends, or
such as are conspicuous for their Birth, Riches, or any other extraordinary
Qualification. The Brain is so framed for the good of each particular Person,
and for that of Society in general, as it relates to this Life, that the Body
mechanically puts on an Air of Esteem and Respect for every thing that comes
from our Friends, and from those who are in a condition to do us any Kindness.
The esteem which we have for Persons, extends it self to every thing that
belongs to them. Eccles. 13.23.
When a rich Man speaks, says the Son of Sirach, every Man holds his
Tongue, and look what he says; they extol it to the Clouds: But if the poor
Man speak, they say, What fellow is this? Our Machine is set to this pitch. Two
Lutes tuned together, give the same sound; and when they are near one another,
if one be touched, the other will move of it self: So our Friends are tuned to
us; he that touches one, shakes the other. Those whose favor we have an
interest to maintain, are always in the right: They mutually impel, and are
impelled by us: They deceive us, and we again deceive them by a rebound, which
neither they nor we are sensible of. The Wheels of the Machine will go on in
their Motion: Now the Body speaks only for the Body; this is a thing we cannot
too carefully observe, For Opinion, or the contagion of the Imagination is the
most prolifick Root of those Errors and Disorders, which lay wast the Christian
World. We should therefore retire into our selves every moment, and compare
that which Men say, with the answers of the inward Truth. We should consult
Reason, which puts every thing in its proper place, and does not confound the
Esteem which we owe to Men's Persons, with the Contempt which is due to their
Follies. The approbation we give to the impertinences of our Friends, confirms
them in their Errors; and the Respect that is shown to every thing which comes
from Persons of Quality, swells them so with Pride, that they attribute to
themselves a kind of Infallibility, and think they have a right to say and do
whatever comes in their Head; not that we should reprehend them openly neither:
They are extremely tender; and we can scarce touch them, without hurting and
offending them. Our Duties in relation to them, must be guided by the Rules of
Prudence and Charity; but we must not abuse them by sordid Flattery, after we
have been deceived our selves by that admirable Relation which God has put
between our own Bodies, and those that are about us, for the good of Society:
Which Relation on the Soul's part is indeed changed into a dependence by Sin,
but ought still to be governed by Reason; and when there is occasion, checked
and reprimanded by it.

X. That all the Judgments and Motions of our Esteem, as well as those outward
Actions which are the Marks and Effects of it, may be conformable to the divine
Law, the immutable Order; we must observe that not only Men's Persons, but also
their Merits, require our Esteem. As to Persons, nothing is more easy than to
acquit our selves of this Duty; for equality of Esteem is due to equality of
Natures. But it is very difficult to proportion our Esteem according to the
Merits of Men. For besides, that their true and real Worth is known only to
God, their natural Merits have so many different Relations, which should
increase or diminish our Esteem, as well as our Respect and Benevolence toward
them, that it is impossible for finite Minds, as ours are, to know exactly the
Duties we owe them; so that we are many times at a loss which way to determine
our selves in this Matter.

XI. Merits in general, may be divided into free and natural, civil and
religious Merits. Free Merits are those which proceed from a good use of the
Liberty of the Mind. Natural Merits consist in eminent Qualities of Mind and
Body. Civil and Religious Merits arise from the Offices Men bear either in
Church or State, and from such Qualifications as are proper for the discharge
of those Offices. All Perfection is valuable in it self; but many times it is
much more comparatively or relatively. A Diamond is not so perfect as a Fly;
but it is a great deal more valuable, because of the Use Men make of it. Also
those Beings which have no other Perfection but that of their own Nature, are
preferable to those which have acquired Perfections. A rough Diamond has not
so much Beauty as Glass well cut and polished; but it has much more Value, as
Things go. So that a Man might justly be counted a Fool, who would play the
Philosopher so much, as to prefer a Fly before an Emerald; and to look upon a
rough Diamond, of very great Value, as no better than a Pebble.

XII. For to judge rightly of the Esteem we ought to make of Things and
Persons, it is not sufficient to consider them in themselves, but we must also
examine the several Relations which they may have to others of far greater
Value. The favor of the Prince gives a luster to the vilest Persons; and the
Esteem Men have for Things, should regulate their Price, and consequently our
outward and relative Esteem, unless we resolve to despise Men too, and make our
selves ridiculous and contemptible. Only we must take care not to let our Mind
to be corrupted by the Judgments that are commonly made of Things. Our Esteem
must be only relative, if the worth of the Thing be but relative; for though Men
esteem Gold and Silver more than Copper and Iron, or the organis'd Bodies of
Flies; yet we must not pay the Duty of Esteem to Gold and Silver, but to Men
who make a wrong Judgment of them. We must not judge of Persons or Things as
Men do, who attribute to the Objects of their Passions imaginary Perfections:
But whether they are deceived in their Judgments or not, we should have a
relative Esteem for that which they esteem perhaps without Reason; because in
human Society, the Worth of Things is generally measured by the Esteem Men have
of them.

XIII. The relative Merit of Men is many times much greater than their personal
Merit, and since our Duties are to be governed as well by the former as the
latter; I say again, That nothing is more difficult than to judge rightly of
what we ought to do in the infinite combinations of these different Merits.
Things may fall out so sometimes, that we must unavoidably come short in the
Payment of what we owe, either to a Relation in such a degree, or to a Man that
has done us such a Service, or who bears such an Office in the Society, and is
serviceable to the State in such a capacity. What must we do in this Case? What
is the common Measure whereby we may precisely discover the Proportion of our
Duties? For though it be certainly contained in the immutable Order, yet it is
not exactly known to us; and if it were, yet many times there are so many
Relations to compare, that we should never know what to resolve on, if we staid
till Evidence precisely noted to us every thing that we ought to do.

XIV. We know well enough, that all other things being equal, we should prefer
some Relations before others; our Relations before our Friends, and our Prince
before them both. But must we prefer one Relation before six or eight Friends?
A Relation who is our Enemy, before a particular Friend? Herein lies the
difficulty: For we must at the same time have regard to the Rights of Kindred,
of Friendship and of Society. So that it often happens, that we are obliged to
prefer an Enemy before a Friend; an Enemy who is a Friend of our Relations,
esteemed by the Prince, and serviceable to the State, before a Friend, who is a
Person useless to the Public, or has little or no affection for those who
ought to be most dear to us. Therefore there is no general Rule for the
Government of our selves in the Duties of Esteem, Respect and Benevolence,
which we owe to other Men, but what is liable to a great many exceptions. And
that which extremely perplexes all that can be said in this Matter, is; That
the Duties of Esteem, Respect and Benevolence, are of different kinds; and many
times in the same kind, we ought to prefer one Man as to the Duties of
Benevolence, before another, to whom we absolutely owe the Duties of Esteem and
Respect.

XV. Seeing then the Order of our Duties is changed and governed by the
different Circumstances of Things, which it is not possible to foresee; every
Man should carefully examine them, and retire into himself, to consult the
immutable Law, without regarding those false Interests which the Passions
continually represent; and when he finds himself at a loss, he should have
recourse to such as are better skilled than I in these matters; he should
consult Persons of the greatest Charity, Prudence and Capacity, rather than
those who have their Memory only filled with general Rules, which are
insufficient to give a decision in particular circumstances, and many times
have neither Sense nor Charity. The only general Rule that I shall venture to
give at present, a Rule which is not much followed, but which seems to me to be
the most certain one that can be given, is this; That we should prefer the Laws
of Friendship in Jesus Christ, and of the eternal Society, before the common
Rights of a Friendship and a Society which must end with our Life. I shall
explain my self more particularly.

XVI. That which is finite, how great soever it be, has of it self no
proportion to infinity. Ten thousand Ages, in respect of eternity, is nothing.
The proportion of the Universe, to immense and boundless Spaces, can be
expressed only by a Cipher. An Unite divided by a thousand Millions of Ciphers,
by a progression from one to a thousand Millions, instead of from One to Ten,
would be a Fraction infinitely too great to express this proportion, for indeed
there is none; this is my Position. Now we shall enjoy God in the other life,
and enjoy him for ever. Therefore the possession of the Empire of the Universe,
in respect of the possession of the true Good; and the time of the enjoyment of
this Empire, compared with the eternity of the life to come, are Ciphers; there
is no proportion between them: They are totally eclipsed and annihilated by the
presence of Eternity. Human Greatness, and Pleasures which pass away with our
life; nay, let us join whatever we can think of for our Satisfaction; all this
disappears when we reflect a little, and consider that we are immortal: It is
nothing, and ought to be counted for nothing. This, I think, every one will
allow.

XVII. Now let us observe this Principle, and we shall see, that he who is an
occasion of falling to one single Person, is more cruel than the inhuman
Phalaris; that it is just that he should suffer, like that wretched Prince, the
same Fire into which he has made others fall; and that it were better for him,
as our Savior speaks, That he were thrown into the Sea with a Millstone about
his Neck.

XVIII. On the contrary, we shall see that he who labors under Jesus Christ,
in the building of the eternal Temple, is incomparably more valuable than the
greatest Architect that ever was. There is nothing now to be seen of the Temple
of the great Solomon, the Habitation of the living God, and the Glory of a
whole People; but this Man's Work shall remain for ever.

XIX. We shall see clearly, that a deformed Body, a rude and unpolished Mind, a
lively and irregular Imagination, a Man of no reputation or fortune in the
World, without Friends, and without any Qualifications to recommend him; that
such a Man, I say, if he be truly pious, if he fears and loves his God, is
infinitely more worthy of our Esteem, than the most beautiful Man in the World,
the most caressed and honored for his admirable Qualities, but with something
less Religion. Certainly no one will dare to say, That God the righteous Judge,
prefers this Man before the other. Therefore we also are bound to prefer the
other if we are sufficiently convinced of the Difference of their Piety.

XX. A Man may esteem the quality of a Physician more than that of a Lawyer;
this is indifferent, and depends on Customs, which vary according to times and
places. But to esteem the quality of a Prince more than that of a Christian, to
value the Title of a Gentleman more than that of a Priest, after the Order of
the Son of God; this is not indifferent: Not but that a Man owes to his Prince
other kind of Duties, than he does to the Minister of his Parish; the Prince
has the sovereign Power, and therefore he must pay him the highest Respect,
and an exact Obedience in all things.

XXI. I have two Relations, or two Friends; one of them is an honest
Missionary, who labors, with success, in the building of the Church; the other
an accomplished Person in all human Sciences, a great Mathematician, an
excellent Philosopher, one that knows the Histories of all Nations, and speaks
their Languages: But I do not find that his Learning is serviceable to the
eternal Society; nay, I think I discover the contrary. Now which of these two
Persons is the most valuable? both of them stand in need of my Assistance;
Which shall I prefer? Certainly the good Priest, the honest Preacher whom the
World despises, and not the learned Gentleman whom the World adores. I may
perhaps give him greater marks of esteem in many Cases, for fear of disgusting
his nice and squemish Constitution. For those that have great Talents in
appearance, or according to the judgment of Men, think every thing their due;
and that we may not offend them, we may sometimes give them those honors which
they do not deserve; for our outward Actions should be governed by the Rules of
Charity, and sometimes with respect to the false Judgments of Men. But for my
inward Esteem and Benevolence, I owe them to those who have the greatest
Relation to the eternal Society before all others, though they were my professed
Enemies, and the lowest of Men in the Eyes of the corrupt World.

XXII. Sometimes Circumstances may fall out so, that a Man must either give
scandal to his Neighbor, or lose his honor and his life. He cannot well
defend Truth, without ridiculing him that attacks it, and exposing his Party.
He cannot serve his Friend, or it may be his Prince without violating the
Christian Charity which he owes to a stranger, and being the cause of his
Damnation. What must a Man resolve in these, and innumerable other the like
Cases? Nothing is more clear, according to the Principle which I have laid
down. For since every thing that relates to infinity, becomes infinite it self
by that Relation; no regard ought to be had to the Rights of a temporary
Friendship or Society, when the eternal Society is concerned.

XXIII. But yet we must take care, that in preferring the spiritual Advantage
before all other Things; we do not offend our Friends without cause: For we
should always do justice, before we exercise Charity. A Man must not steal to
marry a Daughter, who he fears will otherwise be ruined. The Grace of Christ
may remedy those disorders. He must not give his Friend occasion to break with
him, by neglecting those Duties which he has a Right to expect from him, nor
wound one Man's Conscience to cure another. We should govern the Duties of
Charity by Prudence, and endeavor to foresee the Consequences of our Actions.
But I think, I may say in general, That there is not a more certain and
comprehensive Rule than this, to have always a regard to the Rights of the
eternal Society, when they are mingled with other Interests, as it most
commonly happens.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Duties of Benevolence and Respect. We should procure all
Men the true Goods, and not relative Goods. Who it is that fulfills the Duties
of Benevolence. The unreasonable Complaints of worldly Men. The Duties of
Respect should be proportioned to the greatness of participated Power.
I. THe greatest part of what has been said touching the Duties of Esteem, may
be also applied to the Duties of Benevolence and Respect. However, I think it
necessary to say something farther of them here, that the Nature and
Obligations of them may be more distinctly understood.

II. As to the Duties of Benevolence or Charity, we owe them to all Men in
general; and though there be some particular Goods, which we ought not to wish
nor procure to some Persons, nor in some Circumstances, yet the true Goods
which we may give without depriving our selves or others of them, ought never
to be refused to any one whatsoever. We should never conceal Truth, the
nourishment of the Soul, from those that are capable of receiving it. We should
give good example to all the World. No one should ever be excepted in the
public Prayers and Offices of the Church. The Sacraments should never be
refused to such as are rightly disposed to receive them. These are the true
Goods, which relate to the eternal Society. And since God would have all Men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth; he that refuses to any one
the Duties of Christian Charity, opposes the designs of God, and undermines the
Foundation of that Society which we have with him by Jesus Christ.

III. But for the good Things of this World, as they are not properly Goods, as
their real worth depends on the relation they may have to the true Goods, in
short as they are such things as cannot be communicated without dividing; it
very often happens that we are obliged not to impart them to some Persons. For
instance, if a Father out of too much Indulgence to his Children who are
debauched, or prone to debauchery, furnishes them with Money; he is the cause of
their disorders, and wrongs the Poor who stand in need of his assistance: As he
that gives a Sword to a mad Man, or a Man transported with Passion, is really
the cause of the Murder that ensues. The Prodigal robs the Poor, and by his
indiscreet Liberalities kills the Souls of his riotous Companions: And he that
gives a drunken Servant the liberty to drink as much as he pleases, does him a
kindness which is forbidden by the Laws of Charity and Benevolence. In a Word,
he that gives any power to impotent Minds, which can neither consult, nor
follow Reason, is the cause of their destruction, and of all the Mischiefs
which spring from the abuse of Power.

IV. These are undeniable Truths, and the reason of them is plain. Money, for
instance, is not properly a Good, because we cannot truly possess or enjoy it,
for spiritual Subitances cannot possess Bodies: It is such a Good as cannot be
communicated without division, and therefore the love of Benevolence should
distribute it in such a manner, that it may be useful, and become a Good, or
rather a proper means of acquiring Good, to those who receive it. For
otherwise, there is a double breach of our Duty toward our Neighbor: We hurt
those to whom we give it, and we injure all those who by the Laws of Charity
have a just title to it, to whom we do not give it.

V. But Pain and Disgrace, which in themselves are real Evils, become good in
many cases; and the love of Benevolence which we owe to all Men, obliges us to
inflict them on those that deserve it, over whom we have authority, to reclaim
them from their disorders by the fear of Punishment. She is a cruel Mother that
will not suffer a gangrened Arm of her Child to be cut off: But she is much
more cruel, that suffers his Mind and Heart to be corrupted by Ease and
Pleasure. He that sees his Friend ruined by underhand Intrigues, and takes no
notice of it, or for his own advantage enters into a correspondence in
prejudice of the Friendship he has vowed, is a perfidious Friend, and not fit
for humane Society. But he is much more perfidious, who for fear of grieving
and displeasing us, suffers us to fall into Hell, or by gratifying our
Passions, joins with the only Enemies we have to blind and destroy us.

VI. Who then is he that can render to his Neighbor the Duties of Charity or
Benevolence? Certainly he that knows the vanity of transitory Enjoyments, and
the solidity of the future Goods, the stability of the heavenly Jerusalem,
built on that immovable Rock, the well beloved Son of the Almighty: He that
compares Time with Eternity, and following the great principle of Christian
Morality, measures the Duties of Civil Friendship and Society by the Rules of
that Society which is joined here upon Earth by Grace, and cemented for ever in
Heaven by the perpetual communion of a Good which shall be given whole and
entire to all, and entire to every one of us: He in fine, that continually
meditates on that divine Society which we ought to have with the Father by the
Son in the unity of the Holy Spirit, the mutual love of the Father and the Son,
and the Fountain of that happy Love which shall for ever unite us to God. He
and he alone is capable of paying to his Neighbor the Duties of Benevolence.
All other Men are destitute of Charity, and are so far from loving us with the
love which is due to us, and is contained in the Second great Commandment of
the Christian Law, that they do not so much as know their essential Obligations
toward us. The Corespondence they have with us, their Friendship, their Society
will rather be the fatal cause of our Misery, than the happy foundation of our
Joy and Tranquillity.

VII. Let People say what they will, that we ought to separate the Laws of
civil Society from those of Christian Charity, to me they seem inseparable in
the practical part. The Citizen of my earthly City is already by Grace a
Citizen of the holy City; the Subject of my Prince is a Domestic of the House
of God. Now ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, Ephesians. 2.19.
says S. Paul, but Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God; and are built upon the Foundarion of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone; in whom all the Building fitly
framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Shall I then engage
in the designs of a Friend who seeks to advance his Fortunes here upon Earth,
and hazards the possession which he has in Heaven? Shall I by my Counsels and
Friends favor his Ambition, and advance one who wants that constancy and
resolution that are necessary for subordinate Governments, to a station which
all wise and understanding Men are afraid of? A Friend trembles for his Friend,
when he beholds him in the midst of dangers. A Mother is frighted, when she
sees her Child clambring up a steep Place. And shall not I be in fear for a
Relation, for a dear Friend in Christ, whom I see environed on all sides with
dreadful precipices, and yet still climbing higher to a place that makes the
strongest Heads giddy?

VIII. The present Life should be considered with relation to that which is to
follow, and shall be followed by no other. The Society which we now form, is no
otherwise durable, than as it is the beginning of that which shall never have
an end. It is for this second Society, that the First is ordained: It is to
merit Heaven that we live upon Earth. I repeat this Truth often, because it is
necessary that we should be thoroughly convinced of it. We should engrave it
deeply on our Memory. We should incessantly revolve it in our Mind, for fear
lest the continual action of sensible Objects should blot out the remembrance
of it. If we are fully convinced of this Truth, if we make it the Rule of our
Judgments and desires, we shall not be concerned at the want of those things
which we shall not much esteem: We shall not then take such measures as tend
only to make us happy upon Earth, and before the time of recompense; but such
as lead us whither we ought to direct our aim, to that perfection which makes
us acceptable in the sight of God, and worthy to enter into an eternal Society
with him through Christ our Lord.

IX. But because Men have but a weak and abstracted Idea, of the greatness of
future Goods, they seldom think on them, and when they do they are not affected
with them; for only sensible Ideas, shake the Soul, only the presence of Good
and Evil touches, and puts it in Motion. On the contrary, the Imagination and
Senses being continually and forcibly struck by the Objects which are round
about us, we are constantly thinking on them, and always with some motion of
Passion; and as we naturally judge of the solidity of any good by the
impression it makes on our Mind, we look upon them with Esteem, we desire them
with Impatience, and embrace them with Pleasure. And therefore we think that
those Persons have no Kindness nor Friendship for us, who stop us in our
career, instead of joining with us to catch the Prey which escapes out of our
Hands.

X. Observe but a pack of Dogs, when they are going out a Hunting how they
rejoice, and as it were caress and congratulate one another. Eager for the
sport, they mechanically excite each other, and many times the Huntsman
himself, by leaping and jumping, motions which reciprocally require the like,
for all Machines, at least those of the same Species, are narnrally made to
imitate one another. If there be any one hotter than the rest, that ranges too
wide, and starts the Game too far off, him they shut up and leave him behind.
But what a howling and crying there is! What sensible expressions of an extreme
Grief! All this is but Mechanism and Clock-work. Just so it is with those that
know not the true Good, when any Passion possesses them. If you do not assist
and further their designs, if you thwart and oppose them, they will always be
reproaching and exclaiming against you, that you neglect the Duties of Society,
of Friendsh^p and Affinity, that you make them miserable, and profess your self
their Enemy. If you endeavor to convince them by Reason, presently you are a
Stoic, a Cato. If you go about to restrain them by considerations of Religion,
then you are precise and bigoted. The Wheels of the Machine are set a going,
and will go on a long time. Devout and pious Men will still be Whimsical and
Capricious, without Breeding, Friendship or Civility. They will always be
shunned, as not fit for humane Society: For indeed there can be no Society but
between such as hope for the same kind of advantages. But pious Men seek after
the true Goods, for which those others have no inclination, who have no taste,
no sense of any thing but the objects of their Passions.

XI. Good Men being truly animated by Charity, never break Friendship with
those that live disorderly out of anger or resentment. They still hope to
reclaim them by their Example, their Patience, and their Counsels favored and
assisted by Grace. As they are convinced of the Truth of their own Sentiments,
and thoroughly affected with the sweetness of the true Goods, of which they have
already a kind of foretast; they think of nothing but to make others see what
they see themselves. They would fain make them relish the inexhaustible
Fountain of all Pleasures. The abhorrence which they have for Vice inspires and
animates them, and makes them speak in such a Dialect as s^rikes a damp on
those that really find themselves happy, when they follow the agreeable motion
of their Passions. This is the cause that a vicious and debauched Man, and by
debauched I mean all those that do not look upon the immutable Order as their
Law, or the inviolable Rule of their Actions, those that think Reason an
insupportable Yoke: This, I say, is the cause that a debauched Man considers
those of a regular Life as his Enemies, that he avoids their Conversation with
a kind of aversion and abhorrence, and will have no Correspondence with them,
being inwardly persuaded that they will not quit the solid and substantial
Goods to engage in his designs, and join with him in the pursuit of Fantoms,
which vanish and disappear at the Moment that they are embraced.

XII. These sort of People are always complaining that the Laws of Religion are
confounded with those of Nature, that devout and godly Men are good for nothing
in the World, and that they are obstinate and ill-bred People. They would have
Folks converse with them like kind Relations, faithful Friends, or true-hearted
Countrymen, and not like Men prepossessed with Notions which they do not
relish nor approve. But this is not possible to be done. A Man cannot act but
according to his own Light. Shall he that sees clearly, suffer a blind Man to
fall into a Precipice, and not call out to him and stop him? And would the
blind Man think you have reason to complain of the kindness that is done him,
and say to his Friend, let me alone: Do you think you see better than I? We are
all blind: Believe me, you are prejudiced. Am not I more concerned in my own
preservation than you? You had better go blindly along with me, for I am sure I
am in the finest way in the World.

XIII. If I serve my Friend according to his desires, I ruin him and my self
too. This is the prejudice that blinds me. Perhaps he has some reason to
complain of me; but he is unreasonable, if he imagines that I renounce his
Friendship, or if he renounces mine. If my Friend were not a Christian, or not
capable of being one; if our whole Being were to be annihilated by Death, then
I could converse with him in such a manner as he desires, and have the same
Friendship for him that he has for me; I could then be a good Relation, a good
Friend, or a good Countryman according to the Idea he has of those Qualities.
But Eternity changes the Face of things, and it is the greatest madness in the
World not to have a regard to it.

XIV. A Christian, a Priest, a Gentleman and a Friend are not four different
Persons. When the Gentleman is in Hell, what will become of the Priest and the
Friend? If these Qualities are inseparable in the same Person, it is evident
that the Priest is deceived, if he thinks he has a right to act the part of
the Gentleman: And if I give him different Advice according to his different
Qualities, certainly I mislead and abuse him. When Qualities are inseparable,
the most excellent of them should govern all the rest; and though we may abstract
and distinguish them when we only reason in the air, yet when we come to act,
we must join them all together.

XV. Whether therefore we give Alms to the Poor, visit the Sick or those that
are in Prison, instruct the Ignorant, assist our Friends with our Counsels, or
do any other action of Charity or Duty; we should refer all to the Salvation of
our Neighbor, we should always consider that we live among Christians, and
therefore that we ought to do such Actions as are required of us by the eternal
Society which we all have in Christ Jesus. We should give our assistance to
Sinners, Heretics, and even Heathens themselves, because they are capable of
entering into this blessed Society: And we should be more concerned for those
that are excluded out of it, than for those that are in slavery in a strange
Country. We should be more sollicitous to make them come into it, than to
preserve to them this miserable Life: a Life which we ought not much to value,
but only as it is a Time which relates to Eternity, and may deserve it by the
Grace which Christ, the High Priest of the true Goods, distributes to Men, and
thereby sollicits them to enter into a communion of the same happiness with him.

XVI. As to the Duties of Respect or external and relative Submission, they are
due to Power, and therefore we cannot proportion them according to the merits
of Persons, nor regulate them by our own Light, with respect to the interests
of our eternal Society in Christ. We must follow the Customs and Laws of the
State in which God has placed us. It is a Duty of Justice to pay Respect and
Tribute to those to whom God has given Authority over us. It is all one
whether they be good or bad, nay whether they be Christians or not: Whether
they make a good or a bad use of our Contributions. And the reason of this is,
because it is God whom we Honor in their Persons; for all Honor is relative,
and must be ultimately referred to him alone who really possesses Power. So that
it is an injury and a wrong to our Prince, to deny him the Respects which are
due to him; and it is a formal disobedience against the King of Kings, to
refuse to submit our selves, and give sensible marks of our Submission to those
whom he has appointed his Lieutenants and Vicegerents upon Earth. The
primitive Christians paid to the Roman Emperors, even those who cruelly
persecuted Christ himself in his Members, all the Respect, Submission and
relative Honor that was due to their participated Power: Well knowing that
Honor is properly due to God alone, and must be referred solely to him, 1 Timothy
1.17.
according to S. Paul's Words, Unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God, be Honor and Glory. They knew that the Duties of Respect ought
not to be proportioned to the interest of the Church, or rather that they ought
to be referred thither, because that is the great, or indeed the only design of
God; but that this is never better done, than when Christians pay those Duties
with all possible exactness: For indeed this is the right way to oblige
sovereign Princes, who are always jealous of their Glory and Authority, to
favor Christian Societies more than any other in their Dominions. But I must
discourse more at large of our Duties as they relate to the different kinds of
Society which we form with other Men.

CHAP. IX. Of the Duties due to Sovereigns. Two Sovereign Powers. The
difference between them. Their natural Rights. Rights of Concession. Of the
Obedience of Subjects.
I. ALL the Duties which we owe to participated Powers, may be reduced to Two
general Heads; Duties of Respect, and Duties of Odedience. The Duties of
Respect depend on the Laws and Customs observed in every State, and consist in
certain outward and sensible marks of the Submission which the Mind pays to God
in the Person of it is Superiors. Those Duties vary according to the different
Circumstances of Times and Places. Sometimes Subjects prostrate themselves
before their Prince; sometimes they put one Knee to the Ground, or both: At
other times they only make a profound reverence and stand uncovered; and
sometimes also they remain covered in his Presence, without losing the Respect
which is due to him. These are arbitrary Ceremonies, and are governed by Use
and Custom.

II. But that which is essential to Morality, is that the Soul it self should
be touched with Respect in the Presence of the Prince, who is the Image of the
true Power: and that in such a proportion as the Prince actually exercises the
Authority he has received, or clothes himself, as I may say, with the Power
and Majesty of God. For we owe more respect to the King, when he is in the Seat
of Justice, than in a Thousand other Circumstances; and to the Bishop in the
actual administration of his Episcopal Functions, than at any other time. And
indeed we are naturally inclined to measure the respect due to Grandeur and
Power by the sensible operation they have on us. Certainly when we are in the
Presence of the Almighty, our Mind ought to prostrate it self. Now though we are
always in the sight of God, yet we come into his Presence in a more particular
manner, when we approach Superior, who is his Image. Therefore it is not
sufficient to put on an outward air of Respect and Veneration, but the Mind
must also humble it self, and respect the Greatness and Power of God in the
Majesty of the Prince.

III. There is no great difficulty in paying the Duties of Respect to the
higher Powers; nay the Brain is framed in such a manner, that the Imagination
willingly bows before the splendor that environs them; wherefore I think it
needless to say any more of these Duties. But an exact Obedience to the
commands of our Superiors is a continual Sacrifice, much more difficult and
burdensome than the Slaughter of Beasts; and therefore Self-love is an
irreconcilable Enemy to it. There are few People that discharge this Duty like
Christians, or in expectation that he whom they Honor in the Person of the
Prince, should be their only Reward. Every one in a manner dispenses with
himself, as much as he can, from paying an Obedience that does not suit with
his own conveniences; and some preposterously obey unjust Commands, because
they do not know the exact order and measure of their Duties. For opposite
Powers having each their separate Rights, their different interests are many
times so intermingled, that it is very difficult to know which of them ought to
be obeyed; and in these cases every Man follows his own particular humor or
advantage, for want of certain Rules to govern his Actions by. I shall
therefore here lay down one or two Principles, which may give us some Light
toward the clearer discovery of these Duties.

IV. There are but two sovereign Powers in the World, the Civil and the
Ecclesiastical: The Prince in monarchical States, and the Bishop: The Prince,
who is the Image of God Almighty, and his Minister upon Earth; and the Bishop,
who is the Image of Christ, and his Vicar in the Church. The Prince derives his
Authority over other Men from God alone; so does the Bishop; and neither of
them ought to use it any otherwise than God does himself, with respect to the
immutable Order, the universal Reason, the inviolable Law of all intelligent
Beings, even of God himself. The Prince notwithstanding has a more absolute
Power than the Bishop. He has Authority to make Laws, and is not subject to
them himself; he may act without control, and is not obliged to give an
account of his Conduct to any Man; for he seems to have more Relation to God as
Power, than as Reason; to God clothed with Majesty and Glory, than to God made
Man, and like us; to Christ glorified than to Christ upon Earth, and clothed
with our Vileness and Infirmities. But the Bishop has more relation to God as
Wisdom and Reason incarnate and compassed about with our Infirmities, than as
absolute and independent Power; to Jesus Christ upon Earth, conversing
familiarly with Men, than to Jesus Christ glorified and made supreme Lord of
all the Nations of the World. Ye know, says our Savior to his Apostles, Mat.
20.25.
that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that
are great, exercise Authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: The
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life
a Ransom for many. Not that Princes have a Right to use their Authority without
Reason. God himself has not this miserable Right; he is essentially Just, and
the universal Reason is his inviolable Law. But the abuse of the Ecclesiastical
Authority is more criminal in the sight of God, than the abuse of Royal
Authority; not only because there is an infinite difference between spiritual
and temporal Goods, but also because the Ecclesiastical Power that acts
imperiously and arbitrarily, acts directly contrary to the Character which it
bears of Jesus Christ, who is always Reason, and Reason humbled, and
proportioned to the capacity of Men for their Instruction and Salvation.

V. The end of the institution of these two Powers is very different. The Civil
Power is ordained for the maintenance of Civil Societies. The Ecclesiastical
Power for the establishment and preservation of the heavenly Society, which is
begun upon Earth, and shall never end. The Duty of the Prince regards only the
peace of the State, the Duty of the Bishop the peace of Christ's Church. The
Prince should preserve and augment those Conveniences that are necessary for
the temporal Life: The Bishop by his Preaching and Example, should instruct and
enlighten the People; and as the Minister of Christ, diffuse inward Grace by
the Sacraments in the Members of the Church, and thereby communicate the life
of the Spirit to those that are committed to his charge. In a word, the Power
of the Prince is ordained for the temporal Good of his Subjects; that of the
Bishop for the spiritual Good of his Children.

VI. This being laid down as the first Principle, the second which follows from
it is. That since God is the absolute Lord of all Things, his Orders give a
Right to all necessary and reasonable means for the execution of them. A
Servant who receives Orders from his Master to carry a message of importance
with all speed to his Friend, has no right to take his Neighbor's Horse, for
the execution of his Master's commands, because his Master himself has not
that right. But God being the absolute Lord of all Things, when he says to St.
Peter, Feed my Sheep; or when he commands the King to preserve his Subjects in
Peace, he gives to these two sovereign Powers, as far as Order permits, an
absolute right to all Things necessary for the execution of his Will. So that
the natural, essential and primitive Rights of the temporal Sovereignty, are,
as far as Order permits, all necessary means for the preservation of the State;
and the natural rights of the Ecclesiastical Power, are all lawful means
necessary for the edification of the Church of Christ.

VII. But the Church and the State being composed of the same Persons, who, at
the same time, are both Christians and Members of a Body Politic, Children of
the Church, and Subjects of the Prince; it is impossible for these two Powers,
which ought to have a mutual regard to each other, and should be absolute and
independent in the Administration of their several Functions, to exercise their
Jurisdiction, and execute the Orders of their common Master, if they do not
perfectly agree together, and even in some Cases, depart with something of
their Rights to one another. For this Reason it is, that the Prince, by the
concession of the Church, has now a right of Presentation to many Benefices;
and the Church, by the concession of the Prince, enjoys temporal Possessions.
These are not natural rights, because they are not necessary or natural
consequences of the Commission which these different Powers have received from
God: They are only rights of concession depending on a mutual Agreement, whose
end ought to be no other than that which God proposed to himself in the
institution of these two Powers.

VIII. The building of the Church of Christ, the eternal Temple, being the
great, or indeed the only design of God, (for all the Societies and Kingdoms of
this World shall be dissolved, when the Work of him who alone is immutable in
his designs, shall be completed); it is evident that the State has a
reference, and should be subservient to the good of the Church, rather than the
Church to the glory, or even the preservation of the State; and that one of the
principal Duties of a Christian Prince, is to furnish Christ with Materials fit
to be sanctified by his Grace under the care of the Bishop, and to build up the
spiritual Edefice of the Church. For this end chiefly it is that the Prince
should prefer the State in Peace, give Orders that his Subjects be instructed
in solid Learning, such as gives perfection to the Mind, and regulates the
Heart, and take care that the Laws ordained for the punishment of Vice and
Injustice be strictly observed. For a People well instructed, and obedient to
reasonable Laws, is better fitted to receive effectually the influence of
Grace, than a rude, vicious and ignorant People. For this Reason, the Prince
ought to employ his Authority in causing the Decrees of Councils to be
observed, and keeping the People in the Obedience which they owe to their
Mother, the Church of Christ. For in fine, there is so close an Union between
the Church and the State, that he who troubles the State, troubles the Church
which consists of the same Members; and he that makes a Schism in the Church,
is really a disturber of the public Peace and Tranquillity.

IX. But whether a Prince does or does not propose to himself this great design
of gaining immortal Glory by laboring for Eternity, and carrying on a Work
which alone shall last for ever; it is not for private Men to censure his
Conduct. And provided that he requires nothing but what flows from the natural
Rights given him by the Commission which he has received from God, he ought to
be obeyed in all things, even by those that hold the greatest Dignities in the
Church.

X. It does not belong to me to deduce from the certain Principles which I have
here laid down, such consequences as contain the particular Duties of those
that have a right to command; and besides, there is more difficulty in it than
may be imagined. There are a great many circumstances to be considered, which
vary or determine these Duties. Princes should examine their own Obligations in
the sight of God, by the light of the immutable Order and the divine Law,
rather than refer themselves to the Counsels of Men, who most commonly flatter
them. They should also consult the fundamental Laws of the State, and consider
them as the ordinary Rules of their Conduct. So likewise the Bishops, if they
would not abuse their Authority, are bound to observe the Laws of the Church,
which they have promised to keep at their Consecration.

XI. But for Subjects, I think it certain that they ought to obey blindly and
without reserve, when only their own interest is concerned: For provided their
Obedience to one of the two Powers, do not make them omit the payment of that
which they owe to God, or to the opposite Power; without doubt, they are bound
to obey. To censure the Actions of their Sovereign, is to make themselves his
Judges. It is attributing to themselves a kind of independence, to yield only
to their own light. It is a Contempt and a Rebellion against the higher Power,
to expect that he should give an account of his Actions to any one but God who
has ordained him. But still, this is when he commands nothing against God
himself, or against the Power which represents him. For since the Obedience
which we pay to our Prince is due to God alone, and referred wholly to him, it
is clear that we may and ought to disobey him when he commands us that which
God forbids, either immediately by the divine and immutable Law, or by the
other Power which he has ordained.

XII. But when the eternal Law does not answer our attention by its Evidence,
or when the written Laws are obscure, and the two sovereign Powers give us
contrary Commands, there is a necessity that we should inform our selves of
their natural Rights, and draw from them such consequences as should govern our
Actions. We should have recourse to Persons of understanding; and above all, we
should carefully examine the Circumstances and Consequences of the Command that
is imposed on us. And when at length we find our selves bound by the Obedience
which we owe to God, to disobey either of the Powers which are his
Representatives, we should do it bravely and undauauntedly, but yet with all
the respect which is due to those that are in Authority. For though we are not
always bound to obey the Powers ordained by God, which are no way Infallible;
yet we are scarce ever allowed to cast of the Respect that belongs to them, how
much soever they abuse their Authority. They do not lose their Dignity, nor
their Character by unjust Commands, and therefore we must still honor God in
their Person: And they on their part should remember, that they have a Master
who will deal with them as they have treated their Subjects, and that they, as
well as other Men, ought to submit to the divine Law, to which God himself, if
I may so say, is subject. And though they may be satisfied perhaps that they have
a Right to force Obedience from their Subjects, yet they should not be angry,
if in some difficult and intricate Cases, they make a scruple of obeying them,
or do not readily perform their Commands: For Men ought not to be forced to act
against their Conscience. They cannot all have the same sense of things, when
there are great difficulties to overcome, before they can understand the Order
of their Duties. They should be governed by Reason; and when they have not
Light and Understanding enough to know it, and do not otherwise neglect the
Duties which they do know, certainly they deserve compassion and indulgence.

XIII. What I have said of the sovereign Powers, belongs also to subordinate
Powers. We owe Obedience to a Magistrate, a Governor, or any one that executes
the Orders of the Prince, as well as to the Prince himself; even as we owe to
the Prince the Obedience which is due to God, the Fountain of all Power. We
ought not indeed to pay them so profound a Respect, nor so general and blind an
Obedience as we do to the Sovereign; even as we ought to obey the Sovereign in
so universal a manner as we do the Law and the Power of God; because they are
not invested with the whole power of the Prince, no more than the Prince is
with the whole power and the Infallibility of God. But we owe them an Obedience
proportionable to their power, and to the knowledge we have that they execute
the Orders of their Master and ours. If we are persuaded that they encroach
upon us, or require of us such Duties as the Prince does not expect or approve
of; we may free our selves from their exactions by a dextrous management, or by
such ways as do not violate the Respect that is due to them, in regard of the
Person whom they represent. We should inform our selves of the Prince's
pleasure, from the Prince himfelf; and if we can have no access to him, we
should presume that he refers himself to his Ministers. And then we should
humbly, and without murmuring, sacrifice to God the Goods which belong to him,
and which he has given us that we should offer them to him again, and thereby
merit the enjoyment of more solid possessions, which no power shall be able to
take away from us. We should with a truly Christian bravery, show by a ready
Obedience our Contempt of transitory Enjoyments, and look upon the Cross of
Christ, not as the Instrument of our Punishment, but as our triumphal Chariot,
which shall certainly carry us, as it did our Forerunner and our Pattern, to
eternal Thrones, where we shall Judge with him the great Ones of the Earth, in
the day when the Fire shall devour their Riches, and make all their Grandeur to
disappear.

CHAP. X. Of the Domestic Duties of Husband and Wife. The Ground of these
Duties. Of the Duties of Parents toward their Children, with relation to the
Eternal and Civil Societies. Of their instruction in the Sciencies and
Morality. Parents should give their Children a good example. They should govern
them by Reason. They have no right to use them ill. Children owe Obediene to
their Parents in all Things.
I. THose that govern the State have not a continual relation to all the
particular Members of which it is composed, and there are a great many People
who never in their life receive any Command from their Sovereign or his
Ministers: Therefore that which I have said in the last Chapter, is not of so
great and general use, as the Explication of the mutual Duties of Husband and
Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, a Lord and his Tenants, or
those that are under his Jurisdiction, and such Persons as daily converse
together, and have many different relations to one another. We should inform
our selves more particularly of these private and domestic Duties. I shall
therefore endeavor to fix the Grounds and Principles of them, from which every
one may easily deduce Consequences.

II. The nearest Union that can be betwixt any Persons, is that of the Man and
the Woman; for it expressly figures the Union of Chirst with his Church. It is
an indissoluble Union; for God being immutable in his Designs, the Marriage of
Christ and his Church shall continue for ever; it is a natural Union, and the
two Sexes, by their particular constitution, in consequences of the admirable
Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, have the most violent of all the
Passions for each other; because the love of Christ to his Church, and that of
the Church to her Lord, her Savior and her Husband, is the greatest love that
can be imagined, as appears from the Canticles. For in short, the Man and the
Woman are made for one another. And if we can conceive that God in creating
them, had not a design to join them together, then we may also conceive that
the Incarnation of the Word was not necessary; and that the principal, or the
only design of God, which is figured by the marriage of the Man and the Woman,
more particularly than by any other thing, is not the establishment of his
Church in Jesus Christ, who is the Basis and Foundation of it, in whom also the
whole Universe subsists, who brings the whole Work of God out of its profane
State, and by his quality of Son, renders it worthy of the Majesty of the
Father.

III. This Principle sufficiently shows, that the mutual Duties of Christ and
his Church, are the Model of those of Husbands and Wives; and that the Marriage
of Christians, like that of the first Man and Woman, being the figure of the
marriage of Christ and the Church, ought not to differ in any of its
consequences or circumstances from the reality which it represents. And
therefore St. Paul derives from this very Principle, the mutual Duties of the
Husband and Wife. His Words are these:

IV. Ephesians. 5.22
Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. For the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church; and
he is the Savior of the Body. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ,
so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing. Husbands, love your
Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the word; that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish. So ought Men
to love their Wives as their own Bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves
himself: For no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh; but nourishes and cherishes
it, even as the Lord the Church; for we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh,
and of his Bones. For this cause shall a Man leave his Father and his Mother,
and shall be joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This is a
great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Nevertheless, let
every one of you in particular, so love his Wife even as himself; and the Wife
see that she reverence her Husband.

V. From these admirable Words of St. Paul, we see that the Duty of a Husband
is to maintain his Wife, and to supply her abundantly with all things necessary
for her subsistence; to assist and guide her by his Wisdom and Counsels, and to
comfort her in her Afflictions and Infirmities; in a word, to love her as
himself, and after the example of Christ, to expose his life for her defense.
And that the Wife on her part ought to obey her Husband as her Lord, to fear
and respect him, to seek to please none but him, and to govern the Family in
subordination to his Authority, and with a dependence on his Designs, provided
they are agreeable, or at least not contrary to the designs of God.

VI. Now the design of God in the institution of Marriage, is not only to
supply the State with Members to compose the Body of it, and to defend and
maintain its Honor and Reputation; but more especially to furnish Christ with
Materials for the external Temple, with Members of the Church, and perpetual
Worshippers of the divine Majesty. For married Persons are not only the
Figures, but also the natural Ministers of Christ and the Church. God has
joined them together not only to express his great design, but also to act in
it. It is true, since Sin came into the World, they beget Children only for the
Devil, and by an action altogether brutish; and if it were not for Christ our
Mediator, it would be a heinous Crime to communicate to a Woman that miserable
fertility of bringing forth an Enemy of God, to damn a Soul for ever, to labor
for the Glory of Satan, and the establishment of the infernal Babylon. But
Christ came to remedy the disorders of Sin; and it is permitted by the
Sacrament of Marriage, the Figure of his eternal Alliance, to give our
Children, as I may say, to the Devil, that Christ may have the glory to snatch
them out of his Hands, and having washed them in his own Blood, to make them
enter into his Building.

VII. Now the principal Duty of Parents is to educate their Children in such a
manner, that they may not lose their Baptismal Innocence and Purity. Married
Persons may live in continence, as Adam and Eve did before their Sin. Christ
does not want Materials for the building of his Temple. How many Nations are
there still that are ignorant of the Mystery of our Reconciliation? But that
Parents by their Ambition, their Avarice, their disorderly course of Life,
their ill Example, nay by barely neglecting to instruct their Children, should
deprive them of the possession of the true Goods, and make them fall again into
the slavery of the Devil, in which they were Born, and from which they had been
once delivered; this is the greatest Crime that Men are capable of committing.

VIII. A Father may educate his Children so as to be the Honor of his Family,
the delight of their Country, and the support of the State; he may leave them
the peaceable enjoyment of large Possessions, and all possible Splendor: Yet
still he is a cruel and unnatural Father, and the more cruel, because he charms
their Maladies in such a manner, that they will not be sensible of them, till
they are past remedy: He is Impious and Wicked, and so much the more, because
with that which he pulls down from the sacred Temple of the living God, he
builds up the profane Babylon: He is Senseless and stupid, and the more
because there cannot be a greater degreee of Folly, a more gross Stupidity, a
more brutish and surious Despair, than that of a Father who is regardless of
the inevitable alternative of Two very different Eternities, which shall
succeed our latest Moments; who builds for himself and his Family on the Brow
of a Precipice exposed to Storms and Tempests, and just ready to bury for ever
the miserable Object of his Glory and Pleasures.

IX. A Parent therefore that would preserve to his Children the inestimable
right which they have acquired by Baptism, to the inheritance of Christ, must
be always watchful in removing out of their sight all Objects that may tempt
them. He is their guardian Angel, and should take up out of their way every
Stone that may make them fall. It is his Duty to instruct them in the Mysteries
of Faith, and by Faith to lead them by degrees to the understanding of the
fundamental Truths of Religion, to fix in them a firm hope of the true Goods
and a generous contempt of humane Greatness. He should shape their Mind to
Perfection, and teach them to exercise the faculties of it. He should govern
them by Reason; for there cannot be a more perfect Law, than that which God
himself inviolably follows. But he must begin with Faith: For Men, especially
the younger sort, are too sensual, too carnal, too much abroad to consult the
Reason which dwells within them. It must show it self without, clothed with a
Body to strike their Senses. They must submit to a visible Authority, before
they can contemplate the evidence of intellectual Truths. Again, a Father
should never grant his Children any thing that they ask themselves, and never
deny them any thing that Reason asks for them: for Reason should be the common
Law, the general Rule of all our Wills. He should accustom them to obey, as
well as consult it. He should make them give a reason either a good or a
plausible one, for every thing that they ask; and then he may gratify their
desires, though they are not so agreeable to Reason, if he is satisfied that their
intent was to obey Reason. He should not chide them too much, for fear of
discouraging them. But this is an indispensable Precept never to act but
according to Reason. The Soul should will nothing of it self: For it is not its
own Rule, or its own Law. It does not possess Power; it is not Independent. It
ought not to will but with a dependence on the immutable Law, because it cannot
think, act, nor enjoy Good, but by a dependence on the divine Power. This is
what young People ought to know: But it is perhaps what the old ones do not
know: It is certainly what all Men do not practice.

X. We should take care not to burden the Memory of Children with a great
number of Actions, which are of little use, and serve only to confound and
agitate a Mind which has as yet but very little Strength and Capacity, and is
but too much disturbed and shaken already by the action of sensible Objects.
But we should endeavor to make them clearly comprehend the certain Principles
of solid Sciences. We should use them to contemplate clear Ideas, and above all
we should teach them to distinguish the Soul from the Body, and to know the
different properties and modifications of these two Substances of which they
are composed. We should be so far from confirming them in their Error of taking
their Senses for Judges of Truth, by talking to them of sensible Objects as of
the true causes of their Pleasure and Pain, that we should be always telling
them that their Senses deceive them; and should use them in their Presence like
false Witnesses, that clash with one another to discover their Cheats and
Illusions.

XI. Children dye at ten Years old, as well as Men at Fifty or Threescore. What
then will become of a Child at his Death, whose Heart is already corrupted, who
is swelled with esteem of his Quality, and full of the love of sensual
Enjoyments? What Good will it do him in the other World, to understand
perfectly the the Geography of this; and in Eternity, to know the Epochas of
Times? All our knowledge perishes in Death, and the knowledge of these things
leads to nothing beyond. A Lad knows how to Decline and Conjugate, he
understands Greek and Latin it may be perfectly well; nay perhaps he is already
well versed in History, and acquainted with the Interests of Princes; he
promises much for this World, for which he is not made; but what signify all
these Vanities, with which his Mind and Heart is sill'd? Are there solid
rewards in Heaven for empty Studies? Are there places of Honor destined for
those that make a correct Theme? Will God judge Children by any other Law than
the immutable Order, than the Precepts of the Gospel, which they have neither
observed nor known. Is it the Duty of Fathers to breed up their Children for
the State, and not for Heaven; for their Prince, and not for Jesus Christ; for
a Society of a few Days, and not for an eternal Society? But let them take
notice, that those that are best skilled in these vain Sciences, are they that
do most mischief to the State, and raise the greatest Tempests in it. I do not
say but they may learn those Sciences: But it should be then when their Mind is
formed, and when they are capable of making a good use of it; and the
instructing of them in essential Truths, should not be put off to a time when
they shall be no more, or at least not in a condition to Taste, Meditate and
Feed upon them.

XII. The labor of Attention being the only way that leads to the
understanding of Truth, a Father should use all means of accustoming his
Children to be Attentive. Therefore I think it proper to teach them the most
sensible part of the Mathematics: Not that these Sciences, though preferable to
many others, are in themselves of any great value, but because the Study of
them is of such a Nature, that a Man makes no progress in them any farther than
he is Attentive. For in reading a Book of Geometry, if the Mind does not labor
by its Attention, it gets nothing. Now People should be used to the labor of
the Mind when they are young: For then the parts of the Brain are flexible, and
may be bent any way. It is easy then to acquire a habit of being Attentive, in
which, Part I. Chap. V.
as I have shown, the whole strength of the Mind consists. And therefore those
that have accustomed themselves from their youth to meditate on clear
Principles, are not only capable of learning all the Sciences, but are also
able to judge solidly of every thing, to govern themselves by abstracted
Principles, to make ingenious discoveries, and to foresee the consequences and
events of Enterprises.

XIII. But the So^nces of Memory confound the Mind, they disturb its clear
Ideas, and furnish it with a Thousand probabilities on all sorts of Subjects,
which Men take up with, because they know not how to distinguish between seeing
in part, and obscurely, and seeing fully and clearly. This resting on
probabilities makes them wrangle and dispute endlesly. For as Truth alone is
one, indivisible and immutable, so that alone can closely and for ever unite
Men's Minds. Besides the Sciences of Memory do naturally beget Pride. For the
Soul does as it were enlarge and extend it self through the multitude of things
with which the Head is filled. And though the content of the Mind be then taken
up, as I may say, with nothing but Emptiness, or with things of little or no
use, as the position of Bodies, the the series of Times, the actions and
opinions of Men; yet it imagines it self to have as great an extent, duration
and reality, as the objects of its Knowledge. It stretches it self to all the
parts of the World. It goes back to past Ages; and instead of considering the
nature of its own Being, what it is at present, and what it shall be in
eternity, it forgets its self and its own Country, and wanders in an imaginary
World, in Histories made up of Realities which are now no more, and Chimera's
which never were.

XIV. Not that we should slight History, for example, and never study any but
the solid Sciences, such as of themselves make the Mind perfect, and regulate
the Heart. But we should study them all in their proper order. A Man may apply
himself to History, when he knows himself, his Religion, and his Duties; when
his Mind is formed, and he is thereby capable of distinguishing, at least in
some measure, between the Truth of the History, and the Imaginations of the
Historian. He may study Languages: But it should be when he is Philosopher
enough to know what a Language is: When he thoroughly understands that of his
own Country: And when the desire of knowing the Thoughts of the Ancients,
begets in him a desire of knowing the Language: For then he will learn more in
one Year, than he can in Ten, without this desire. He must be a Man, a
Christian, an Englishman, before he is a Grammarian, a Poet, an Historian, or a
Foreigner. He should not study even the Mathematics, only to fill his Head
with the properties of Lines, but in order to procure to his Mind, that
strength, extent and perfection of which it is capable. In a word, he should
begin his studies with those Sciences that are most necessary, or such as may
most contribute to the perfection of his Mind and Heart. He that only knows how
to distinguish the Soul from the Body, and does not confound his Thoughts and
Desires with the different motions of his Machine, is more solidly learned, and
more capable of being so, by the knowledge of this one real Science, than he
that understands the Histories, Laws and Languages of all Nations, but withal
is so deeply Buried, as I may say, in the Ignorance of his own Being, that he
takes himself for the more subtle part of his Body, and imagines that the
immortality of the Soul is a Question not to be resolved.

XV. I am satisfied that I speak nothing but Paradoxes, and that it would need
a great many Words to persuade others to be of my Opinion. But I would have
them only open their Eyes. Do we find that those who understand Virgil and
Horace very well are wiser Men than those that understand S. Paul but
indifferently? It is experience that must convince such as will not consult
Reason. Now where is the experience which proves that the reading of Tully is
more useful than that of the all-divine Words of the eternal Wisdom? O, say
they, we make Boys read Tully for the Latin. But why do not they make them read
the Gospel for Religion and Morality? Poor Children! they breed you up like
Citizens of old Rome, and you will get its Language and its Morals. They
nenever think to make you reasonable Men, true Christians, and Inhabitants of
the holy City. You are mistaken, say they, we do think of it, we do make it our
business: But I am sure it is not the fashion to mind it thoroughly. St. Augustine
lamented this in vain, Confess. l. 1.
and it is to no purpose that I trouble my self about it. We shall still see
young Lads when they come from School, and ought to know something, for none of
them scarce mind any thing afterward; we shall still see them, I say, ignorant
in the knowledge of Man, of Religion and Morality. For can they be said to know
Man, who cannot so much as distinguish the Soul from the Body? Have they learnt
the first elements of Religion and Morality, who are not fully convinced of
original Sin, and the necessity of a Mediator? They are well stockt with the
precepts of Grammar. They can say Lilly by Heart, and repeat all the cramp
Words in Faruaby and Butler. This is sufficient. They can declaim pro and con
on any Subject. A rare Qualification indeed, to be able equally to maintain
Truth and Falsehood, without knowing how to distinguish one from the other! But
what! It is not reasonable that Boys should know more than their Fathers: Nor
is it fit that they should have more Learning than some of their Masters.

XVI. But I leave it to Tutors and Schoolmasters to examine the order of their
Duties, and to take care of the performance of them. For I would not have
Parents obliged to instruct their Children themselves, because a great many are
not capable of doing it, or have other business, which you shall never persuade
them to be of less Importance than the education of their Children: But then
they should endeavor at least to choose a good Master. Let them not imagine
that a Young Man who only understands Greek and Latin, and does not know, much
less can govern himself, is a fit Person to inform the Mind and regulate the
Heart of a Child. But when they have happily met with one that is, let them not
by their Example and Behavior pull down that which a Tutor by his Pains and
Diligence has been building up. Children, by reason of their weakness and
dependence, are extremely affected with the Language of the Imagination and
Senses, with the outward Air and Behavior, especially of their Parents. This
is a natural Language which persuades insensibly, it penetrates the Soul, and
in a delightful manner begets conviction and assurance in the Mind.

XVII. If a Master teaches his Scholars to judge of things by Principles of
Religion and Reason, to silence their Senses, Imagination and Passions, to
despise sensible Objects, humane Greatness, and transitory Pleasures; an
indiscreet Father shall talk of these false Goods before his Children, with
such an Air, Voice and Gestures, as are able to shake a settled Mind, and move
even those that are least prone to Imitation. Perhaps he may speak to them of
the true Goods: But then his Discourse shall be so Cold and Faint, that it
shall only beget in them contempt and aversion. But you shall hear him Twenty
times a Day, and that with concern, bid them hold up their Head, keep their
Body steady, and carry themselves handsomely. He shall applaud and commend them
for repeating a few passionate Lines with a Grace. He shall sensibly discover
his Joy by the Air of his Face, if he finds in them any qualification which the
World esteems, and only make a Jest and a Diversion of their greatest and most
material Imperfections, such as discover to those that are skilled in the
knowledge of Man, an abominable pravity and corruption. And if a Tutor though
never so good a Christian and a sensible Man should go about to extinguish
their Pride and Self-love; the Approbation of a peremptory Father, or a fond
Mother shall beget in them such a hatred and contempt of him, as shall make him
incapable of ever doing them any good. The greatest Reverence and Respect
should be showed to Children.
Maxima debetur puero re^erentia, says a judicious Author. Example and outward
Behavior irresistibly persuade young People, when they suit with the
corruption of their Nature: And he that without saying a Word, does Evil in
their Sight, with an Air of Pleasure and Satisfaction, speaks to them more
strongly and forceably, than he that discourses to them coldly of Virtue, and
exhorts them to follow it. This is a matter that deserves the greatest
consideration, with respect to the instruction and education of Youth.

XVIII. There are some Fathers who always use their Children Arbitrarily and
Tyrannically: They never do them Justice: They are severe to them without
cause; and instead of enlightening them by Reason, and making them submit to it,
they fancy that the Will of a Father is the inviolable Law of a Child. But when
the Father is Dead, what then will be the Law of the Son? Without doubt his own
Will: For he has never been told that there is an eternal Law, the immutable
Order: He has not been accustomed to obey it. Nay he will not stay till his
Father be Dead, or grown Old and unable to keep him in Slavery any longer,
before he prescribes a Law to himself. He will naturally find it in his
Pleasures. For this unjust and brutish Law is better perhaps than the will of
an unreasonable Father; I am sure it is more agreeable and easy. A young Man
will quickly be satisfied of this, when once he has tasted the sweetness of
it. And then whether the Father be dead or alive, the Son will easily find
means to obey this Law, and yield to its Enchantments. He will look upon his
Father as an Enemy and a Tyrant, if he has yet Strength and Vigor enough left
to interrupt him in his Pleasures, and disturb him in his Debauches: and Being
persuaded by the example and conduct of his Father, that every thing ought to
obey his own Will and Pleasure, he will employ all his Power, and all those
Persons over whom he has any Authority, in gratifying his desires. For he will
find himself actually happy, in giving himself up to his Pleasures; and will
not have Education and Experience enough to apprehend the fatal Consequences of
them. Children therefore should be governed by Reason, as far as they are
capable of it. They have ^ll the same Inclinations with grown Men, though the
Objects of their desires are different; and they will never be solidly
Virtuous, if they are not accustomed to obey a Law which shall never perish, if
their Mind which was formed after the universal Reason, be not formed anew
after the same Reason made sensible by Faith.

XIX. A Father must not imagine that his quality of Father gives him an
absolute and independent Sovereignty over his Son. He is a Father only by the
Efficacy of the Power of God; and therefore he ought not to command his Son but
according to the Law of God. He is a Father in consequence of a bru^ish Action,
in which he knows not what he does; for it is only Experience which teaches
him, that in gratifying his Passion, he also preserves his Species. What Right
can he have over the Mind and Heart of another Man, from an Action like that of
Brutes, an Action which he ought to blush at, and which I am ashamed to
mention? A Mother carries her Burden with a great deal of Trouble and Hardship,
and brings it into the World with extreme Pains. But she does not give it Shape
and Growth, much less does she give a Being to the Soul which animates her
Child: Therefore she has no Right to command him but in Subordination to the
universal Reason, because she had no power to conceive him, but by the Efficacy
of the divine Power.

XX. Nevertheless, a Son should stand in fear of his Parents when they are
angry with him; for God who gives and preserves his Being, God who can throw
him headlong into Hell, God who has all manner of Authority over him, commands
him by his Law to obey them; and by that command gives them a Right to command
him. But Parents should not make use of this Right against the Will of him from
whom they receive it; They should not assume it to themselves as a Reward of a
sinful, or at least an indecent and beastly Action; They should employ it in
promoting the great Design of God, the eternal Temple, the end and masterpiece
of all his Works; in laboring not for Time but for Eternity, and preserving in
the Members of Christ the Spirit of Holiness which they received at their
Baptism. And Children on their part should pay Obedience to their Parents, as
to God himself whose Person they represent; They should show a Respect in their
presence as in the presence of the Almighty; They should endeavor all they can
to please them, and further their designs, as far as Order permits. Perhaps
they shall not live ever the longer upon Earth; for this was the Reward of the
Jews, but they shall live eternally happy in Heaven with the well-beloved Son
of God, who was obedient to his Father unto death, even the shameful and cruel
death of the Cross.

CHAP. XI. The original of the difference of Conditions. Reason alone ought to
govern, but Force is now necessary. The lawful use of Force is to make Men
submit to Reason, according to the Primitive Law. The Rights of Superiors. The
Duties of Superiors and Inferiors.
I. IT is certain that the difference of Conditions amongst Men is a necessary
consequence of original Sin, and that many times their Nobility, Riches and
Grandeur are derived from the Injustice and Ambition of their Ancestors. But
the iniquity of their Forefathers being buried in Oblivion, and the luster
which their Riches and Honors have left in their Families, still remaining, we
are dazzled with the splendor of their Quality, which appears bright and
shining to our Senses, and strikes our Imagination; but we never think of the
Injustice, which perhaps is the original of that splendor, because it is not
visible and apparent.

II. The generality of Men who judge of things by the impression which they
make on their Senses, look upon those that go attended with a magnificent
Train, as something more than Men; and instead of shutting their Eyes in sight
of a stately Palace, that they may make a sound judgment of the personal Merit
of him that dwells in it, they open them insensibly, to behold the beauty that
courts and enchants them, and join to the Person of the owner, all the Gold and
Marble with which the House is adorned. But a Christian Philosopher beholds
without being moved, the Magnificence which astonishes and prostrates weak
Imaginations; and being persuaded that that which belongs to Man is not the Man
himself, and that greatness of Mind is not consistent with Injustice and abuse
of Power, he sees nothing more monstrous and deformed, than a low and
despicable Soul dwelling in a proud and lofty Building, and admired by all the
World. And whether he thinks himself obliged by his quality and the custom of
the World to appear splendid and magnificent in the Eyes of other Men, or looks
upon those vain Ornaments wherewith the rich endeavor to hide their wretched
Mortality, he is still sensible of his own and others weakness, he contracts
and as it were annihilates himself within himself, and measures great Men only
by the merit which he finds in them.

III. But besides, that there are very few of these Philosophers, how much a
Philosopher soever any Man is, he is often surpised unawares by the sensible
impression and unexpected Motions of a rebellious Imagination; and the vanity
which fills Mankind, does so much favor the natural Judgments which are formed
in us without our consent, touching human greatness, that Men always have and
ever will judge of the Esteem which they owe to other Men, by the Train, the
Magnificence and the Splendor that environs them. Now these Judgments which
every one pronounces within himself in favor of Persons of Quality, or such as
have the appearance of Persons of Quality; these Judgments, I say, which are
pronounced more strongly and definitively by a submissive Air and a respectful
Behavior, than by Words, swell Men with Pride, and beget in them an Opinion of
their own greatness. This is it which makes them despise Virtue and Reason in
those that are below them, and esteem, without distinction, every thing that is
heightened and set off to advantage by the Quality of the Persons. This is the
Reason that a haughty Lord looks upon his Vassals as Creatures of a despicable
Species; and that Servants hearken to their Masters as to Virtue it self, and
Reason incarnate. In short, this is the Cause that Superiors do not pay to
those that are under them, the Duties which are owing to their Nature; and
Inferiors think it meritorious to act contrary to the divine Law, in obedience
to the Commands that are imposed on them.

IV. Human Nature being alike in all Men, and created for Reason, it is Merit
alone that should distinguish, and Reason that should govern them. But Sin
having left Concupiscence in those that first committed it, and in all their
Posterity, Men, though all equal by nature, do not now join in a Society of
equality under one common Law, to wit, Reason. Force, the Law of Brutes, that
which gives the Lion the command over the Beasts, has gotten the sovereign
sway among Men; and the Ambition of some and the Necessity of others, has
obliged all Nations, as I may say, to cast off God, their natural and lawful
King, and the universal Reason, their inviolable Law, and to choose them
visible Protectors, who by Force may defend them against Force. It is Sin then
which has introduced into the World the difference of Qualities or Conditions;
for Sin, or Concupiscence being supposed, these differences must necessarily
follow: Reason it self requires that it should be so; because Force is the Law
that must keep those in their Duty who have cast off their Obedience to Reason.
In fine, God himself approves this difference of Conditions, as is plain from
the Scriptures.

V. But the necssity of the Remedies shows the greatness of the Distempers. We
need not seek after them, when we have no occasion for them; and the esteem and
use that ought to be made of Force, is grounded only on the miserable necessity
to which we are reduced by our universal Contempt of Reason. Therefore those
that have Authority to command other Men, and to decide their Differences,
ought not to value themselves, and to be proud of this Right; They should
rather be afraid of profaning their Power, by making it subservient to their
Pleasures; for nothing is more Sacred, nothing more Divine. The Almighty, their
natural and lawful Sovereign, will deal with them, as they, who are but
subordinate Powers, have dealt with their Subjects. They hold their places but
during his Pleasure; They should continually reflect on this. God can pull them
down, if they do not endeavor to set up Reason; and sooner or later, Death,
that cruel Enemy of their Power, Riches and Pleasures, will make them like
other Men. It will present them before the living Law, which penetrates the
Heart, and lays open all the folds and recesses of it; and they will find the
Reward or Punishment of their good or bad Actions, written in eternal and
indelible Characters, in the immutable and necessary Order. Wisd. 6.5, 6, 8.
Horribly and Speedily, says the wise Man, shall he come upon you; for a sharp
Judgment shall be to them that are in high places. For Mercy will soon pardon
the meanest; but mighty Men shall be mightily tormented; a sore trial shall
come upon the mighty. Superiors therefore should look upon themselves as
Lieutenants, as I may say, and Vicegerents of Reason, the primitive and
indispensable Law; and should employ their Authority only against such as
refuse to obey that Law. They should never make use of Force, the Law of
Brutes, but against Brutes, against those that know not Reason, and these that
will not submit to it; and should hearken to their Inferiors favorable,
calmly and charitably. For if they confound their own desires with the
immutable Order, and the secret inspirations of their Passions with the
dictates of the inward Truth; that Truth which they slight and disregard, shall
be the Law by which they shall be judged, by which they shall certainly be
condemned, and by the Efficacy of which they shall be eternally tormented.

VI. Eccles. 32.1, 2.
If thou be made the Master of a Feast, says the Son of Sirach, lift not thy
self up, but be among them as one of the rest, take diligent care for them, and
so sit down. And when thou have done all thy office, take thy place that thou
may be merry with them. A Family, a Community, a Society, whose Head applies
himself wholly to maintain the Peace and supply the Necessities of it, is in a
continual Feast. The Superior ought not to take his place of Honor, till he
has performed his devoirs, nor put himself at the head of others, but only to
protect and defend them, to reconcile their differences, and to rejoice them
with his presence. Superiors, and especially Princes, are called in Scripture
and in ancient Authors, Shepherds of the People; and the Governor of a Feast,
who disturbs the Table, and interrupts the Music, Hinder not Music, verse 3.
represents a Head, who breaks the agreeable Harmony and Concert of all the
Members of the Body which he ought to govern and maintain in a perfect Union
and a mutual Correspondence. The end of all Government, is Peace and Charity,
and the means of attaining this end, is to advance Reason to the sovereign
sway; for there is nothing but Reason that can unite Men's Minds, put them in
tune to one another, and make them act in concert. Reason is a natural and
universal Law, which few People observe in all Points, but no one dares openly
reject, and which all Men pretend to follow, even at the same time that they
depart from it.

VII. Wherefore a Magistrate, a Father, who is the natural Head of his Family,
a Master who has Scholars or Servants under him; in a word, every Superior
ought to breath into his Inferiors a Spirit of Reason, Justice and Charity, as
his and their inviolable Law. He should assume to himself no other Right but
the use of proper means to make them respect and submit to it. But let him not
doubt, but that all those means are his true and natural Rights, in proportion
nevertheless to the Authority which he has received from the Superior Power.
For the Power which gives any Commission, does also give the same Right to the
use of all lawful means for the execution of it, which that Power it self has;
if it self, or Custom, and especially Reason, directs nothing in particular
touching these Means. Thus a Magistrate has no power to punish Criminals but
according to the Laws, though he may by his own Authority make use of a thousand
ways to prevent their Villainies where the Laws give no particular directions. A
Father may correct his Children with a Rod or a Cudgel, and that severely, but
he must not kill or maim them, and thereby render them unserviceable to the
State, on which he himself depends, and to which they belong. A Master may whip
his Scholar, but he can not use him cruelly and injuriously without injuring
the Father, who has not given him this Authority, any more than Custom or the
Laws of the Community. But, excepting that which Custom, Reason, or a Superior
power prescribes, those that are in Authority may challenge to themselves as
their natural Right, the use of all other fit means to reduce such as are under
their command to the Obedience, not of their own Will, but of Reason; of
Reason, I say, not their own Will; for neither a Father, nor a Magistrate, nor
a Prince, no nor God himself, if this could be, if the Word were not
Consubstantial with him, if it were possible for him not to beget and love it;
not God himself, I say, has any Right to make use of his Power, in obliging
Men, who were created for Reason, to submit to a Will not conformable to Reason.

VIII. Notwithstanding, a Servant, a Scholar or a Subject, ought not to dispute
the Will of his Superiors; he should have so much Deference for them as to
believe that they are rational Men as well as he, and much more than he; and
when Evidence or the express Commandment of the Law of God prescribes nothing
to the Contrary, he is bound to obey instantly and without murmuring. Nay, he
is not allowed so much as to offer any Objections, in order to be satisfied of
his doubts, but only when this kind of Liberty carries with it no signs of
Contempt, and cannot offend the Person in whom he ought to fear and respect the
Power of God himself. But Superiors, on their part, should have a great regard
to the nicety and scrupulousness of other Men; they must not imagine themselves
to be infallible, nor by their haughty and insolent manner of proceeding,
oblige those that are under them to fear them, instead of fearing God in their
Person. The invisible God is not so terrible to weak Imaginations, as the
sensible and threatening Air of a choleric Father or Master; and many times, a
Superior heated and disturbed by Passion, makes his Inferiors commit greater
Crimes than he does himself; for the suddenness of his Passion having blinded
him, his Fault is less voluntary; but the Offense of those that obey him
contrary to Reason, is the more heinous, because for fear of displeasing and
provoking him, they deliberately offend against God.

IX. Not that a Superior must never show his Authority, and make himself feared
by those that are under his Command. Reason requires that he should sometimes
be angry, that as this Passion mechanically produces something terrible in the
Face, his outward Air may strike a terror into the Wicked, and dispose them to
Obedience: If this will not do, he must also add Threatenings, and in the end
proceed to Punishment, and to a kind of Injury and Violence. It is absolutely
necessary that Power should make Men submit to Reason, and force them to follow
it, when Reason it self, though well enough known, has not Charms enough to
attract them, Men look upon Reason as impotent and unactive, as unable to
reward its followers, and to punish those that side with its Adversaries. But
they must be delivered from this Error, in which they are confirmed by all the
prejudices of their Senses, and be convinced by their Senses and by a visible
manner of proceeding, that Reason and Power are not two different Deities; that
the Almighty is essentially Reason, and the universal Reason Almighty. Those
that are powerful and reasonable amongst Men, by the particular relation which
they have to the divine Power and Reason, should by force constrain
unreasonable Minds to fear that Reason which they do not love; as they should
by Reason, dispose such as love it, to unite themselves to Power, and to
rejoice in it, in expectation of their Happiness, which shall be given to them
according to the ruses which the same Reason prescribes. Wherefore those that
despise Reason must be threatened, punished, and made miserable. For since it is
easier to obey Reason without Pleasure, than to disobey it with Pain, perhaps
wicked Men being made sensible by the fear of Punishment of the greatness of
those Miseries which they may avoid, if they will conform themselves to Reason,
will be more easily disposed to follow the Motions of Grace, without which no
Man can pay to the eternal Law, all the Obedience which is due to it.

X. The Passions are not evil in themselves: Nothing is more wisely designed,
nor more useful for the maintenance of Society than they, provided they are
raised and governed by Reason. For sensual Men must be taught by their Senses,
and carried whether they ought to go, by something which may impel and put them
in motion. A Scholar will not gain much ground under the conduct of a sober,
phlegmatic, slow-paced Master, without Spirit and without Passion. Children
and Servants, whose Minds are not fashioned according to Reason, advance slowly
toward Virtue, if they be not continually quickened, and spurred on. But we
should never correct them, without enlightening them, and letting them know what
it is that is required of them, and not then neither, except they can perform
their Duty with more ease than bear the Punishment which is inflicted on them.
And as no one can determine his choice without some Motive, we should put them
in a condition to be able to choose with Pleasure, and to do that willingly
which is worth nothing if it be not voluntary. The Springs of their Mind should
be set in order as well as those of their Machine; and the fear of Evil should
only serve to carry them toward Good, to bring them near to the Light, and make
them behold and love the beauty of Order. It is this kind of correction which
Men are made to suffer, in the presence and for the honor of that Reason which
they have cast off, that enlightens the Mind, and gives understanding; and not
inhumane and brutish Punishments, which are sit only to manage Brutes, to train
up Horses and Dogs, and to teach Men to make their own Will the inviolable rule
of their Actions.

XI. Inferiors are obliged to pay a ready and exact Obedience not only to the
Commands of their Superiors which are expressed and signified to them, but also
to their Will, when it is clearly known, though it be not signified. And though he
that stays for an express Order from his Superior, before he obeys him and
performs his Will, does not hereby show any disrespect to his Person, or any
opposition to his Authority; yet he does not sufficiently respect in him the
divine Power and Majesty. But a Minister who by the asendent he has over his
Prince, by his alliances and creatures draws all the Authority to himself, and
reduces his Master to such a condition that he is afraid to command him,
deserves to be treated like a Rebel. An insolent Servant, who by the knowledge
he has of his Master's concerns, or of the weakness of his Mind, deprives him
of the liberty of signifying his Pleasure to him, is many times more guilty of
Disobedience than a lazy and negligent Servant, who does not perform the Orders
that are given him. A Son who by the rigorous constitution of his Mind and
Body, or by the Reputation and Fortune he has gained in the World, is got into
such a Post, that his Father who is in a low Condition, weak and impotent dares
not impose any Command on him, violates the Duties of filial Obedience, if he
knows, his Father's Will, and does not perform it. A Wife who by her untoward
and ungovernable Temper is grown so formidable to an easy good-natured Husband,
that he dares not discover his Mind to her, is more Disobedient, though she
exactly performs every thing that he bids her, Ephesians. 5.33.
than one that fears and reverences her Husband, according to the Apostles
Precept, though she do not always obey his Commands. An inferior Clergyman, who
by the Credit he has gotten in the World, or by his Personal Qualifications,
stops the Mouth of his Superiors, and does not do that which he certainly knows
they require of him, is guilty of Disobedience. In a word, he that withdraws
himself in any manner whatsoever, from the Obedience which he ows to others,
leaves his Post, and rebels against Authority: And though he may secure himself
from the Censures of Men, and the Laws of those that do not penetrate and
search the Hearts, yet he shall not escape the Judgment of the righteous Judge,
who unfolds all the turnings and windings of Self-love. He that obeys Men as
Men, and not as God himself, according to the Precepts of Religion, and Reason,
cannot possibly fulfill all the Duties of Obedience; as on the contrary he that
desires to please God, in obeying the Commands of Men, is so happily guided and
influenced by that desire, that he performs easily and naturally every thing
that the most enlightened Mind can impose on him.

CHAP. XII. Of our Duties toward our Equals. We should give them the place they
desire in our Mind and Heart. We should express our inward Dispositions in
favor of them by our outward Air and Behavior, and by real Services. We
should yield them the Superiority and Pre-eminence. The hottest and most
passionate Friendships are not the most solid and durable. We should not make
more intimate Friends than we can keep.
I. THE greatest part of the Duties which we pay to other Men, consist only in
certain sensible Marks, whereby we give them to understand, that they hold an
honorable place in our Mind and Heart. Those who are satisfied that we have a
particular esteem for their Worth and Qualifications, cannot but feel some
Emotion and Pleasure which must unite them to us: And there is no Man but must
be touched with a sensible Displeasure which will separate himself from us, if
he finds that we do not give him that place in our Mind which he desires, how
great respect soever we outwardly show him. For the place of spiritual Beings
does not lie among Bodies; their Habitation, their Seat, their place of Rest
has no relation to that magnificence which strikes the Senses, and is only the
work of Men's Hands. The Soul dwells with Honor in the very Souls of those that
Honor it, and rests with Pleasure in the Heart of an affectionate Friend. What
Glory, what Honor is it then to possess the esteem of the universal Reason?
What rest and satisfaction will theirs be whom God shall take into his Heart,
and treat them as his Friends? The vaniry of Men should raise in us these
Thoughts, and the Seeds of Pride which we all have in us, should make us aspire
to the Happiness of getting an honorable Place, a fixed and immovable Seat in
all intelligent Beings united to Reason, and in Reason it self, and of being
our selves a sacred Temple, where God himself may reside for ever: For God, who
is a pure Spirit death not dwell with Pleasure in material Temples, though never
so Costly and Magnificent.

II. It is the eternal Wisdom, the immutable Order of Justice, that should
regulate these spiritual Places, which are to be filled by substances of the
same kind. But as long as we are upon Earth, subject to Error and Sin, we
deserve none of them, at least we do not know which of them we deserve.
Therefore we ought always to take the lowest, and expect to be removed higher
according to the degree of our Virtue and Merit. But Men never trouble
themselves about the place which they hold in the divine Reason, the
indispensable Rule of that which they ought to possess in created Minds, and
labor only to advance themselves to a place which they do not deserve. They
hide their Imperfections; they show only their best side; they endeavor by
seducing others, to get an empty Name to themselves; and when they have, or
fancy they have deceived them, they entertain with extreme delight the doubtful
and equivocal marks of an Esteem, which cannot make a Man truly and
substantially happy or contented, but only when it is governed and supported by
Reason, which alone is the supreme Judge of Merit, and alone able to give it an
eternal reward.

III. Though Honor and Glory, absolutely speaking, be due only to God, yet
created Spirits may also challenge it in regard of the relation they bear to
the divine Perfections, and the resemblance they have of the Model by which
they were formed. We have reason to believe that they do, in some measure at
least, correspond with their original. We are certain that the Image of the
invisible God, stamped on the very Foundation of their Being, is indelible.
Therefore we may, nay and ought, as long as we live with them, to give them
marks of Esteem and respect; and so much the more, because we cannot acquit our
selves of the obligation we are under to preserve Charity for them, without the
performance of these Duties.

IV. For, since Men invincibly desire to be happy, they cannot, without an
extraordinary degree of Virtue, unite themselves with those that despise them;
because in consequence of the Laws ordained for the good of Society, they feel
an extreme Pain, when they find themselves not well entertained in the Minds of
others. In Winter we get away from such places as are exposed to Winds and
Frost; because in consequence of the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body,
the Soul is unhappy in those places. How is it possible, when we are governed
by our Passions and Pleasures, to unite our selves to those, whose Coldness
chils and freezes us, to those who sensibly afflict us by the incommodious and
disagreeable place they give us in their Mind and Heart? Therefore we must not
think to maintain Charity amongst Men, to bring them near and unite them to us,
and to be serviceable to them, if we do not pay them such Duties as may
persuade them that they shall live easily and contentedly with us.

V. Since it is not in our Power to infuse inward Grace into the Hearts of Men,
which alone can dispose them to sacrifice their present Happiness to the Love
of Order; we are many times obliged to make use of their Concupiscence or
Self-love, to moderate their Passions, and favor the efficacy of the Grace of
Christ. For if in the Old Testament, the Angels, to preserve the Worship of the
true God among the Jews, governed them only by Motives of Self-love, as not
being themselves the dispensers of the true Goods, nor of the Grace necessary
to deserve them, certainly we ought also to labor for the Conversion of Men by
those natural means which the general Laws supply us with. We must Plant and
Water, and expect from Heaven the increase and maturity. We must endeavor to
employ to a good purpose, the universal Instrument of Iniquity, the
Concupiscence of Pride and Pleasure, or rather Self-love, the abundant source
of all our Miseries. The Grace of Christ coming to our assistance, will change
Men's Hearts, and enable the Weak to go on in the ways of Righteousness, which
we shall have taught them, by a prudent and charitable management of those
things that are in our Power.

VI. It is certain then, that though our Duties for the most part consist only in
certain outward and sensible Marks, by which we signify to other Men, that they
have such a place in our Mind and Heart, as may content their Self-love; yet we
are obliged to perform them exactly, not with a design to advance our own
private Interest, nor to fortify and keep up Concupiscence in others, which we
do in some measure please and gratify by these Duties, but to destroy and
sacrifice it by the assistance of the Grace of Christ.

VII. Now though our equals do not sensibly represent the Power and Majesty of
God, to which the submission of the Mind is due; yet we ought to treat them as
our Superiors, and to give them sensible Marks of our inward Respect, upon this
consideration, that their Merit, their Virtue, and the invisible Relation which
they have to God, renders them worthy of these Duties; or if they are not
worthy of them, that we cannot contribute to make them so, if we do not first
gain their Friendship and Affection.

VIII. As for those that are below us, we should not treat them as our
Superiors, though we may look upon them as such, according to those general Words
of S. Paul, "Let each esteem other better than themselves; Phil. 2.3.
But we should in many cases treat them as our Equals and Friends. For the main
end of our Duties is to preserve Charity among Men, and to join our selves with
them in an affectionate and durable Friendship, that we may be useful to them,
and they to us. For this end it is necessary that our Duties should be sincere,
or at least it should be probable, that we give other Men the same place within
us, which we express by our outward Signs. Thus a Superior may descend so far
as to treat his Inferiors like equals, and they will be pleased and satisfied
with it; for there is some likelihood of Sincerity in this. But if he stoops
below them, they will have reason to believe, if they look upon him as a Man of
Wit, but not much Virtue, that he mocks and abuses them. They will be apt to
imagine that this excessive Humility is only a Blind to cover some
extraordinary design. Or else they will despise him, as a Man of a low and mean
Soul, in which it is no advancement to possess the highest Place. They will
look upon themselves to be without a Head, and will live every one according to
his own Fancy, when he that should guide and govern them so imprudently debases
himself. For when the Head stoops too low, the Members despise him, and he
cannot raise himself up again, without angring and discontenting them. But when
he treats them only as his Equals, they are sensible that they still have a
Master, and are not surpised to see him resume the Command and Authority.

IX. When our Equals out of a Principle of Virtue humble themselves below us,
and give us the precedence, yet they do not fully acquit themselves of their
Duties toward us, unless they yield us the pre-eminence too, and give us real
or at least probable Testimonies of a particular Esteem and Affection. For if
we do not believe that their Humiliation is a mark of the esteem they have for
us, our Self-love cannot be satisfied with it. Virtue may make a Man lower
himself to one whom he despises. Now it is more disagreable and displeasing to
be obeyed by one that despises us, than to be commanded by one that gives us
real marks of his Esteem and Friendship. It is Nature many times that gives us
Masters: We may obey without debasing, without sacrificing and destroying our
selves: But we cannot naturally and without Virtue love Contempt. This is a
thing that can never agree with Self-love; how dextrous soever it be in
accommodating every thing to its own ends. For we cannot, without the greatest
regret, see our selves stripped of our Excellence and Grandeur, in the very Seat
of our Pride and Vanity. Perhaps our Equal may give us a great example of
Virtue, in putting himself below us. We may admire his Humility, and perhaps
imitate it naturally and out of Pride; for many times the proudest Men are the
most Civil and Obliging. But if he would have us Love him, he must give us an
honorable and delightful place in his Mind and Heart: He must flatter our
unjust and proud Concupiscence. Then, though in appearance he be not so.
obsequious and obedient to our Will, he will be better qualified for a Friend;
and will perfectly fulfill the Duties he ows us, if he makes use of the entrance
which we give him into our Heart, by the place which he gives us in his, to
mortify our Concupiscence in us, and set up in its place the immutable Order of
Justice.

X. It is not so easy a thing as may be imagined, to persuade others, that they
are placed in our Mind and Heart as they desire to be, and to discover the true
Sentiments they have of us. We must therefore examine what are the least
equivocal and most sensible marks of the inward Dispositions of Men's Minds,
that so we may discover the bottom of their Hearts, and satisfy them of the
Respect and Friendship we have for them. It is certain that bare Words are
equivocal and deceitful Signs in the Mouths of most Men. Besides, the
institution of them being arbitrary, and depending on the Will of Men, they do
not strongly and forcibly persuade these Truths which they express. None but
weak People, or such as have a great Opinion of themselves, will be deceived by
them; or it may be such as have no experience of the World. But the Air and
Behavior is a natural Language, which is understood without Studying; it
persuades by a lively Impression, and as I may say, diffuses conviction in the
Mind. Besides, this Language is not deceitful, or if it be, it is very rarely,
because it is a natural and in a manner necessary effect of the actual
disposition of the Soul. For the Soul discovers its greatest Secrets by the Air
which it mechanically puts into the Face; and when we are once acquainted with
the different Airs, we may discover in the Heart of him that speaks, the
Sentiments and Motions with which he is agitated in relation to us.

XI. Therefore if we would persuade Men that they hold the place which they
desire in our Esteem and Friendship, we should really Esteem and Love them; and
indeed it is our Duty so to do. We should in their presence excite within our
selves such Motions as they may naturally and sensibly understand by the Air
which these Motions give to our Face: And when our Imagination is cold in
relation to them, because their Merit does indeed appear very mean and
indifferent, we should represent to our selves some Motives that may warm and
agitate us: Or at least we should endeavor to manage things so, that Men may
attribute to the coldness of our Constitution, that indifference which is so
grating and disagreable, and the want of a winning and obliging complaisance in
our Behavior toward them. But above all things, we must take care not to put
on a forced and affected Air, which betrays it self and cannot hold long,
because it does not agree with the actual dispositions of our Mind. Nothing is
more gross and offensive; we had better hold our Tongue, than praise any Man
with such a fawning and perfidious Air, as tickles and betrays none but stupid
and senseless People. Charity and Religion are sufficient to stop the natural
Motions of our Machine; for they furnish us with reasonable Motives enough to
honor and love other Men sincerely, and to despise our selves.

XII. But beside Words and the outward Air and Behavior, there are also real
Services which are the surest and most convincing marks of Esteem and
Affection. By these it is, that we should make new Friends, and try those that
we have already. But as these Duties are the most difficult and painful of all,
so we must not presently imagine that he who fails in the performance of them,
has no Affection or Friendship for us. For we should consider, that there are
some People who by their natural Constitution are so cold, so heavy, so
reserved, in short, so difficult to be stirred, that they do little or nothing
for their Friends. But then they do nothing for themselves neither. This is a
thing that ought to be taken notice of; for he that thinks that these kind of
Men have no Friendship for any Body, must also believe that they do not love
themselves. But I think I may say, That generally speaking, there is no
Friendship more solid and durable, than that of those Persons who seem to want
Friendship, because they have not that spriteliness of Imagination which some
have; and that short-lived Fire, which kindles and blazes out, as soon as a Man
opens his Heart to them, and does them the honor to lay before them the need
he has of their Assistance. The Reason of which is this:

XIII. It is the Fermentation of the Blood, and the abundance of Spirits which
heat Men's Imagination, and give them a Motion which animates and impells them.
Now those who have strong and lively Passions, and a warm Imagination, are
inconstant beyond expression; for it is not Reason that governs them, Reason
which is always the same, but Humors, which are soon kindled and as soon go
out again; Humors, whose Fermentation excites contrary Motions every hour.
Besides, it is most commonly the Body which speaks in them; and as the Body
speaks only for the Body, or for those Things which have a Relation to the
Body, the least interest determines toward their own particular Profit, the
Motion which at first was produced in them for the Profit of a Friend, only
because they found some Advantage in it themselves; for it is always pleasant
and agreeable to get new Friends and keep the old ones. In short, there is no
solid and durable Friendship, but that which is founded upon Religion,
fortifyed by Reason, animated and supported by the charming Pleasure that
proceeds from a mutual Possession of Truth. But Religion, Reason and Truth, are
mere Fantoms to an Imagination that is struck and wrought upon by other
Objects. They have nothing in them that affects the Senses, therefore they have
nothing solid in them. They have no Relation to the Body, nor to the Society
which is formed by the Body, and for the good of the Body; they have nothing
therefore that pleases the Imagination, which speaks only for the good of the
Body, for that which animates and rejoices it, which gives and preserves its
Being.

XIV. When a Man has entertained the unhappy design of making his Fortune in
this World, of pushing forward and advancing himself; let him endeavor to make
those his Friends, who have a strong and lively Imagination, and let him excite
and put them in motion. Their motion will perhaps carry him to the greatest
Dignities. It is the Imagination that reigns here below, and distributes Riches
and Honors. There needs only a strong and prevalent Imagination, to give an
honorable Place in Men's Minds to a worthless Person, and to discountenance and
disgrace a Man of the greatest Wisdom, Learning and Virtue. He then that would
advance his Fortunes, must settle himself well in the Opinion of such as are
active and stirring, he must gain their Favor and Affection, and he must
quicken and spur them on; they will carry him a great way; they will lift him
to a great height. But let him look to himself; nothing is more
incomprehensible, nor more ungovernable than the Imagination; it goes upon very
ticklish Wheels, and very difficult to be kept in order: He must be well
acquainted with all its fantastical and variable Springs, and must know how to
try and manage them with Art and Dexterity. For otherwise, those Friends that
have raised him up, will throw him down again, and trample him under their Feet
with as many expressions of Rage and Indignation, as they have before given him
of Favor and Friendship.

XV. But for those that are contented with their Fortune, and would have good
and real Friends, let them seek them among such as are lovers of Truth and
Justice; let them ground their Friendships on a mutual Communication of the
true Goods, the immutable Goods which make Friendships firm and constant, the
inexhaustible Goods, which exclude Envy and Jealousy; and let them assure
themselves, that those Persons who seem to be least exact in performing the
Duties of Friendship, if this proceeds from the natural Coldness of their
Constitution, are the most sincere and faithful Friends. Their Imagination is
not slippery and inconstant; but let it be what it will, they can restrain and
govern it. Their Passions are not sprightly nor violent; but they know how to
esteem and love according to Reason. Their Friendship is not an inconstant
Passion, but a solid Virtue; and though it may be for want of Spirits and Flame,
they appear cold and unmovable outwardly, yet they have all the inward
Sentiments and Motions for their Friends which they ought to have.

XVI. But though we ought many times to be satisfied with those that do not give
us sensible Marks of their Friendship, yet we ought not to be satisfied with
our selves, if we do not give them lively and sensible Expressions of ours. For
the greatest part of Mankind being governed more by Sense than Reason, they
will never be satisfied, except they read in our Face, and are convinced by our
Services, that we are concerned for their Interests. We are bound in duty to
make some steps for them, which we would not make for our selves. Perhaps they
do not feel the pain that we do in motion; for it may be they love to be in
Agitation. They have not the same Opinion that we have of the good Things of
this Life; for they are blinded by their Passions. And therefore judging of
others by themselves, they will be apt to believe that we have no Esteem or
Friendship for them, if we do not leave the most sacred and the most important
Business, to serve them, if we do not do for them, what we would not do for our
selves; and this belief will infallibly excite in them some unjust, and it may
be sinful Passions.

XVII. For this Reason it is, that Society is a grievous and painful slavery to
those that are not made for it, and can live without it; it is perhaps the
sharpest and severest Penance. It is a Trade, in which many times the honestest
and fairest Dealers lose much more than they get; they venture a great deal,
and make but small Returns. We should therefore enter into no particular
Alliances, which oblige us to such Duties, as either the natural Constitution
of our Machine, or any other Reasons will not suffer us to perform; for we
should not get Friends to make Enemies of them. Nothing is more grievous and
irksome than an Enemy who was once a Friend, and who abuses the Favors that
are bestowed on him. Let every one therefore examine his own Strength, and not
suffer himself to be overcome by the dangerous pleasure of knowing and being
known; and let him engage himself no farther in any Society, than he is able
and willing to perform the Duties of it, no farther than that he may be
serviceable to others without injuring himself, or at least that the Injury he
does to himself may be less than the Service he does to others.

CHAP. XIII. A Continuation of the same Subject. If we would be beloved, we
must make our selves amiable. The Qualities which make a Man amiable. Rules for
Conversation. Of different Airs. Of Christian Friendship.
I. THough we should not enter into any particular Alliance with all the sorts
of People, especially when we do not find in our selves Strength and Art enough
to maintain it; yet we should study to gain the love of all Mankind, to the end
there may be no one whom we may not be capable of serving. Now the way to be
beloved, is to make our selves amiable. It is an unreasonable and ridiculous
pretention to challenge Love and Friendship; and those that are not beloved,
ought to blame none but themselves. If Men do not always do Justice to Merit,
because they do not know it, and most commonly judge amiss of it, yet every one
is a competent Judge of amiable Qualities, and those that possess them never
want Friends. The Merit of other Men obscures and puts out ours; and when we do
them Justice, we seem to wrong our selves. We cannot exalt them, without
depressing our selves, and when we get them below us, we think our selves the
greater. But we may love other Men, without any injury to our selves. Nay, on
the contrary, the Soul grows greater as it were by diffusing it self in the
Hearts of others, and seems to cloth and adorn it self with the Glory which
environs our Friends. So that a Man never fails of being beloved, if he makes
himself amiable, but he is not always esteemed, though his Merit be never so
great.

II. What then are the Qualifications that make us amiable? They are very easy
to be discovered. It is not Wit, nor Learning, a handsome Face, or a fine
Shape, it is not Quality, Riches, no nor Virtue it self; all this will not do
the business. For a Man may have an Aversion for one that possesses all these
valuable Endowments. What is it then? It Is to appear such to others, that they
may be persuaded they shall be easy and contented in our Company. If great
Riches make a Man covetous; if Wit makes him proud; if Nobility makes him
haughty and insolent; if Virtue and Merit it self makes him think every thing
his due; all these Qualifications, how valuable soever they be, will never make
the possessors of them amiable. Men would invincibly be happy; therefore he
alone can gain the Love, I do not say the Esteem of Men, who is good either in
reality or in appearance. Now no Man, how perfect soever he may be in himself,
is good with relation to others, if he does not impart to them the Favors
which God has bestowed on him.

III. Thus the Man of Wit who ridicules and plays upon every Body he comes
near, makes himself odious to all the World; and the Scholar, that is always
showing his Learning, puts himself in the Habit of a Pedant, and appears in a
ridiculous Dress. Those that have a great deal of Wit, if they would be
beloved, must impart it to others. They must put such a stamp on the fine
Things they speak, and make them pass so well, that every one may be satisfied
with himself in their Company. He that has Learning and Knowledge, must not
magisterially dictate to others those Truths of which he is convinced himself;
he must have the Art to diffuse Light insensibly in the Minds of his Auditors,
so that every one may find himself enlightened, without the shame of having been
his Scholar. A liberal Man will never be beloved, if he takes a pride in
showing his Liberality, or brags of it. This is in effect to upbraid those on
whom he bestows his Favors, and makes them as much ashamed. But he who imparts
his Wit and Learning, as well as his Money and Grandeur to others, without
letting it be known, or without drawing any Advantage from it, must necessarily
win their Hearts by this virtuous Liberality; the only virtuous, I say, and
charitable, the only generous and sincere Liberality; for all other kind of
Liberality is nothing but a mere effect of Self-love; it is all interested, or
at least very ill managed.

IV. But he that is continually exposing our Nakedness, to advance or divert
himself to our prejudice; nay, he that for want of due respect toward us, takes
too much liberty, and uses too much familiarity with us; in a word, all rude
and ill-bred People, beget in us an irreconcilable hatred and aversion. There
is no Man perhaps equally strong and hardy in all parts of him; and when we
know a Man to be weak in any place, we should not fall upon him there; we can
hardly touch him without hurting him. We should use all Men with Respect and
Charity, and be extremely tender of striking them in a sensible part. But on
the other side, we should have a care of reproaching them with their extreme
nicety and tenderness by an overcautious and affected Behavior: We should
converse with them according to Nature, as far as their Quality, Humor, and
actual Dispositions permit us so to do; and not be too fearful of setting upon
them on that side where they fear nothing. They loved to be attacked where they
are strong and well fortified; and are pleased with Raillery and Satyr, when
they are sure it cannot hurt them. A Man that has Wit naturally, loves the
exercise of the Wit, as well as that of the Body, when he has a strong and
vigorous one. The Resistance he makes, the Victories he obtains, give him
Testimonies of his Strength and Excellence, and discover them to others, which
begets in him a secret Pleasure and Satisfaction. For Motion delights and
enlivens us; and he that contradicts us impertinently does not so much offend
us, as he that gives us no occasion of showing those Qualities which we
foolishly admire in our selves, and would have others admire too.

V. Men are much more sensible and tender, in relation to those Qualities which
are esteemed in the World, than to those which are really valuable in
themselves; to those Qualities which concern their Profession or Employment,
than to those Perfections which are essential to their being; to those, in
fine, which they have not, or rather those which the World does not much
believe they have, whether they have them or not, than to any others. Thus
there cannot be a greater Affront put upon a Soldier who has not yet given
much proof of his Valor, than to call him Coward. For Courage is a thing
esteemed in the World; besides, it is thought absolutely necessary for a
Soldier; in fine, one that wants it, or fears the World should think he wants
it, does all he can to conceal that kind of Infirmity; for we are very careful
to cover every thing that being discovered brings us Shame and Disgrace. It is
the same thing with all other Conditions. If an ignorant Lawyer or Physician
knows that you think him so, you shall never be his Frirnd, especially if you
are so indiscreet as to speak your Thoughts freely of him, and this comes to
his Ears. If you give a Woman cause to believe that you think her ugly, you
certainly make her angry. For Women value themselves upon Beauty; as Men do
upon Wit; not that they do not pretend to Wit, nay and Learning too; for some
of them set up for Wits and Scholars at a strange rate, and are so more than
many grave Doctors. We should know the World, if we would please it; at least
we should converse with People with so much Modesty, Civility and Respect, that
they may attribute the Injuries we do them to simplicity or inadvertency: There
is no other way to make our selves beloved: for it is impossible to gain the
love of others, when we offend and make them uneasy.

VI. The Air and Behoviour is, as I said before, a Language much more
expressive and intelligible than Words, and represents to the life our inward
Dispositions in relation to others. We should therefore take a particular care
to carry our selves with an Air of Modesty and Respect, and that in proportion
to the Quality and known Merit of the Persons with whom we converse: I mean
such an Air as sensibly shows that we do them Right within our selves, and
willingly give them that place in our Mind and Heart which they desire, and
think they deserve. A careless and negligent Air is acceptable only to
Inferiors, and is no where tolerable but amongst Equals. For though it be
pleasing in regard it shows that we are not much taken up with our selves, yet
on the other side it is disagreeable, because it is a sign that we do not much
trouble our selves about other People. The grave and stately Air is very
offensive and uncasie. For besides, that it denotes a great Opinion of our
selves, it makes others think that we have but little esteem for them. This Air
is allowable only in Superiors; and is never becoming in them neither, but
when it actually represents the Power with which they are invested. It becomes
a Prince, a Judge on the Bench, a Priest at the Altar, or any one who by his
Character, or otherwise, introduces others into the presence of God. But it
makes a Man ridiculous and contemptible who puts it on unseasonably and
preposterously, and begets in us a secret Indignation and Aversion for the
Vainglorious Fop that assumes it. But for the haughty and disdainful Air, it
is provoking beyond all expression; for it shows in a very significant and
sensible manner, that a Man has no esteem nor kindness for others. This Air in
a Prince makes him look terrible and dreadful; but in a private Man it makes
him appear a frightful and ridiculous Monster, and must naturally beget in
others an extreme contempt, and an irreconcilable hatred.

VII. All other different Airs are composed of these four: They are all natural
and involuntary Effects of the esteem we have of our selves with relation to
others; and according as our Imagination is struck, with the appearance of the
Quality and Merit of those that are about us, so we do insensibly and in
consequence of the Laws ordained for the good of Society, put on such an Air as
is most proper to preserve the place which we think we deserve in the Mind of
others, that place I mean which we actually and at that instant imagine we
deserve; for it is not Reason, but Imagination which acts in these Encounters.
It is not an abstracted Knowledge of our own Qualifications with relation to
those of others, but a sensible View of their Grandeur or Meanness, and the
inward Sense we have of our selves, which sets the Wheels of the Machine a
going, in order to put the Body in such a posture, and give such an Air to the
Face, as discovers to Men the actual dispositions of our Mind toward them. It
is evident therefore, that to put on that natural and unaffected Air of Modesty
and Respect which makes us amiable, to those especially who have a great deal
of Pride, it is not sufficient to believe that other Men are of greater Quality
and Worth than our selves, but our Imagination must be actually moved by that
belief, and must put the animal Spirits in motion, which are the immediate
Cause of all the alterations which happen in and upon the Body.

VIII. But the Imagination is so unaccountable a thing, and consequently the
Mind of those that suffer themselves to be governed by the actual Disposition
and Motion of their Machine, that many times the same Air causes quite contrary
effects in two different Persons, or in the same Person at different times.
This depends on the Fabric and Position of the Imagination, and the quality of
the animal Spirits. A pitiful and dejected Air moves Compassion in some, and
Hatred in others, or it may be Contempt or Laughter. Therefore we should open
our Eyes, and read in Peoples Faces the effect which our Behavior causes in
them, and shape or correct our Air by theirs; this is the surest way. And
indeed it is what every one does naturally and without thinking, especially
when he stands in need of the Assistance of others, and passionately desires to
gain their Favor and Affection. I shall say no more of the means whereby we
may accustom our selves to such an Air and Behavior as will make us amiable.
The World is so corrupted and so much given to flattery, that I much fear
People would make an ill use of it. They are already but too knowing in this
matter, and the World is never the better for it, For till Men learn to consult
Reason, and to make no account of the outward Behavior, they will still be
governed and misled by the Imagination of such as have a sprightly Temper and a
dextrous Wit; for it is the Imagination which gives the Face and the rest of
the Body these different Airs, which please and tickle the wisest Men, and
never fail to deceive the simple.

IX. When a Man grows rich and powerful, he is never the more beloved, if he
does not grow better too in respect of others, by his Liberality, and the
Protection he affords them; for nothing is good, nor beloved as such, but that
which does good, that which makes Men happy. Nay, I know not whether they
really love rich Men though they be Liberal, or powerful Men though they protect
them. For generally speaking, they do not make their court to rich Men, but to
their Riches; they do not esteem great Men, but their Greatness; or rather
every Man seeks his own Glory, his own Support, his own Ease and Pleasure.
Drunkards do not love Wine, but the pleasure of drinking; for if the Wine be
naught, or do not please their Palate, they will not drink it. A lewd Man, as
soon as his Passion is satisfied, abhors the Object that excited it; and if he
still loves it; it is because his Passion is still alive. Now all this is
because sading and perishing Enjoyments can never be a Bond strong enough to
join Men's Hearts in a strict Union. A durable Friendship can never be built on
transitory Goods, nor formed by Passions which depend on a thing so inconstant
as the circulation of the Blood and Humors: This can only be done by a mutual
Possession of Reason, the common Good. The Enjoyment of this universal and
inexhaustible Good, is the only thing that can make constant, secure and easy
Friendships. This is the only Good that we can possess without Envy, and
communicate without injuring our selves. We should therefore excite one another
to labor for the acquisition of this Good, and join all together for the
mutual procurement of it. We should liberally impart to others that which we
have already gotten, and not scruple to demand of them that which they have
conquered by their Pains and Application, in the Country of Truth. Thus we
should enrich our selves with the Treasures of Wisdom and Reason; for we gain a
better Possession of Truth, the more we communicate it. The Friends we get this
way will be true, constant, generous, sincere and immortal Friends; for Reason
never dies, Reason never changes; it gives to all those who possess it,
immortality in their Life, and immutability in their Conduct.

X. But who is it that shall lead us to Reason, who shall subject us to its
Laws, and make us its true Disciples? It is Reason it self; but Reason
incarnate, humbled, made visible and sensible, and proportioned to our
Weakness. It is Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, the natural and
universal Light of intelligent Beings, who because he could be no longer the
Light of our Minds, immersed in Flesh and Blood by Sin, was made Sin himself,
and by the foolishness of the Cross, makes a lively impression on our Senses,
and fixes our Eyes and Thoughts on him. It is Christ, and Christ alone that can
lead us to Reason, and reunite us in his Divine Person by the mediation of his
glorified Humanity. Our Nature subsists in Reason through him, and by him Reason
will reign in our Minds and Hearts. For in fine, we are created for Reason, by
that we are intelligent Beings; we were first formed by it, and by it we must
be formed anew. Christ crucified is our holy Sacrifice, and the perfect Model
of the Sacrifice which we must offer up of our Self-love to the Love of Order;
but being raised from the dead, consummated in God, and made an High Priest
after the eternal Order of which Melchisedech was the Figure he is the
inexhaustible source of those Celestial influences, which alone can teach us
how to Sacrifice, as he did, our corrupt Nature, and thereby to merit a divine
Being, a glorious and incorruptible Transformation; to be perfectly reunited to
our Original, and to live wholly on the intellectual Substance of Reason, by
divine Chatity, in perpetual Peace, and in an everlasting Society.

XI. If we are true Christians here on Earth, we shall be faithful Friends; and
we shall find faithful Friends no where but amongst those that have solid
Piety. For there can be no true and constant Friendship but in the immutability
of Reason; and we cannot in our present condition constantly follow Reason, but
by the strength which Reason incarnate gives us. We cannot sacrifice our own
interests to the Laws of Friendship but by a Charity unknown to Nature, and
which derives its original and efficacy from the true Tabernacle, where Christ
exercises the Office of High Priest. Your worldly and licentious Friend has
been always faithful to you. It may be so. For he always found his advantage in
it, or hopes one time or other to repay his Self-love. But would he serve you
do you think to his own prejudice, or without the hope of a return, when even
the Righteous themselves are most commonly excited to serve God, or other Men,
only by the hope of a reward, which is so much the more grateful to their
enlightened Self-love, as it infinitely exceeds the greatness of their Services?

XII. There are really no such things as disinterested Friends. They alone may
be reckoned as such, who do not expect their reward from us. They alone can
truly be our Friends, who desire nothing in this tottering and unstable World.
They alone are our good Friends, our sincere, faithful and serviceable Friends,
who do us Service, because Reason and Charity command them to do it; and expect
from God alone those good Things which are capable of contenting their
Self-love, the only enlightened, generous and lawful Self-love. Let us therefore
make choice of such Friends; and for those Friendships which we have already
contracted, let us endeavor to fix and settle them on the immutability of
Reason, and to purify them by the Sanctity of Religion. Let us make our selves
amiable, only to make the Law of God beloved; and let us look upon the
Salvation of our Brethren, as the reward of the Services we do them. This
reward will soon be followed by another: And the Glory which we shall receive,
for having wrought under Christ in the finishing of his Building, shall endure
for ever. The Society of the World should tend only to establish an eternal
Society in Christ. We should converse with Men only that we may labor for
their Sanctification, and they for ours. Certainly God has sent us into the
World with no other design. Happy, then infinitely more happy than we can
imagine shall we be, if by engaging in this just Design of our common Master,
we make our selves worthy through Christ our forerunner, to enter into his
rest, and to enjoy his Glory and Pleasure to all Eternity!

CHAP. XIV. Of the Duties which every Man owes to himself; which consist in
general in laboring for his own Perfection and Happiness.
I. THE Duties which we owe to our selves, as well as those which we owe to our
Neighbor, may be reduced to this general Head, of laboring for our Happiness
and Perfection: Our Perfection which consists chiefly in a perfect conformity
of our Will with the immutable Order: And our Happiness, which consists wholly
in the enjoyment of Pleasure, I mean solid and substantial Pleasure, capable of
contenting a spiritual Substance made for the possession of the supreme Good.

II. The perfection of the Mind consists chiefly in the conformity of the Will
to Order. For he that loves Order above all things, has Virtue: He that obeys
Order in all things, fulfils his Duty. And he that sacrifices his present
Pleasure to Order, that suffers Pain, and despises himself out of respect to
the divine Law, merits a solid Happiness, the genuine and suitable Reward of a
tried and approved Virtue. That almighty and all righteous Law shall judge his
Cause, and shall reward him to all Eternity.

III. To seek after Happiness is not Virtue, but Necessity: For Virtue is free
and voluntary, but the desire of Happiness is not in our own Choice. Self-love,
properly speaking, is not a quality which may be increased or diminished. We
cannot cease to Love our selves; though we may cease to Love ourselves amiss. We
cannot stop the motion of Self-love; but we may regulate it according to the
divine Law. We may by the motion of Self-love enlightened, supported by Faith
and Hope, and governed by Charity, we may, I say, sacrifice present to future
Pleasure, and make our selves Miserable for a time, to escape the eternal
Vengeance of the righteous Judge. For Grace does not destroy Nature. The motion
which God continually imprints on us toward Good in general never stops. The
Wicked and the Righteous equally desire to be happy: They equally tend toward
the source of their Felicity. Only the Righteous does not suffer himself to be
deceived and corrupted by pleasing appearances: The foretast of the true Goods
supports him in his course. But the Sinner, being blinded by his Passions,
forgets God, his Rewards and Punishments, and employs all the motion which God
gives him for the true Good, in the pursuit of Fantoms and Illusions.

IV. Self-love therefore, or the desire of being happy is neither Virtue nor
Vice: But it is the natural motive to Virtue, and in wicked Men becomes the
motive to Vice. God alone is our end: He alone is our Good: Reason alone is our
Law: And Self-love, or the invincible desire of being happy, is the motive
which should make us love God, unite our selves to him, and submit to his Law.
For we are not our own Good, nor our own Law. God alone possesses Power;
therefore he alone is to be loved and feared. We invincibly desire to be happy:
Therefore we should inviolably obey his Law. For we cannot imprint this too
deeply on our Minds, that the Almighty is also Just; that every Disobedience
shall be punished, and every act of Obedience rewarded. In the present state of
things, wickedness and disorder is attended with Happiness: The exercise of
Virtue is hard and painful. And it is necessary it should be so, to try our
Faith, and to give us means of acquiring true and genuine Merit. But it must
not nor cannot continue so always. If the Soul be not immortal, if the Face of
things shall not one Day be changed, then there is no God: For an unjust God is
a mere Chimera. The Mind clearly sees all this. And what then must our
Self-love enlightened, our invincible and insatiable desire of Happiness
conclude from hence, but that if we would be solidly happy, we must submit our
selves entirely to the divine Law? This is evident in the highest degree.

V. Our Self-love then is the motive which being assisted by Grace, unites us
to God, as our Good, or the cause of our Happiness; and subjects us to Reason,
as our Law, or the model of our Perfection. But we must not make the motive our
End, or our Law. We must truly and sincerely love Order, and unite our selves
to God by Reason. We must prefer the divine Law before all things: Because we
cannot slight it, and cease to conform our selves to it, without losing the
liberty of access to God which we enjoy by it. We must not desire that Order
should accommodate it self to our Will: It is impossible to be done; for Order
is immutable and necessary. We must not wish that God would not punish our
Iniquities; God is a Judge that cannot be corrupted. These desires corrupt us:
These foolish and insignificant Wishes are injurious to the Purity, the Justice
and Immutability of God; they strike at the essential Attributes of the divine
Nature. We should abhor our own Corruptions, and fashion all the motions of our
Heart by Order: We should revenge on our selves the injuries done to the honor
of Order; or at least we should humbly submit to the divine Vengeance. For he
who wishes that God would not punish Theft or Drunkenness, does not love God;
and though the strength of his Self-love enlightened may keep him from Stealing or
Drinking, yet he is not Righteous. He makes that the end, which should be only
the motive of his desires. He must call upon the Savior of Sinners, who alone
can change his Heart. But he that had rather there should be no God, than such
an one as delights to make eternally miserable even those that truly love Order
and Reason, is a just Man: For that chimerical Deity, that unjust and cruel God
is not amiable. Grace it self does not destroy Self-love, but only regulates
it, and makes it subject to the divine Law. It makes us love the true God, and
despise that Irregularity and Injustice which a disturbed Imagination may
attribute to the divine Nature.

VI. From what has been said it is evident, First, that we must enlighten our
Self-love, to the end it may excite us to Virtue. Secondly, that we must never
follow the motion of Self-love only. Thirdly, that in obeying Order inviolably,
we labor effectually for the contentment of our Self-love. In a word, since
God alone is the cause of our Pleasure, we ought to submit our selves to his
Law, and labor for our Perfection; leaving it to his Justice and Goodness, to
proportion our Happiness to our Merits, and to those of Christ, in whom ours
deserve an infinite Reward.

VII. I have explained in the first Part of this Treatise the most material
things that are necessary to make us labor for our Perfection, or to acquire
and preserve an habitual and ruling Love of the immutable Order; in which our
Duties toward our selves consist. They are these in general.

VIII. We should accustom our selves to the labor of Attention, and thereby
procure some strength of Mind. We should never assent but to evidence, and so
preserve the liberty of our Mind. We should continually study Mankind in
general, and our selves in particular, that we may gain a perfect knowledge of
our selves. We should meditate Night and Day on the divine Law, that we may
obey it exactly. We should compare our selves with Order, to humble and despise
our selves. We should reflect on the divine Justice, to fear it, and awaken our
selves. We should think upon our Mediator, to call upon him, and comfort our
selves. We should look upon Christ as our Model, love him as our Savior, and
follow him as our Strength, our Wisdom, and the Fountain of our eternal
Happiness. The World seduces us by our Senses: It troubles our Mind by our
Imagination; it carries us away and plunges us in the depth of Misery by our
Passions. We should break off the dangerous correspondence which we hold with
it by our Body, if we would strengthen the union which we have with God by
Reason. For these two unions of the Soul, with God, and with the Body, are
incompatible. We cannot unite our selves perfectly to God, without abandoning
the interests of the Body, without despising, sacrificing and destroying it.

IX. Notwithstanding we are not allowed to procure our own Death, nor to ruin
our Health. For our Body is not our own: It belongs to God, to our Country, our
Family, and our Friends. We must keep up its strength and vigor, according to
the use we are obliged to make of it. But we must not preserve it contrary to
the command of God, and to the prejudice of other Men. We must expose it for
the public good, and not fear to weaken, ruin and destroy it in executing the
commands of God. And so likewise for our Honor and our Fortunes. Every thing
we have belongs to God and our Neighbor, and must be preserved, employed and
sacrificed to the honor of the divine Law, the immutable and necessary Order,
and with a dependence on it. I shall not enter into the particulars of this
matter; for my design was only to lay down those general Principles by which
every Man is obliged to govern his Life and Actions, if he would arive happily
at the true and certain place of Rest and Pleasure.

FINIS.
BOOKS sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
A New Voyage round the World: Describing particularly the Isthmus of America,
several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cape Verd, the
Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico;
the Isle of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao, and other Philippine and
East India Islands near Cambodia, China, Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc.
New-Holland, Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the C^pe of Good Hope, and Santa Hellena,
Their Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits, Animals and Inhabitants. Their
Customs, Religion, Government, Trade, etc. By William Dampier. Illustrated with
particular Maps and Draughts. The Third Edition Corrected.

Capt. Dampier's Voyages, Vol. II. in Three Parts. First, the Supplement of his
Voyage round the World, being that part that relates to Tonquin, Ac^in,
Malacca, and other Places in the East Indies. Second, his Voyage to the Bay of
Campeac^y in the West Indies. Third, his Observations about the Winds and
Weather in all parts of the Ocean, between the Tropicks; with a General Index
to both Volumes. Octavo. Illustrated with particular Maps.

A New Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of America, giving an Account of
the Author's abode there, the Form and Make of the Country, the Coasts, Hills,
Rivers, etc. Woods, Soil, Weather, etc. Trees, Fruit, Beasts, Birds, Fish, etc.
The Indian Inhabitants, their Features, Complexion, etc. their Manners,
Customs, Employments, Marriages, Feasts, Hunting, Computation, Language, etc.
With remarkable Occurrences in the South Sea, and elsewhere. By Lionel Wafer.
Illustrated with several Copper Plates.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England. In Two Parts,
viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the Kings Revenues. IV. Whither to Farm the
Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most for the Public Service. V. On the
Public Debts and Engagements. By the Author of The Essay on Ways and Means.
Part I. To which is added, a Discourse upon Improving the Revenue of the State
of Athens. Written Originally in Greek, by Xenophon? and now made English from
the Original; By another Hand.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England. Which more
immediately Treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom; viz. I. That Foreign
Trade is beneficial to England II. On the Protection and Care of Trade. III. On
the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. By the Author of The Essay
on Ways and Means. Part II. To which is added, the late Essay on the East India
Trade. By the same-Hand.

Jacobi Rohaulti Physica. Latin reddidit, and annotatiunculis quibusdam
illustravit. S. Clarke, A. B. C.G:C.C. Accessit index rerum and Phaenomenorum
praecipuorum.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years.
Translated by Charles Cotton Esquire Fol.

Processus Integri in morbis fere omnibus Curandis a Do. Tho. Sydenham
Conscripti. 12s.

Dr Sydenham's practice of Physic, faithfully translated into English, with
large Annotations, Animadversions and practical Observations on the same. By W.
Salmon, M. D. 12s.

The Penitent, or Entertainments for Lent, written in French by R. F. N.
Causin, and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth Edition, To which is
added several Sculptures.

Wingate's Arithmetic, 8vo. Latin Common Prayer, 12s. Idem, in French.
Cambridge Phrases, 8vo. Baker's Chronicle, fol. L'Estrange's Aesop, fol. King
and Prince Arthur, fol. Tillotson's Sermons, 8vo. Bishop Taylor's Life of
Christ, fol. Temple's Essays. Dryden's Virgil, fol. -- Juvenal, 8vo. --
Miscellany Poems. Oldham's Works, 8vo. Cambridge Concordance, fol. Duty of
Man's Works. fol. Patrick on Genesis, Exodus, etc. 4to. Collier's Essays, 8vo.
-- View of the Stage, 8vo. Salmon's Dispensatory, 8vo. Seneca's Morals, 8vo.
South's Sermons, 3 vol. 8vo. Stillingfleet's Sermons, 3 vol. 8vo.
Mr. Dryden 's Plays, bound or single, viz.
1 Drammatick essay 2 Wild Gallant 3 Rival Ladies 4 Indian Emperor 5 Maiden
Queen 6 Sir Martin Marrall 7 Tempest 8 Mock Astrologer 9 Tyrannick Love 10
Conq. of Granada 11 Marriage A-la-mode 12 Love in a Nunnery 13 Amboyna 14 State
of Innocence. 15 Aurenzebes 16 All for Love 17 Limberham 18 O Edipus 19 Troilus
and Cressida 20 Spanish Friar 21 Duke of Guise 22 Albian and Albanius 23 Don
Sebastian 24 Amphytrion 25 King Arthur 26 Cleomenes 27 Love Triumphant
Mr. Shadwel 's Plays, bound or single, viz.
1 Sullen Lovers 2 Humorist 3 Royal Shepherdess 4 Virtuoso 5 Psyche 6 Libertine
7 Epsom Wells 8 Timon of Athens 9 Miser 10 True Widow 11 Lancashire Witches 12
Woman Captain 13 Squire of Alsatia 14 Bury Fair 15 Amorous Biggot 16 Scowrers
17 Volunteers
Mr. Otway 's Plays, bound or single, viz.
1 Alcibiades 2 Friendship in fashion 3 Orphan 4 Soldiers fortune 5 Atheist 6
Titus and Berenice 7 Venice preserved 8 Don Carlos 9 Caius Maius 10 Windsor
Castle, a poem
Mr. Lea 's Tragedies, bound or single, viz.
1 Sophonisba 2 Nero 3 Alexander the Great 4 Gloriona 5 Mithridates 6
Theodosius 7 Caesar Borgia 8 Lucius Jun. Brutus 9 Constantine 10 O Edipus 11
Duke of Guise 12 Massacre of Paris 13 Princess of Cleve
Also these, and all other Modern Plays.
Mr. Anthony Abdelazer Alphonso K. of Naples Antony and Cleopatra Adventures of
5 hours Bellamira Black Prince and Tryphon Bussy d' Amboyse Country Wit Country
Wife Chances Circe Cheats City Politics Cambyses Destruction of Jerusalem Duke
and no Duke Devil of a Wife Distressed Innocence Dame Dobson Dutch Lover Don
Quixot, 3 parts Double Dealer Empress of Morocco Earl of Essex English Monarch
English Friar Edward the Third Emperor of the Moon English Lawyer Fond Husband
Feighn'd Courtezans Forced Marriage Female Virtuoso Fortune Hunters Fatal
Marriage Gentleman Dancing Master Greenwich Park Henry 5 and Mustapha Heir of
Morocco Hamlet Ibrahim Island Princess Ingratitude of Commonwealth Julius
Caesar Injured Lovers Innocent Impostor Innocent Usurper King and no King King
Lear Love in a Tub London Cuckolds Love for Money Man of Mode Mulberry Garden
Mackbeth Madam Fickle Maids Tragedy Marriage-hater matched Maids last prayer
Othello Old Batchelour Oroonoko Plain Dealer Philaster Pope Joan Regulus
Rehearsal Richmond Heiress Scornful Lady She would if she could Siege of
Babylon Sir Solomon Single Squire Oldsap Successful Strangers Sir Courtly Nice
Sir Patient Fancy Triumphant Widow Titus Andronicus Treacherous Brothers
Traitor Virtuous Wife Very good Wife Widow Ranter Woman's Conquest Woman Bully
Wives Excuse Love for Love Pyrrbus King of Epire Mock Marriage
And all other Plays.


