CHRIST'S GLORIOUS APPEARANCE TO Judgment.

IN Two Choice SERMONS OF THAT Reverend Minister of Christ Mr. SAMUEL MALBON.

LONDON, Printed by John Hancock Sen. and Jun. at the Three Bibles in
Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhill. 1673.

THE SUM OF TWO SERMONS Preached Aug. 19 --
MAT. XVI. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with
his Angels: and then he shall render toward every Man according to his works.
THIS verse has either reference to the immediate foregoing, or rather to the
24. as a further Argument to press that difficult duty. For the Son of Man,
(i.e.) the Lord Jesus Christ, who is both God and Man, as God the Son and only
begotten of God, as Man the Son of Man, born of the Virgin Mary, though not
begotten by man as other men are. The Son of Man Christ Jesus in his humane
Nature shall come. We read of a double coming of Christ; The first is past long
ago, when he was born into the world, then Christ came to obey the Law, and by
suffering to satisfy Justice, and so to save sinners; All those among the
sinful sons of Adam, who were from all Eternity elected, and should in time be
effectually called, and believe on him. The second coming of Christ is yet to
be, The Son of Man shall come; which was not only true when it was spoken by
Christ, but also still is true; of which coming of Christ we read, Acts 1.10,
11. This coming of Christ it will be to Judgment at the end of the world, at
the Resurrection, then Jesus Christ shall come to judge the world; of this
coming of Christ my Text speaks, as appears by the last words, And then shall
he, etc. which coming of Christ was long ago foretold and prophesied in Jude
14.14, etc. in the Glory of his Father; this Christ mentions, that we might not
think his second coming will be like his first; then he came under the habit
and shape of a servant; then he came to suffer, to be judged and condemned by
men, and therefore came in a mean and despised way; but when he shall come
again the second time, he will come as a Judge to be a Judge: and therefore
will come in the glory, etc. He will come like himself with his Angels, with
all the Angels accompanying him, who are his. And then, and not till then, he
shall, Jesus Christ himself shall reward, or render to every man, one and
another, good and bad, high, low, etc. according to their works; not according
to their thoughts and words of themselves, not according to their wills and
wishes, not according to their meanings and purposes, etc. but according to
their works; not according to the works of others, but according to their own
works.

Observations.
1. There is to be a day of Judgment. 2. Jesus Christ the Son of Man is to be
the Judge at this day. 3. When Christ shall come to judge the world, he shall
come in the Glory of his Father. 4. With the Angels. 5. The Angels are Christ's,
with his Angels. 6. That at the day of Judgment every man shall receive a
reward from Christ according to his works.

D. 2 That Jesus Christ the Son of Man is to be the Judge at the day of
Judgment.

That Jesus Christ who suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, he shall be the
Judge at this day; and that in that nature in which he suffered God gave the
Law by a Man, viz. Moses; and he will judge men according to the Law, by the
Son of Man, Jesus Christ, who was typified by Moses.

John 12.47. John 3.17. These places speak nothing against my Text; but the
meaning of them is this, either thus, That the first and chief End of his
coming was not to judge the world, but to save it, or rather those places are
spoken on concerning his first coming, That then he came not to judge, etc. The
truth of this doctrine appears by many places of Scripture; the day of
Judgment is not often spoken of, but this is hinted, That Jesus Christ shall
be the Judge, Job 19.26. that is, judge the world, Acts 10.38, 39, etc. Hence 2
Cor. 5.10. its called, The Iudgement-Seat of Christ; and very often called, The
Day of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. and 10, etc. Acts 17.31. Romans 2.16.
Christ shall judge the world* not that the Father and Spirit are excluded, but
because Christ in his humane Nature will appear, will speak and pass the
Sentence; and he speaking, God will speak by him; and he judging God will judge
by him and therefore its said in that Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day in
which he will judge the World by that Man whom he has appointed. The Judgment
will be of the whole Trinity, as to the Consent and Authority; but it will be
Christ's as to the visible Acts, Promulgation and Execution of the Sentence; as
when Judges among men condemn Malefactors, it is by the Authority of the
Prince, though the trial and sentence be actually by him. Some observe there
are four things to be considered in Judgment, 1. Judicial Power. 2 The internal
Approbation ^f good, and detestation of evil. 3. The Retribution of Reward;
These three agree to each Person in the Trinity; But then 4. There is an
external sitting upon the Tribunal, and pronouncing of sentence, and in this
respect the Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son,
John 5.23. This is part of Christ his Kingly Office, as he is the Fathers
Prorex and rules for him; Christ has three Offices, Priest, Prophet and King;
as he is a Priest, so he died to save his people, and ever lives to make
intercession for them; as he is a Prophet, so he reveals the mind of his
Father to them; as he is a King, so he now rules the world, and will hereafter
judge it; Christ's Kingly Office will not end till the day of Judgment be past,
and then he shall give up the Kingdom to his Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.

This is an honor fit for none else but God and Christ to be the great Judge
of the whole world. All men shall be judged at this day, except Christ only,
who shall be the Judge. Christ shall be the Judge, not that he has taken this
work upon himself, but the Father has appointed him to it, (as before) God
appointed Christ, and sent him at his first coming to save the world; and he
has appointed him, and will send him at his second coming to judge the world.
That there shall be a day of Judgment, even Reason it self manifests; and
therefore the Heathen themselves had an apprehension of some such time; but
Jesus Christ shall be the Judge, that is a Truth only made known by the
Scripture, and therefore wholly to be received by faith; but though the truth
could not have bin known by reason, yet its no way contrary to it; yea, there
may be several reasons given why it should be so, which I shall but touch.

1. The first reason may be taken from his first coming; he was much abased at
his first coming, therefore he shall come again and be exalted; he was
arraigned, accused and condemned by men at his first coming, therefore he shall
be the Judge of men at his second coming, Phil, 2.8, 9, 10. which is to be at
the day of Judgment, Romans 14.9, 10, 11. This is an ordinary Piece of Gods
Providence toward his people, the same evil he casts them into now, he exalts
them into the contrary good in his time; as the Lord had a purpose to make
Joseph Ruler over all Egypt; but first he makes him a slave: so God had a
meaning to make Christ Judge of men, and therefore first suffers him to be
judged by men, This may be one reason to prove, that Christ shall be the Judge
at this day, and it has not a little in it to prove the day of Judgment it
self: The sufferings of Gods people in the world prove that, much more does the
ill usage and sufferings of Christ prove it, that there will be a time when the
innocence of Christ shall be cleared before all the world, and his enemies
fully punished, which that it might be indeed, God has appointed Christ Judge
at this day, John 5.22, 23. Christ shall be the Judge, that he might be
honored before and by all the world, and there is reason for it; because he was
dishonored and disgraced in and by the world; Christ shall judge the world,
that it may appear to all men how the father honors him and loves him; and
what a difference there is betwixt Christ and all other men

2. This will be for the Honor of God, his Greatness and Sovereignty; to judge
the world by another: Kings on earth seldom judge any themselves, but execute
Judgment by others Hereby the Justice of God also will appear the more, in
that he will judge men by Man, by one who was flesh and blood like themselves,
John 5.27.

3. Christ is the Savior of the world, of all those who do and will believe on
him; he is the way of salvation to his People, they are saved by him; and for
others, those who live (be sure) where the Gospel is preached, the great reason
of their destruction and perdition will be, because they do not and will not
believe on him, John 3.19 this may be another reason, because its by believing
on him that those (who shall have it) come to have a right to eternal life:
they shall have it for his sake; and therefore from him, and its for not
believing on him that others will suffer eternal death, and chiefly deserve it,
therefore it shall be inflicted by him; and in this the justice of God will
appear also the more in the destruction of unbelievers, in that he will condemn
them by him, whom he offered to them to be their Savior; hereby wicked men's
mouths will be stopped indeed, they will have nothing to say.

Fourthly, Christ now rules and governs the world. Mat. last. 18. the world is
Christ's, as by Gods Gift, so by his Purchase; and therefore, etc.

Fifthly, Christ shall be, etc. that so wicked men might see their Judge, God
being invisible, Rev. 1.7. Mat. 24.30.

Sixthly, Christ has lived in the world amongst men, and so by experience he
knows their temptations and ways, therefore the Apostle says, Christ is fit to
be an High Priest, Heb. 4.15. and therefore he may be said to be fit to be Man's
Judge; he knows what it is to live in the world; Christ will be able to answer
any thing that wicked men may plead, that they lived in a sinful world, and
that they had such and such temptations, etc. in that he has lived in the
world, and bin tempted as much and more then any.

USE I. Instruct. 1. Learn hence willingly to suffer and undergo any thing for
God you will be no losers in the end; the lower you are brought for God, the
higher he will exalt you one day; the more disgraced for God, the more will he
honor you; the more you do for God, the more he will own you hereafter; this
we may learn by Gods dealings with Christ, none brought lower then Christ, and
therefore none shall be exalted higher, none disgraced more, and therefore God
will honor none so much; none ever did so much for God, and therefore none
shall ever be own^d so much by God: Christ lost nothing by any thing he did,
suffered or underwent for God, neither shall you.

Secondly, learn not to judge of men as they appear outwardly to you in this
life; who more mean, poor, and every way low while in the world then Christ;
yet he, even he, that poor (but blessed) Jesus Christ who had not a horse to
put his head in while in the world, shall be the Judge of the whole world; It
will not be with men hereafter according to their condition while here; who
would have thought seeing Jesus Christ here on earth, when born in the S^^ble,
lying in the Marger; when buffered and spit on, when hanging upon the Cross,
etc. who would and could have thought; who did think of those who saw him,
(without an Eye of faith) that he should have bin the Judge of the world at
this great day

Thirdly, is it so, then what awful, honorable and reverent althoughts should
we have of Jesus Christ; how should we fear and everence him in our hearts;
Judges on earth are feared, reverenced, honored and feared, how much more
should Jesus Christ the Judge of the whole world? Christ was a man as we are,
(sin only excepted) but he was and is God as well as man; and though a man, yet
you hear he is to be the Judge of all men; he is to be a Judge of Judges
themselves (to whom, but that there are none such here) a word might have been
spoken particularly as such, from this doctrine, to put them in mind, that as
they are Judges of others, so they themselves shall be judged by another, even
by Jesus Christ. Honor (I say) and fear Christ, because he is to be your
Judge; Those who honor me, says God, I will honor; so they who now honor
Christ, Christ will honor at this day; those who now truly fear him, then
shall not fear him. But as for those, who have now low, mean and contemptible
thoughts of Christ, Christ now knows their thoughts, and I shall say no more,
but they for certain will not be out of his mind at this day, when they shall
stand before his Tribunal-Seat: we also hence learn the honor of all true
believers, in that they stand nearly related to Christ: would you not account
it an honor to be near related to some great Judge on earth; what an honor
then is it to ^e related, and nearly related to the Judge of the whole world.

USE II. Of Comfort and Consolation, To all true believers: to all those who
have truly owned, and truly received, and rest upon the Lord Jesus for their
Savior who truly love him and believe on him; it must needs go well with all
such at this day. This Consideration takes away all cause of fear, terror and
amazement in reference to the day of Judgment from all such; and this may be
one reason why Christ shall be the Judge at this day, that hereby those who
truly believe on him, might have the greater comfort, in thinking of this day
now, and in being at it when it comes. The day of Judgment in it self affords
matter of comfort to all such; but much more upon this account. If God himself
were immediately to be the Judge at this day, true believers would have no
cause of fear, yet they might be apt to fear. But this consideration, that
Christ is to be Judge at this day, will keep all such from fearing, if it be
seriously thought of. There are several Considerations that might be drawn from
the Consideration of the day of Judgment, which afford matter of comfort to
the people of God; but this is even the chief and first. It will be a great
comfort to believers to fee Christ at this day; but a greater comfort that they
shall be judged by him; and the comfort that is comprehended in this doctrine
to all such, will appear, if you consider

1. The Relations between Christ and them, they are the friends of Christ, John
15.15. yea, the brethren of Christ: Christ is called Our elder Brother. And
Mark 3.2. last. Christ calls believers his Brethren; yea, they are the Members
of Christ; the Church is the Body of Christ, and every true believer a Member
in particular, (as the Apostle) yea, they are the Spouse of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30.
where the Apostle alludes to the nearness of the Relation between Man and Wife;
Eve being taken out of Adam, and so (as he speaks concerning her) she was flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bone: yea, Christ not only stands thus nearly
related to all believers, but there is a love in him to them, answerable to
these relations, and above them; now what a comfort is this to have one so
nearly related to you; (O believers) to have one ^o full of love to be your
Judge; Surely, it was the love of God to you that appointed Christ to be your
Judge; If you were to be judg^d by men here on earth, and such a one were to be
your Judge, who (you knew) loved you entirely even as his own self, who was
your friend, your brother, etc. would not this be a comfort? was not this a
comfort (think you) to Joseph's Brethren, that their brother Joseph was Lord of
all Egypt? would not this have been a comfort enough to David, if Jonathan his
friend had been his Judge? would he have doubted to have found favor? suppose
it could have been, and God should have consented to it, that thou should
have chose thy Judge, surely thou could not have chose such another for thy
own good and comfort; if thou had chose the best friend thou have in the
world, suppose it be thy husband, father, child, or any other, and such a one
should have had power to determine how it should have gone with thee for ever,
surely it should not have gone better, nor so well as now it will, nor would
thou have had more comfort and boldness in appearing before him then now thou will. Man may change, Christ will not and cannot; man may be deluded and
corrupted, Christ cannot; yea, let me add this, should God have told thee,
that at this day thou should have been thine own Judge, and it should go with
thee to Eternity as thou thy self should say it should, here would not in
this be so great a comfort; for its impossible that thou should love thy self
more, more truly, more fully, yea, so much as Christ loves thee, being a true
believer: were Christ to judge himself at this day, (if that might be) he would
not more certainly free himself, and pronounce a sentence of eternal life then
he will to thee, even to thee, whoever thou art, poor, weak, foolish, sinful,
if thou do truly believe on him: for thou art, (I may say himself) being a
Member of him, and one with him.

Secondly, consider its Jesus Christ who is to who has laid down his life that
you might live, who has bore the wrath of God to free you from it, who has
purchased eternal life for you by his blood. Therefore for certain he will,
when he shall sit upon his Throne to judge you, look upon you with a loving,
smiling countenance; speak nothing but words of love, grace and kindness to
you, and concerning you; therefore for certain he will not pronounce a sentence
of eternal death, but eternal life to you: he should act against himself, and
frustrate the end of his coming and dying, of all that he did and suffered, if
he should not give eternal life to you. Its Jesus Christ who is to be your
Judge, who has promised eternal life to you, He that believes on me has
everlasting life, John 3. Therefore its against his truth and faithfulness not
to bestow it upon you at this day, but he being to be the Judge of the world,
it cannot be that he should be unfaithful and unrighteous, Romans 3.4, 5. Is God
unrighteous, God forbid, for how then should God judge the world; Ics a
necessary requisite in all Judges, that they should be righteous, much more in
the Judge of the whole world. Its Jesus Christ who is to be your Judge, who is
your Advocate and Intercessor with God, whoever lives to make Intercession for
you, and plead for you, that you might obtain mercy, notwithstanding your sins,
1 John 2.1. And therefore when he shall come to sit in Judgment, he will not
doubtless, he cannot go against his own pleading, notwithstanding your sins he
will give eternal life to you. Jesus Christ who has been judged for you is to
be your Judge, you need not fear to be judged by him. Its that Jesus Christ who
is to be your Judge, to whom your sins are imputed, who is your Surety, with
whose righteousness you are clothed, who has procured the Pardon of all your
sins; and therefore let not this trouble you, to think that your sins may be
spoken of, and made known as this day. If it be so, it will be by Christ who is
your righteousness himself, who has been made sin for you, therefore doubt
not, notwithstanding your sins he will acquit you, and free you from the desert
of them. You will not need any to plead for you, or speak a word for you, nor
will you need to speak a word for your self, seeing Christ himself your
Advocate is to be your Judge: O blessed believers! you shall be judged by
Christ, it is your happiness. You are exceedingly in debt to God by your sins,
but Christ is to be your Judge, who is your Surety, who has paid your debts
for you, therefore most certainly he will not lay you up in prison for them,
for he has so paid for them, that he requires nothing of you but to believe,
which you do who are true Christians, to whom I speak, and on whom this
doctrine smiles and speaks comfort. Christ himself is to be your Judge, to whom
all Power is given for this end, to give you eternal life, John 17.2. Christ,
who has undertaken and engaged to his Father to bring you safe to Heaven;
Christ who is in Heaven now preparing a place for you, and therefore for
certain he will carry you to the place he is preparing. Christ, from whom you
had all your gra^e which you have, therefore though but small he will then own
it. Christ, in whom there is a fullness of all grace for you, that you need,
John 1. and therefore fear not that he will condemn you, because you have no
more grace, it being in his hand for you. All the Promises of God are made to
you in Christ, therefore for certain he being to be your Judge, he will make
them all good to you. Christ who has prayed for you, that you might be where
he is, that you might behold his glory, and partake of it, so far as you are
capable, John 17.22, 24. therefore you need not doubt of going to the place
where he is, and receiving of that glory he has at this day. Its Christ who
has helped you to do all the good that you have done: Without me ye can do
nothing, John 14.5. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me,
(says the Apostle) therefore he will own what you have done at this day. You
who are believers you have Christ in you, (Christ in you the hope of glory) you
have the Spirit of Christ in you, you are one Spirit with him, (as the Apostle
speaks.) you are in Christ, Romans 8.1. therefore how can it but go well with you
at this day, seeing Christ is to be your Judge. Jesus Christ, O believers, is
to be your Judge, who is your Redeemer, Ephesians. 1 7. who has obtained an eternal
Redemption for you, Heb. 9.12. therefore for certain you shall be perfectly
redeemd from all evil at this day, and therefore its called the day of
Redemption to believers, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit whereby you are
sealed to the day of Redemption, that is, of perfect, full and complete
Redemption of all those who believe on Christ, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed
is from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: therefore for certain,
since Christ is to pronounce the fentence, Go ye cursed, it shall not be
pronounced to you. Its Christ whom you have honored by believing on him, who
will be glorified in you, and admired in you at this day, 2 These. 1.10.
Therefore for certain you shall be honored and glorified by him, yea, and
therefore you shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3. What cause have all
true believers to love the appearing of Christ, and say concerning him, Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 20.4.

These words are brought as the Answer of the Church to every true believer,
whereas all unbelievers say in their hearts, and have cause to say, What come
quickly; No, Jesus; stay, stay long, stay and never come. Surely, none who have
any good evidence concerning their faith in Christ, can forbear rejoicing,
triumphing, wishing and praying; desiring, longing and hoping for this day of
Judgment, because Christ is to be the Judge at this day, if he do but consider
these things: But whether believers do now, as it may be they may not rejoice
in this through the weakness of their faith, and those many doubts and
untoward fears that are in him, and wont of meditation and serious
consideration concerning these things; yet when this day shall come, the sight
of Christ will fill them with joy and consolation; it will then, then it will
make them to leap and triumph: how glad were the Angels, the Shepherds, old
Simeon and others at the Birth of Christ, at his first coming? much more will
all true believers be glad and rejoice at his second coming, though it be to
Judgment, yea, therefore because it shall be to judgment. When Christ comes to
the soul in an Ordinance by his Spirit, believers you ^now how welcome he is;
had you ever greater joy in your lives? Cant. 3.4. what joy! what joy! O what
joy! believers, what joy, when Christ she I come personally at this day, for
then Christ will come to receive you to himself, John 14.2, 3. Christians, when
you think of the day of Judgment, think of this Scripture, Christ will then
come to receive you to himself, even thee, poor soul, who believe on him; The
first coming of Christ was great matter of joy: Abraham saw my day, (that is,
by faith) says our Savior; my day, that is, the day of his first coming, and
was glad; we also should now by faith look upon the day of this his second
comeing and be glad: But (as I said before,) if now we are not then we shall
Psalm. 96.10, 11. and Psalm. 98.4, 5. Thus it will be with all godly men and
women, and with all true believers at this day, Acts 3.19. Now your spirits may
be sad and heavy, your spirits may sink and droop; but then, O then, (my
Br^thren and Sisters in Christ,) we shall be refreshed, we shall be cheared and
revived, we shall have more comfort then ever we had sadness, more joy then
^ver we had sorrow, more peace then ever we had trouble; our spirits shall be
raised Figher in comfort, then ever they were dejected and c^st down with fear
and grief: we shall have as much joy at this day, as believers and wicked men
will have sorrow and terror; we shall be as willing to appear before Christ as
they will be unwilling, as ready and forward as they will be backward. When
this vo^ce shall found in your ears, Arise, O deal, Christ is come to
judgment, the Name of Christ will make your hearts to leap within you; O
blessed Jesus! what Jesus Christ on whom I have believed, who is the beloved of
my soul, who has shed his blood for me, is he come to judge me? so welcome
Jesus, welcome: I have waited long, long for him; is the time now past at an
end, is the Winter gone, is he now come? with all my heart, most gladly let me
appear before him; could any and would any hinder you from appearing before
him, you would even strive to go to him; you will even be impatient till you
have got near him, and never will you think your selves too near him.
Henceforth there is laid up for me, etc. 2 Timothy last 8. True believers love the
appearing of Christ now, how will they love it when it shall be: it comforts
them now to think of it, much more will it to see Christ, and well it may,
seeing then they are to receive a Crown from him. What joy is there when the
Bridegroom meets the Bride? what joy is there when Brethren and Friends meet
who have been long parted; such (such did I say) and a thousand times more will
thy joy be (O believer!) thy joy O now sad, weeping, sighing, groaning
believer, when thou shall meet Christ at Judgment, Romans 8.34 So I may say, Who
is he that shall condemn thee at this day it is Christ who is to be thy Judge;
surely if the devil (that accuser of the brethren) or any other, would speak
against thee, the sight of Christ upon the Tribunal-Seat, will silence them
all; yea, and thine own conscience too fully, however now it may trouble thee
and accuse thee, then it will acquit and free thee Christ being to be thy
Judge; thy Conscience will tell thee there is he that died for thee, and loves
thee; there is thy life, there is thy hope, thy righteousness, sanctification and
redemption; thy Friend, thy Brother, thy Advocate, thy Surety, thy Savior; thy
Judge is all these to thee. Was not the rising of the Sun welcome to the
Egyptians after their long night. So welcome will the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness be to thee at this day. Christ who accounts all that is done to
thee as done to himself, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? When I was hungry
ye fed me etc. Christ who will, and at this day, does reward those who do thee
any good, and punish those who do thee any hurt, he shall be thy Judge, think
then, will he do thee any hurt at this day? what good will he do thee? What
good will he not do thee? Christ is the best friend thou have in the world, the
best thou can have. He shall be thy Judge. Besides all this,

Consider in a word these two or three things.

1. Christ Jesus is to be thy Judge, and he is appointed to be thy Judge by God
himself; God shall judge the world by the Man whom he has appointed; so that
what Christ shall do at this day, God will own and stand to; its a
consideration not without comfort, that God himself has appointed to Christ to
be our Savior, that God sent Christ at first coming, and ^ent him to do what
he did, and suffer what he did, so also to me its a comfortable consideration,
that God has appointed Christ to be my Judge, that he will send him at his
second coming, and send him to do what then he shall do, and be what then he
shall be: God, against whom thy sins have been committed, will send Christ to
be thy Judge, whom he has sent to die for thy sins. It thou had committed
treason against some Prince and the Prince himself should appoint thy Brother
or Friend to be thy Judge, what would thou think of this; if Christ of
himself should come to be thy Judge (if that could be) what were this? thou
might fear (though he should judge well concerning thee) his Judgment might
not stand.

Secondly, there will for certain be no change in Christ as to his heart and
affection to his people at this day; his love and affection will be the same to
them that it was while here on earth; when he suffered for them on the Cross;
Christ loves them now in Heaven, as well as he did while here on earth, and so
he will at this day. So often it is with men, those to whom they were friends,
while in a low condition, they slight and despise, and are strange too when
they are raised; but it is not now, and will not then be so with Christ; Christ
was exceeding loving to, and tender over his people while he was here, as he
manifested many ways, so loving, so tender will he be to every one of them at
this day; yea surely, he will then show much more love to them, then he did
while here, in respect of his carriage to them; yea, may I not say, there will
be as much familiarity between them. But

Thirdly, consider when Christ shall be your Judge (beloved Christians) it will
be as the last Judgment, after which there shall be no Judgment, from which
there shall be no Appeal; to have the Judge of an inferior Court to be your
friend were not so much, but to have the Judge of the Chief and Supreme Court
your intimate, entire friend, from which there is no Appeal, this were
something indeed: The sentence that will pass from Christ at this day, it will
be a standing eternal sentence, that shall never so much as be questioned.

Fourthly, the sentence of life and happiness that Christ will pronounce to you
he himself will see made good, and make good, Mat. 25. Christ will say to the
wicked, Go ye Cursed; but to his people, Come ye blessed; what, go to Heaven,
either before or after. But come, come with me; Christ himself will accompany
them to Heaven; and therefore in that place beforementioned, I will come and
receive you to my self. See 1 These. 4.17. When once Christ and believers meet
at this day, they will never part, Christ will never leave them again, no, not
for a moment to eternity; Christ ^ill place every one in his Mansion about him.
Lastly, Christ will be your only Judge at this day; sometimes amongst men there
sits more Judges then one, but Christ will be your only Judge, Christ will be
for you, and there will be none against you, and none that you can think or
fear may be against you, because there will be none but Christ: Christ is our
only Savior, and he will be our only Judge.

SERMON II.
Use 3. IS it so, etc. Then let all unbelievers, all the enemies of Christ
think of this, this doctrine looks with a dismal face upon all such, and speaks
dreadful woe and misery to all such. Its full of sweetness, a breast full of
consolation to all true believers, (as you have heard but there is nothing but
bitterness and terror in it to all who shall live and die without Christ, and
enemies to him; and indeed all those who do live without, who will not believe
on him, they are enemies to him; He that is not with us is against ^s says
Christ; he that goes not to Christ by faith, is against Christ, an enemy to
him. Terror, terror from this doctrine to all such. And this is given by some
as a farther reason, why Christ shall be Judge at this day, that so this day
might have the more terror in it to all such. If God himself were immediately
to be the Judge, it would not be so terrible to wicked men; to have a man who
was like themselves (except sin) come to judge them, and such a one who was
offered again and again to them to be their Savior, who shed his blood, and
bore the wrath of God to make way for the salvation of sinners; and this was
told them many times, and they were entreated and invited to take Christ for
their Savior, and were told (from Christ his own mouth) for certain he would
not cast them out, if they would come to him but they should be freed from
wrath by him, and at this day receive eternal life from him; but yet they
hearing heard not, regarded not, but turned their backs upon Christ, despised
him, made light of him, breaking his Commands, contemning his Ordinances,
abusing his People. etc.

To have this Jesus Christ come to judge these Rebels against him, it must
needs be terrible, Rev. 1.7. All Nations shall wail because of him; that is,
all unbelievers and enemies to Christ in all Nations shall wail, not only
because that then they shall be judged, but because then they shall be judged
by him. This will set their Consciences against them in a terrible manner, when
this voice shall sound to them, Arise unbelievers, Arise wicked men, Jesus
Christ is come to judge you; then Conscience will tell them, O there is he who
was offered to thee to be thy Savior, but thou did refuse him: there^s he to
whom thou were often called to come by faith, but thou would not move in the
least toward him: Now he is come, he is come to judge thee; O what shall I do
then will thou think, is there no believing on him now? Conscience will answer,
No, no; but he is very merciful and compassionate, he laid down his life to
save sinners, surely he will be favorable and gentle to me: No, says
Conscience, he will be the more furious against thee, in that then thou would
not accept of him: Lo, he is now come in flaming! alas, alas, woe, woe, he is
now come in flaming fire to render vengeaence upon thee, 2 These. 1.7, 8. There
is not the least spark of love, mercy and compassion to be found in him now
toward thee, nothing but fire, nothing but wrath against thee. Think not you
who are ungodly sinners; you who are unbelievers think not, it will fare ever
the better with you at this day, because Christ shall be your Judge: No surely,
it will be worse for you, except you now turn, repent and believe. Think not,
that because Christ was so meek and loving while here on earth, that he will be
so to you at this day; yea, Christ was angry with wicked men while here upon
earth, Mark 3.5. much more will be angry with them when he shall be their
Judge, Rev. 6.16. Wicked men will not endure so much as to look Christ in the
face, Hide us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, (then which
nothing will be more lovely, amiable, refreshing and desirable to believers)
and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand? The wrath of the Lamb, where (by joining wrath and Lamb
together) this thought seems to be answered, Christ was as a Lamb while here on
earth, meek and patient, therefore surely he will not be severe at this day:
yes, but he will; he will be full of wrath against wicked men. The day of his
wrath: the day of Christ his first coming was a day of love and mercy, but the
day of his second comeing will be a day of wrath to all ungodly ones; and such
wrath that they shall not be able to stand at this day, Who shall be able to
stand? stand they shall, but it will be intolerable to them to stand, and sore
against their wills? Christ was as a Lamb at his first coming but to wicked men
he will at his second coming be as a Lion, as he is called, Rev. 5 5. Psalm
2.12. When his wrath is kindled but a little, how then will it fare with wicked
men when his wrath shall be kindled to the utmost. O unbelievers, who am I
speaking to, not to the walls, but to you? The Lord Jesus Christ who is to be
the Judge of the world now calls upon you to come to him; Come unto me, come
off from your ways of sin, own me, t^ke hold of me by faith; if you shall not
bear and obey, his voice will be quite contrary to you at this day, Depart ye
cursed, etc. Mat. 25.41. I would have freed you from the curse of the Law if
you would have believed on me, but you would not, now therefore you shall
suffer it; And so, I Jesus Christ, who offered to free you from it, pronounce
it against you, and in flict it upon you, Depart ye cursed; so Mat. 7.23. Then,
that is, at the day of Judgment, I will profess I never knew you, etc. This
will be the voice of Christ to every of you who hear me this day (and all other
whoever) who live in sin and unbelief; depart, but whither, not into the world
again; O that would be a pleasing word to sinners if it should be so, no, but
Depart into everlasting fire; Depart, whither? into Hell, where there is no
hing, but torment; and exquisite torment, as bad, yea, worse; worse, yea,
inconconceivably worse then fire: VVo is us, will sinners then think, and well
may they think. But how long must we be there? how long? a hundred years, a
thousand years; woe, woe is us indeed, what so long? In fire so long? yea, for
ever, ever, ever, depart into everlasting fire. O how will this word fill the
hearts of wicked men. Your hearts, O wicked men, (as many of you as are here)
if you continue such, thy heart O drunkard; thy heart, O prophaner of the
Sabbath; thy heart, O covetous wretch, etc. with the hearts of all other wicked
men; how I say will this voice fill such men's hearts with horror and
amazement. O heart-aking, trembling word* when Judges amongst men do pronounce
a sentence of death upon Malefactors, would not this make thy heart ache within,
and make thee even tremble every joint of thee: if for some crime such a
sentence should be past upon thee by a Judge on Earth; Depart to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, to be burnt, etc. what an astonishing word will this be to
thee, when Christ shall say, Depart, etc. but what shall my company be, may
wicked men think: Christ tells them, the devil and his Angels: but how long
will it be ere this fire be kindled, till this be fulfilled? will there be not
some time of respite before we shall go into the fire, seeing we must never
come out; no, it will be ready prepared and kindled, Depart into everlasting
Fire prepared, etc. Pray confider, it appears by the sentence, Jesus Christ
will not be mild and merciful to wicked men at this day, for these are the
words of Christ himself the Judge, he tells you he will say thus to wicked men
at this day. The People of God (as I told you) could not possibly have a Judge,
whose Presence would be more delightful; wicked men could not possibly have a
Judge, whose Presence, would, could be more terrible, more dreadful. Were the
worst enemy thou have (O unbeliever) to be thy Judge, yea, let me say, were the
devil himself to be thy Judge; it would not be so dreadful as to have that Lamb
Jesus Christ thy Judge. O unbelievers, the Lord Jesus shall be your Judge, who
knows what is in you, who knows your hearts and very thoughts, John 2.3, last.
Christ did while here on earth, and therefore be sure he will at this day;
there will be no deluding and deceiving Christ, my friends, who is to be your
Judge. Jesus Christ shall be your Judge, who is and ever was perfectly holy,
yea, as God, infinitely holy, more holy then the Angels; it cannot therefore go
well with sinners, that love sin and live in sin; That little holiness that is
in Gods people here, makes them even to hate wicked men (as such) and that with
a perfect hatred, and does and will Christ love them? Christ is to be your
Judge, who is an entire Lover of his Father and his Fathers glory; now the sins
of wicked men they are committed against God, and he is greatly dishonored,
and so injured by them, therefore he will undoubtedly be furious against wicked
men at this day? How angry was Moses (from that love to God which he had) with
those who caused Aaron to make the golden Calf, though he were the me^kest man
that ever was; yet they bad dishonored God, and Moses he is greatly wrath; He
breaks the Tables, ande. Exodus 30. If Moses that meek man were so angry with
the people for that one sin, how angry will Christ be (notwithstanding his
meekness,) when he shall come to punish wicked men for all their sins; Christ
shall be your Judge, O wicked men, who then shall be your Advocate, who shall
stand up to plead for you? O that I could but fully make known to you what will
be your misery at this day, and that upon this Account, because Christ shall be
your Judge; but truly I perceive it more then I can express it to you. Sure I
am, the sight of Christ upon the Throne, will be the dreadfullest sight to them
that ever they saw: It will be dreadful to them to see all the world on fire
about them, but more dreadful will the sight of Christ be to them. It must
needs be that Christ should look upon, and speak in a terrible manner to all
such, when he shall be their Judge. O wicked men, sin caused me to sweat drops
of Hood, it pierced me, crucified me, and put me into inconceivable torment in
bearing the wrath of God; and yet, (though you heard of this, you loved sin and
took delight in it; it was your meat and drink, a pleasure to you. All that
ever you had you had for my sake; you had never lived so long, never been out
of hell so long, never had had one hour of comfort, ease, rest and peace,
never the least good but for me; and yet I could have no love from you; and yet
you regarded me not at all; I required of you but to receive me, but to believe
on me that you might be saved by me, and yet that you would not, yea, and did
not so much as in truch seek, desire, and endeavor it. Of all things you
thought least of me, cared least for me, yea, even nothing for me; you carried
it to me as if I had been worth nothing; you did even what lay in you to
frustrate the end of my coming into the world and dying; had all carried it to
me as you did I had been no Savior. O unbelieving sinners, you have been
desperate enemies to me; think not now that you shall have the least friendship
from me; speak not a word to me, I will not hear you. I Will now make you to know
what it was to despise such a loving; suffering crucified Savior; I your Judge
am your enemy, I will now send you to a place where you shall never see, never
hear of me and mercy any more, to a place where you shall be ever learning by
your sufferings: how great my sufferings was which you despised, and what your
sin was to make light of such a Savior: I cannot now save you, I will not now
save you: yea, I Jesus Christ the Savior of the world condemn you to the
bottomless Pit: I who have the Keys of Hell, and of Death, Rev. 1.17. open Hell
to you, and inflict eternal Death upon you: had you closed with me, and owned
me, none should have hurt you; but now there is none that can, that will, that
shall help you: lean still upon your works, duties and good meanings, and
whatever else you leaned upon, and made a Savior of before, lean still upon
it, and see if it can keep you from that place whither I shall send you. O
unbelieving sinner! I could and would have saved thee once to the utmost, but
now I will destroy thee to the utmost. I had a Commission and full power to
make thee happy if thou would; I have now Commission and Power to make thee
miserable for ever. I told thee I would certainly save thee notwithstanding thy
sins if thou would come to me; I was very real and hearty in it, I would now
have been as good as my word, thou should now have found the truth of it, but
thou did question it, and would not believe me but thoughtst thy self too
great a sinner for me to save, (as it is with some) I now tell thee, thou shall
into everlasting fire; and I am as real in this as I was in that, and in that
as I am in this; question the truth of this if thou will, thy sense shall tell
thee presently, that I really mean as I say Yea, I told thee this before, in my
Word, and by my Ministers, that I would at this day send thee into everlasting
fire, if thou would not believe on me; but thou were not affected or moved by
this word, and did not believe it; the day I told thee of thou see is come,
the sentence I told thee I would pronounce, thy ears shall now hear, I now
pronounce it against thee; such as ye will or may be, the words of Christ to
thee, even to thee, to thee (I say) if thou do not come in, leave thy sin and
close with him; yea, more terrible, believe it, will his words be to thee for
the matter, then I can speak and tell thee; and for the measure of them, what
shall be wanting in the words of Christ to thee, thy conscience will make up,
and be making up in thee to Eternity? Will it not be dreadful, think you, at
this day for Judas who betrayed Christ, for those who came to take him (of whom
we read some went backward and fell on the ground) how fraid and amazed will
all those be at this day, when they shall stand before Christ his Tribunal, all
those who had any hand in putting him to death, to whom God gave not
repentance; all those who spet upon him, and mocked him, and smote him, and
cried out. Crucisie him; will it not be dreadful to them, think you, when they
shall see that same Jesus, whom they so dealt with, sitting as their Judge:
doubtless you will say yes; why, surely, my friends, it will be little less
dreadful to every one of you, who hearing of Christ yet refuse him, and
continue in your sins knowingly and wilfully under the light of the Gospel;
certainly, as there never was such love and mercy heard of, as Christ has
shown to the sinful sons of men in his suffering, so never was there such fury,
such wrath and indignation as Christ will show at this day, against all ungodly
men and unbelievers. Its not said. Christ will come in fire, taking vengeance
on those who crucified him, but on those who know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of his Son; yea, certainly it will even go worse at this time with you
who now live under the sound of the Gospel, and yet continue in sin and
unbelief then it will (a least) with some of them who crucified Christ, for
they did it ignorantly as Christ says, Father forgave them, for they know not
what they do; but you will not be able to plead ignorance; you know you should
be sober and constant in duty, etc. That you should believe on Christ, and yet
you do not, you will not.

Use 4. Exhort. 2. To move you to seek out for an interest in Christ; neither
is it an Argument that is empty and light, that has little in it. Both the
comings of Christ are strong Arguments to move sinners to come in and close
with him; Christ came into the world to save sinners, O therefore, to Christ,
my friends; close with him. Christ will come again to judge sinners, O
therefore also to Christ sinners, to Christ; take hold of him, own him in truth
for thy Savior, which if you shall the Use of Consolation from this doctrine
belongs to you, if not, the other use of terror is thy portion, believe it,
sinner. Men and Brethren, when you are called upon to believe on Christ, it is
indeed to believe on One who has been in the world, and now is gone out of it,
whom thou see not and can not now see, he being in Heaven, in glory, and
far above thee; but remember, think of it, it is yet to believe on one who will
come again, whom though yet thou have not seen, thou shall see. When you are
called upon to believe on Christ, you may think, who is Christ, where is
Christ, we see him not, we never saw him, he is gone out of the world: I but he
will, he certainly will come again, and that to judge thee, and then thou shall
see him: Had thou no need of Christ to be thy Savior, (as some possibly may
think they have but little need) yet seeing Christ shall be thy Judge, it
concerns thee to close with him. Its a high offense, yea, and an injury to
Jesus Christ, not to believe on him, yea, the greatest offense and injury that
can be offered to him, yea, that ever was offered to him: its worse then to
crucify Christ; many of those who crucified Christ will be saved by him at
this day, so many as did believe on him, as several of them did, Acts 2. Peter
tells them they had crucified the Lord of Life, and they being pricked at the
heart, cry out, Men and brethren-what shall we do? Peter tells them, They must
believe on Christ, and 3000 of them were added to the Chrich: so that to
believe on Christ, is more pleasing to God and Christ then crucifying of Christ
was displeasing, and therefore nor to believe on Christ crucified is worse and
more displeasing then to crucify him: now pray tell me, Will it be, do you
think, for your advantage at this day, so to have displeased and injured Christ
your Judge? Doubtless this was one end why this truth was discovered to us,
that Jesus Christ shall come again and be the Judge of the world, that it might
be a motive to stir us up to believe on him. Were you never to have any thing
to do with Christ nor Christ with you, you might still reject and dispraise
him, it would not be such folly. But Jesus Christ is to be your Judge, O
therefore give ear, open your hearts to the Voice of God and Christ in his
Word, calling upon you to come to Christ and believe on him, Christ tells you,
If you believe not, you are condemned already, John 3 Certainly therefore he
will condemn you at this day if you do not: Christ tells you again, v. last,
that he who believes not on him shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him; therefore you may assuredly know, that if you die in unbelief
he will not give you life, but pour forth that wrath of God upon you, Mark last
16. He that believes not, (says Christ shall be damned; Christ speaks plain,
Remember it is the Word of Christ who is to be your Judge; who therefore, he
having said, that if you believe not you shall be damned, will, without any
hope to the contrary, not only condemn but damn you too at this day, if you
shall not believe on him. Certainly, there is none of you but must needs be
convinced from this doctrine (had there never been any thing else before said
to you about believing) that its best for you to believe on Christ, seeing its
that he requires and desires of you; neither certainly could you hear this
truth, but you would seek after faith, and be greatly troubled if you do not
believe, if you were not deluded and deceived. Now many are the delusions and
deceits whereby men are kept from being moved by this and such like truths;
amongst the rest this is even the chief and most common; though men do not
believe, yet they please themselves with a groundless hope that they do, I
shall therefore put you in mind of one place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 5.17. My
friends, Christ is to be your Judge, you cannot deny it; the Word of God
abundantly confirms it; now will he give eternal life to you except you believe
on him? he professes that he will not once and again, and you certainly cannot
think that he will; well then, do you believe on him? you will say (its lik^)
yes, you do, or you hope you do as well a^ any other: Hear now the Word of
God, If thou do believe on Christ thou art a new creature, etc. What say
thou, Is it so? have thou left thy old sins? art thou not the same man as ever
thou were? have thou not as hard a heart, as blind an understanding? do thou
not live as bad, or it may be a worse life then formerly thou did? art thou
not as profane, as vain, as worldly as ever? Or if thou have amended some
things, yet do not some old things remain still? do thou not live in some of
thy old lusts, and that with as much love to them, delight in them, and as
little trouble for them as ever; is it thus with thee? Secondly, are all things
become new with thee, are thy affections new affections, thy desires new
desires, thy love a new love, thy fear a new fear, thy delights new delights?
do thou desire grace in stead of the world, love God in stead of self and the
world, fear sin in stead of outward evils and God in stead of men? do thou
delight in duty, holiness and God, in stead of sin, vanity and the world? is
thy company also new? are thy thoughts, thy words and discourse new? ^is it not
thus with thee? Then if the Word of God be true, (and deny it if thou durst)
thou art not in Christ, that is, thou do not ^elieve on him; please thy self,
(if thou think good) with thy false hope, that thou do believe: but know
that Christ will try thee by this Scripture, (with such like) and judge of thy
faith according to it, and of thee according to thy faith, and then thou will
see thy folly, and for certain be turned into the place of unbelievers, which
place if thou would know. See Rev. 21.8.

Secondly, is it so that Christ is to be your Judge, then he exhorted to yield
obedience to the Commands of Christ; when you hear or read any of the Commands
of Christ, remember this, they are the Commands of him who is to be thy Judge:
would you know what the Commands of Christ are? I answer, all the Commands of
God are the Commands of Christ: the ten Commands are the Commands of Christ:
but more particularly and especially you may read what the Commands of Christ
are, in the fifth, sixth and seventh chapters of Matthew, besid^s other places:
Christ commands you to love your enemies, to pray, to (...) up for (...) selves
treasure in Heaven, to seck first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; to
do as you would be done by etc. these with the rest of the Commands of Christ
ye should obey, yea, must obey if ever it go well with you, when Christ shall
come to judge you: if you shall refuse to obey them, you may read what will be
your doom at this day, Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies that would not that I
should reign ever them, bring them ^ither and slay them before me.

Thirdly, beware how you make use of his Ordinances, Preaching the Gospel, the
Lords Supper, etc. Take heed how you hear, (says Christ,) the same I may say
concerning every Ordinance of Christ, take heed how you receive the Lords
Supper, take heed how you pray, how you make use of Baptisin, etc. Look to it
that it be according to his institution, and as he requires; if you use the
Ordinances that he has appointed in any way and manner but what he has
appointed, most certainly to your cost you will hear of it at this day, however
you may now make light of it, and plead for that which is either directly
contrary to his institution, or no way (at least) according to it. People
should take he^d how they make use of the Ordinances of Christ, and Ministers
also how they administer them, because they are the Ordinances and Institutions
of Christ, who is to be the Judge of us all.

Fourthly, hence be exhorted to beware how you carry to the friends of Christ,
and Ministers of Christ, as you love your selves, and desire Christ his good,
will at this day carry it well to them, for as you carry to them, so Christ
accounts you carry it to himself, Mat. 25. lat. In as much as you did it not to
one of these, you did it not to me: and for the Ministers of Christ. Mat 10.40.
He that receives you receineth me, etc. VVo be to those which despise and
injure the friends and servants of Christ, seeing Christ is to be their Judge.
Which consideration also may encourage the Ministers of the Gospel, and all
true believers, to undergo with patience all the hard usage and speeches of
wicked men against them for their faithfulness to Christ, his ways and truth;
certainly, in that Christ is to be their Judge they shall not lose their
reward, as those neither shall not who show them kindness^ s He that receives a
Prophet, (says Christ the Judge of the world, who is to reward every man
according to their works) in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Prophets
reward, and he that receives a righ^eous man in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive a righteous man's reward.

Lastly, hence be exhorted to beware how you take upon you the Name of Christ,
and how you make use of his Name. 1 Beware how you take upon you the Name of
Christ, that is, that you do not account and call your selves Christians, and
yet live in sin, as it is with many? what will Christ say to such when he shall
come to judge them; O thou wicked person, thou drunkard, was I ever such a one,
did I ever so, thou vain, profane, covetous, idle, railing person, etc? Did I
ever live after that manner? was not I holy, did I not in all things constantly
obey the Commands of God? how then durst thou to bear my Name upon thee, and
call thy self a Christian, as if I had lived as thou did? for truly that is
^ven implied, when a wicked man calls himself a Christian, a disciple of
Christ, what does he but even say, that Christ was such a one as he is, 2 Timothy
2.19. Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity; let
very one who calls himself a Christian, and would be called and accounted so
by others, endeavor to live as Christ did, or woe be to him also seeing Christ
is to be his Judge; its even as great a dishonor and disgrace as you can cast
upon Christ, to call your selves by his Name, and yet live in the devils ways.
Secondly, beware how you make use of the Name of Christ, and that either in
speaking to God or to men; when you speak of him one to another, speak not of
him as of other men, peak awfully and reverentially of him, and that in a
proper discourse, not upon every vain and trifling occasion: there is a taking
the Name of Christ in vain, as well as the taking of the Name of God in vain;
and as God says, God will not hold him guiltless who takes his Name in vain;
so when you use the Name of Christ to God in Prayer, look to it that it be with
faith on his Name, and that it be from a true love and respect to him; use not
his Name as a mere customary thing (as its to be feared i^s with the most: Its
the custom to say for Christ his sake, in and through Christ etc. and therefore
they say, as when they ask any mercy of God, and when they bless him for any
mercy. Remember this, no unbeliever can use the Name of Christ aright as he
ought to do: Christ is to be your Judge, certainly it will not go well on thy
side at that great day, if this shall stand upon Record, and be brought forth
against you; Thou did often use the Name of Christ, but thou had no love to
him, no faith on him, but after a vain and loose manner, as if he had bin a
mere fancy; or but a mean person, or one of whom thou stoodst in no great
need, and had no cause to fear and honor.

To the right making use of the Name of Christ in Prayer to God, it is required
as that you should have love to him, and faith on him, so that you should be
deeply sensible of your own vileness, and total absolute unworthiness to
receive any thing from God immediately; that you should indeed desire, expect
and hope for all that you a^k of God in his Name, for his sake and not in the
least for your own sake, or the sake of what you have, or have done, or for the
sake of your Prayers: yea, or for Gods sake; that is, for his mercy sake, and
his faithful sake in the Promise, without respect to Christ; every time you ask
any thing in Christ and do not so ask it, you take the Name of Christ in vain;
its highly displeasing both to God and Christ: And besid^s, here is also this in
it, That you will for certain go without whatsoever you so ask, though you ask
never so often and never so long, so (without repentance and pardon) you are
like to suffer for it when Christ shall come to judge; There Is many a man who
prays much but receives nothing, because he asks not in the Name of Christ: and
there is many a one who does ask in the Name of Christ verbally, in words; yet
not asking in his Name cordially, from his heart, and in a right manner, with
faith on his Name, and love to him, and a deep sease of his unworthiness to
receive any thing but through him, so as to desire, hope and expect it, only
for his sake, he goes without what he asks, and not only so, but pulls down
judgments from God in stead of mercies, and makes his condition far worse, and
himself a subject fitter for wrath when Christ shall come to judge him. the
same may be said of praising for any mercy that we receive: We ought not only
to praise God for mercy, but to praise for it in Christ; and that so, as really
to account the mercy received, to have come from God only for Christ his sake,
that is, from grace in Christ, etc.

FINIS.
Bridge's Remains, being Eight Sermons, viz.
1 Of Man's Blessedness. 2. Affections rightly Placed. 3. How to walk with God
in our Calling? 4 Of good and bad Company. 5. The Carnality of Professors. 6.
What our Work is, and how to be done? 7. Soul-Resignation into the Hands of
God. 8. The Dignity and Duty of Gods called ones.
A Discourse of Christ's coming. By Theoph. Gale.

The Nature and Principles of Love, as the End of the Commandment, declared in
some of the last Sermons of Mr. Joseph Caryl, with an Epistle of John Owen D.D.

All sold by John Hancock Sen. and Jun. at the three Bibles in Cornhill.


