MALEBRANCH's Search after Truth: OR, A TREATISE OF THE NATURE OF THE Humane
Mind. AND Of its Management, for avoiding Error in the SCIENCES.

To which is Added, The Authors Defense against the Accusations of Monsieur de
la Ville.

ALSO The LIFE of Father Malebranch, of the Oratory at Paris: With an Account
of his Works, and several particulars of his controversy with Monsieur Arnaud
Dr. of Sorbonne, and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written
by Monsieur Le Vasseur, lately come over from Paris.

VOL. II.

Done out of French from the Last Edition.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship at the Ship in Cornhil. 1695.

TO THE Marquess of Normanby.
My Lord,
THis Translation of the Second Volume of Father Malebranch's Recherche de la
Verite, Humbly begs the same Favorable Acceptance and Protection, as Your
Lordship was pleased to grant the First: Nor could I have any Temptation to
seek another Patron for it, either in respect of the Author or my Self. Every
one that has had the Honor to know Your Lordship, is very Sensible that You
have Successfully Studied Mankind in General, and are therefore a very good
Judge of this Subject. As for my Self, Your Lordships preventing Goodness, and
extreme readiness to serve me, has already outdone the utmost Ambition of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant Richard Sault.

The Life of Father Malebranch of the Oratory at Paris: With an Account of his
Works; and several Particulars of his Controversy with Monsieur Arnaud Dr. of
Sorbonne, and Monsieur Regis Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written by
Monsieur Le Vasseur, lately come over from Paris. Done into English by R. S.
FAther Nicholas Malebranch was Born at Paris of a considerable Family, in the
Year 1638. His Eldest Brother is now one of the Counselors in the first
Chamber of the Parliament at Paris; where he is disinguisht by his Integrity,
and other Qualifications that are proper to make a good Magistrate.

When Father Malebranch became of Age to choose an Employment suitable to his
Birth and Inclination, his Parents proposed to him to make him a Member of that
August Body; but he generously refused so handsome an Establishment, and
thought rather of retiring from the World, and devoting himself to the Church.

To this End, he chose the Congregation of the Priests of the Oratory; which
continually supplies France with Learned Divines, Excellent Preachers, and Men
capable of filing the most Eminent Dignities of the Church, Father Malebranch
spent the first Years of his retreat in studying Divinity and Languages,
necessary for the understanding of Holy Scripture and other Ecclesiastic
Authors. But as he felt a greater Pleasure and Inclination for those Sciences
that are acquired by Reasoning and Meditation, than for those which depended
only on Memory, and were founded upon Historical Facts, or the Writings of
Ancient Authors; he resolved to content himself with reading the Holy Scripture
attentively, and employing the rest of his Time in the Study of Metaphysics,
and the knowledge of himself.

The Book entitled, A Search after Truth, was the first Fruit of his
Meditations: Never was there any Book received with so great an Applause in
France, nor in other Countries, where they are curious in matters of Reason and
good Sense. All the World was surprised to see a Young Philosopher, who knew
Man better than the Celebrated Monsieur Des Carts his Master did at the end of
his days; and who had found the secret of writing upon abstracted things after
so noble and polite a manner. The Able Men of France, Italy, Germany, England
and Holland, earnestly sought his Acquaintance, and gave him particular Marks
of the Esteem which they had conceived for him. Madam, the Princess Elizabeth
Palatine, that Illustrious Scholar of Monsieur Des Carts, was so charmed with
his Search after Truth, that she resolved to make it her Manual, and to have it
always with her: Notwithstanding the Esteem her most Serene Highness had for
the Memory of Monsieur Des Carts, she easily confessed, that Father Malebranch
had outdone that great Philosopher, as to what regarded the knowledge of the
Humane Mind, and the Consequences of the Union of the Soul and Body. She wrote
to her Sister, Madam the Princess Louise, Abbess of Maubuisson in France, that
she was surprised, that having near her Abbey a Man of such merit, so rare and
so distinguished, that she had not sought his Acquaintance. What was most great
and extraordinary in Malebranch was, that he always preserved a Humility and
Modesty that was truly Christian, in the midst of all the Praises and Applauses
that he had received in his own Country and elsewhere. He was always watchful
over himself, and would not so much as hearken to so refined a Temptation, as
the greatest Philosophers of Antiquity have not been able to withstand.

It was with extreme Displeasure that Father Malebranch observed afterward
that certain Persons, otherwise persuaded of the solidity of the Principles of
the Cartesian Philosophy, which he had so happily explained, were not yet
sufficiently convinced of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and of the
Morals of Jesus Christ. Being troubled at the fatal blindness of these
Philosophers, he resolved to make use of the Principles in which they agreed
with him, to prove to them the Corruption of Man's Heart, and the necessity of
such a Mediator as Jesus Christ: To this end he Published a little Book of
Christian Conversations; and from that time, he only applied himself to make
use of the Truths which he had discovered, to prove the beauty and solidity of
that Divine Philosophy which Jesus Christ teaches us in the Gospel. What Glory,
what Honor is it, for a Christian Philosopher to have set in so full, and so
clear a light, the Reasons, which we can now so advantageously use against
Atheists, and the Enemies of the Gospel. With the Principles of Father
Malebranch we may boldly defy the Atheists to explain to us how the Blood
circulates in their Veins, how they feel Pleasure and Pain by means of certain
Motions which are excited in their Body, without supposing the Existence and
Action of an Infinite Perfect Being, who is only capable of punishing and
rewarding us: And if this pretended strength of Mind, of which our Atheists so
much boast, is baffled when they consider but a Bowl that is in motion, an
agreeable titillation, or Pain which they feed before the Fire; what if we
should desire them to explain the formation and increase of an almost infinite
number of Organized Bodies; to tell us bow this vast Machine of the Universe
could be formed and move of it self, after so just and regulated a manner, in
every thing that is necessary for its Conservation? What Comfort is it for us
to learn, that even the irregularities which appear in the World, and
concerning which the Enemies of our Religion reproach us with an insulting Air,
are certain marks of the infinite Perfection of the Author of Nature, who ought
to act always after a constant and uniform manner? So that the World would be
a Work less worthy a Being soveraignly perfect, if it were not subject to the
Irregularities, and seeming Disorders, wherewith they reproach us. Father
Malebranch had laid down all these great Principles in his Search after Truth,
and has since proved, and admirably well illustrated them in his Treatise of
Nature and Grace, in his Christian Conversations, and Dialogues upon
Metaphysics. We are also obliged to him for having taught us how to prove
invincibly to the profane, that the Precepts of the Morals of Jesus Christ are
Remedies so efficacious against the corruption of the Mind and Heart, and so
proper to redress both, that every equitable Person must ingenuously
acknowledge, these Remedies could not have been taught to the World, but even
by his Wisdom, who knew us perfectly: This is showed in his Christian
Conversations, and in the Treatise of Morality, which Father Malbranche
Published a little after.

Although the Book of Christian Meditations was composed in imitation of the
Soliloquies of St. Augustine, who endeavors to instruct himself by consulting
the Universal Reason, that is, the Wisdom of God himself, and the Light which
inlightens all Men: This manner of commerce betwixt us and the Divine Word,
appeared wholly new and extraordinary to the French, who had seen nothing like
it in their Language; even the Friends of Father Malebranch having received an
Essay of the Work, told him freely, That they knew not whether a Book of this
Nature would be well received in so nice and ridiculing an Age as ours. However
the Author was not discouraged, but continued his Book, and enriched it with
noble and lively Expressions; and his Imagination, that was always regular and
fruitful, furnished him with such fine and happy Turns, that his Adversaries
were constrained to confess, that the Book imposed upon them, and that the
Author had the secret of engaging his Reader, and making him relish his
Sentiments, in a work, whose very Design was enough to deter them from reading
it.

To content all the World, and explain yet further his Principles, which
Persons eminent for their Rank and Ability continually decryed, Father
Malebranch sometimes after, Published his Dialogues upon Metaphysics and
Religion. This is his Masterpiece; the greatest Reverencers of Antiquity in
France acknowledged, that these Dialogues were not inferior to those of Plato.
Indeed Father Malebranch has there showed as much Eloquence, Delicateness of
Wit, and Elevation of Mind, as is to be met with in the Works of this Athenian
Philosopher, whom the greatest Men, both Greeks and Latins, have looked upon as
their Master and Pattern.

Some of Father Malebranchs Friends, having desired him to explain to them what
he thought of the manner of reconciling Free Will with the operation of Grace,
which acts immediately upon Man's Will: He endeavored to show them, that the
System of those, who are called Jansenists in France, is altogether contrary to
Reason, and the Sensation we have of what passes in our selves. His Proofs
appeared so clear and convincing to some of those who conferred with him upon
this matter, that they renounced the Jansenian Sentiments, in favor of which
they had been prejudiced in their Studies of Divinity. It was this that gave
occasion to Father Malebranch to write his Treatise upon Nature and Grace. He
showed the Manuscript to several of his Friends, and was not displeased that
they communicated it to Monsieur Arnaud, who till then had appeared so charmed
with Father Malebranchs Books, that he could not forbear speaking well of them
to all the World.

But it is a strange and hard thing to encounter the favorite Prejudices of
certain Men; especially when they look upon them as Truths of Faith, for which
they will be Martyrs. The Treatise of Nature and Grace appeared to Monsieur
Arnaud, and his Disciples, as a dangerous Book, and full of Heresies; the
Author, whom that Party had admired so long as they believed him no Enemy of
the Opinions of Jansenius, became all of a sudden an Enthusiast, and the most
wretched Philosopher that had ever appeared in the World.

Monsieur Arnaud before he engaged in an exact refutation of that Treatise,
thought fit to ridicule his new Adversary, and make him pass for a Man who
believes he sees God, and supposes him Corporeal. This was the design that
Monsieur Arnaud proposed to himself in his Book of True and false Ideas; he
said nothing there which had any relation to the Dispute upon Grace and
Free Will, he endeavored only to divert the Reader upon account of a
particular Sentiment of F. Malebranchs about the Nature of Ideas: An Opinion
which he had read some Years before in the Search after Truth, and against
which he had nothing to object, till the Treatise of Nature and Grace was
unhappily Printed.

This procedure, so little becoming a Man of Monsieur Arnauds Reputation,
troubled Father Malebranch, who showed the Injustice thereof, and proved in his
Answer to Monsieur Arnaud, that this Doctor was pleased to disguise, or at
least did not well understand, the Sentiment which he would oppose. Certain
Persons will hardly be persuaded that Monsieur Arnaud (a Name that included
every thing amongst the Jansenists) did not well understand the Sentiment of an
Adversary which he was willing to refute with so much pains and application.
But does not Passion and Prejudice deceive the greatest Genius's? Is it not
this which often hinders them from comprehending what others less prejudiced
conceive easily?

After some Contestations upon the Miracles of the Old Testament, Monsieur
Arnaud came to the principal Question, which regards the manner how Grace acts
in Man. This is not a place to examine what was said on either side, nor does
it concern the Search after Truth. I shall only add, that if Monsieur Arnaud
pretends to have sufficiently proved that Father Malebranch favors
Semipelagianism, Father Malebranch might also reply, that he had evidently
showed Monsieur Arnaud maintained the Opinions of Calvin, and some other
Reformers, condemned in the Council of Trent.

A Jesuit having bethought himself to Publish a Book against Monsieur Des
Carts, his Disciples, under the borrowed name of Louis de la Ville, and to
accuse them to the Archbishops and Bishops of France, as Innovators, who
overturned the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and some other Articles commonly
received in the Church of Rome; the Author of the Search after Truth was not
forgot in the Catalogue of these new Heretics. F. Malbranche contented himself
with a short Answer to this Adventurer, whom the Prelates of France would not
so much as hear. Certainly it must be confessed, that these Gentlemen carried it
very prudently in so nice a conjuncture: For if they had declared that the
Cartesian Philosophy overthrew the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, they would
have found that the greatest part of the best Wits in France do not believe it:
And was not this to put the King of France under an unhappy necessity of
sending Dragoons into the Monasteries and Societies, and to an infinite number
of honest Men, to cause them to abjure the Errors of the Cartesian Philosophy?
So true is it that Devotees do not always see the fatal Consequences of an
Advice which impetuous Zeal dictates to those that are in Authority.

Monsieur Regis, well known by the Philosophy he has Published, having
undertaken to oppose some Sentiments of F. Malebranch: this Father neglected at
first to Answer his new Adversary; but when Monsieur Regis would have drawn an
advantage from the silence of a Man who plainly perceived himself unfairly
attacked, Father Malbranche published the last Year a short Answer to Monsieur
Regis. The name of Monsieur Arnaud was made use of in this Contestation, which
occasioned him to appear again upon the stage. In the Journal des Scavans at
Paris, he Printed two Letters addressed to F. Malebranch, who soon answered him,
and gave two Letters to the Journalist that were also Printed. Monsieur Cousin
left off his Correspondence with Monsieur Arnaud, and refused to put in his
Journal other Letters which M. Arnaud had written a little before his Death; we
shall doubtless see them in his Posthumous works; for it is not probable that
they will rob the Public of the Remains of so great a man. We shall be gainers
thereby two ways; F. Malbranche will break that silence which he seems to have
condemned himself to, and we shall have new Explanations upon some important
Difficult ties which M. Arnaud may have found in the Works of so hard an
Adversary.

I have but one thing more to say of F. Malebranch: It is; that his Heart
agrees perfectly with his Understanding: There is as much Vprightness in the
one, as Justness in the other: He is a Christian Philosopher, who acts as he
thinks. Never did any Man more perfectly regulate his Manners and Actions upon
the Principles of his Philosophy; Being persuaded that God is the only cause
which acts truly upon our Body and in our Soul. F. Malebranch accustoms
himself, upon every Sensation, upon every Perception, to elevate himself always
toward the Supreme Being, to humble himself in his Presence, and to praise him
continually: With what assurance does not he (as often as it is possible)
approach to the Throne of Grace of the Eternal High Priest, who continually
intercedes for us? With what fervor does he not beg to be admitted as a
Living Stone in the Structure of the Mysterious Temple, which this Divine
Architect builds up to the Glory of his Father? He is in a continual
watchfulness and attention over himself, to divert the Impressions which
sensible Objects may make upon his Body, and to stop whatever is capable of
exciting the Passions. He is the most sober and temperate Man in the World.

And if F. Malebranch so exactly observes his Duties toward God and himself,
he is not less regular in those which respect his Neighbor, He is tender and
compassionate to the unhappy, courteous and affable to all the World,
preventing and sincere in respect of his Friends, good and indulgent to all
those who injure him; Being persuaded, that the Love of his Neighbor ought to
have for its principal end, that Eternal Society to which we are called by the
Gospel. He endeavors to inspire all those who come near him, with Sentiments
of Piety and Religion; to procure as much as he can their Eternal Happiness,
which he earnestly desires day and night. In a word, F. Malebranch has drawn
his own Pourtraiture in his Treatise of Morality: To compose the greatest part
of which, he had no need of long and new Reflections upon the Duties of Man: He
has told us, without thinking of it, what he exactly practiced after he had
applied himself to the regulation of his Manners upon the Truths he had so
attentively Meditated, and so happily Explained.

A SEARCH AFTER TRUTH.
BOOK V. of the Passions.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Original of the Passions in general.
THE Mind of Man has two essential or necessary relations, which are very
different, the one to God, and the other to its Body; as it is a pure Spirit it
is essentially united to the Word of God, to the Eternal Wisdom and Truth, for
it is only by this Union that it is capable of thinking, as has been shown in
the 3d Book; as an humane Spirit it has an essential relation to its Body, and
because of this union, it is sensible, and imagines, as has been explained in
the First and Second Books. I call that sense or imagination of the Mind when
the Body is the natural or occasional cause of its thoughts, and that
understanding when it acts of it self, or rather when God acts in it, or when
his light enlightens it after many different manners, independantly of any
thing whatever that passes in its Body.

It Is the same in respect of the humane Will; as a Will, it essentially depends
upon the Love which God bears to himself, upon the Eternal Law, in a word upon
the Will of God; It Is only because God loves himself that we love any thing,
and if God did not love himself, or if he did not continually imprint upon the
Soul of Man a Love like to his, I mean that motion of Love which we receive for
good in general, we should love nothing, we should will nothing, and
consequently we should be without any will, since the will is nothing else but
the impression of Nature which carries toward good in general, as we have
often said before, Book I. Chapter I. and elsewhere.

But the Will as it is an humane Will, essentially depends upon the Body, for
it is only from the motions of the Blood and Spirits, that it perceives it self
agitated with all sensible Emotions; I therefore give the name of Natural
Inclinations to all the motions of the Soul which are common to us with pure
Intelligences, and some of those in which the Body has a great share, but
whereof it is only indirectly the Cause and the End, as I have explained in the
preceding Book; and here I design by the word Passions all the Emotions which
the Soul naturally feels by means of the extraordinary Motions of the Animal
Spirits and Blood, These are the sensible Emotions which shall be the Subject
of this Book.

Although the Passions are inseparable from the Inclinations, and Men were no
farther capable of sensible love or hatred than as they are capable of the
mental, yet I thought it would not be amiss to treat distinctly of 'em to avoid
confusion; Those that consider the Passions are much more strong and lively
than the Natural Inclinations, for other Objects, and which are always produced
from other Causes, will acknowledge, that it is not without reason that I have
separated things that are inseparable in their nature.

Men are only capable of Sensations and Imaginations as they are capable of
pure Intellections, the Senses and Imagination being inseparable from the Mind,
however no one has opposed a distinct Treatise of these two Faculties of the
Soul, although they are naturally inseparable.

In fine, the Senses and Imagination don't differ any more from the pure
Understanding, than the Passions do from the Inclinations, so that we must
distinguish these two last Faculties as it has been usual to do with the three
first, that we may be better able to discern what the Soul receives from its
Author by means of the Body, from that which it has from him independent of the
Body. The only inconvenience that will naturally result from the distinction of
these two things thus naturally united, will be (as it happens upon like
occasions) a necessity of repeating some things which have been already said.

Man is one, although composed of many parts; and the union of these parts is
so strict, that it cannot be touched in one place without affecting the whole:
all his Faculties have such a mutual dependence upon one another, and are so
subordinate, that it is impossible to explain any one of 'em without speaking
something of the other; Thus by endeavoring to avoid confusion, I am obliged
10 repetition, but it is better to repeat than confound, because my business is
to write as clear as I can, and in this necessity of repetition, I can only
endeavor so to repeat as not to be troublesome to my Reader.

The Passions of the Soul are Impressions of the Author of Nature, which
incline us to love out Body, and whatever may be useful to its preservation: as
the Natural Inclinations are the Impressions of the same Author, which chiefly
incline us to love him as the Soverain Good.

The natural or occasional Cause of these Impressions is the motion of the
Animal Spirits to beget and cherish an agreeable disposition to the Object
which is perceived; so that the Mind and Body are mutually assistant on this
occasion. For it is the Order of God, that the Motions of our Body which are
proper to execute the Order of our Will should follow it, and that the Motions
of our Body which are mechanically excited in us at the sight of any Object,
should be accompanied with a passion of our Soul which inclines us to will that
which appears useful to the Body; it is this continual impression of the Will of
God upon us, which so strictly unites us to a portion of Matter, and if this
impression of his Will should but cease for one moment, we should from that
moment be, freed from the dependence we have upon all the changes which happen
to our Body.

I cannot comprehend how some persons imagine that there is an absolutely
necessary connection between the Motions of the Spirit and Blood, and the
Emotions of the Soul, some little particles of Choler are violently moved in
the Brain, therefore the Soul must necessarily be agitated with some Passion,
and this Passion must rather be Anger than Love; What relation can be conceived
betwixt the Idea of an Enemies Imperfection, a Passion of Contempt or Hatred,
and betwixt the Corporeal Motion of some Particles of Blood which beat against
some parts of the Brain? How can a Man persuade himself of such a dependence?
and that the Union or Alliance of two things so different and incompatible as
Mind and Matter, can be caused and preserved after any other manner than by the
continual, and Almighty, and Omnipotent Will of the Author of Nature?

Those who think that Bodies do necessarily and of themselves communicate
Motion in the moment of their Concourse, think something like truth, for indeed
this prejudice has some foundation, Bodies seem to have an essential relation
to Bodies, but the Mind and Body are two kinds of Beings so opposite, that
those who think the Emotions of the Soul do necessarily follow the Motions of
the Spirits and Blood, think something that has not the least appearance of
truth, certainly it is only our own Consciousness of the Union of those two
Beings, and our Ignorance of the continual Operations of God upon his
Creatures, which makes us imagine another Cause of the Union of our Soul and
Body besides the Will of God.

It is difficult to determine whether this relation or connection of the
thoughts of Man's Mind with the Motion of his Body, is the Punishment of Sin or
the Gift of Nature, and some Persons believe it would be rashness to decide
either way; it is well known that Man before Sin was no Slave, but absolate
Master of his Passions, and by his Will did easily stay the agitation of the
Blood which caused them; But I should be hardly persuaded that the Body did not
solicit the Soul of the first Man to an enquiry after things which were
proper for the preservation of his Life, or that Adam before his Fall was
insensible that Fruits were agreeable to his sight, and pleasant to his taste,
especially if I may believe the Scripture, and that this so just, so mavelous
an Economy of his Senses and Passions for the preservation of his Body was a
Corruption of Nature rather than the first Institution.

Doubtless Nature is now corrupted, the Body acts with too much power upon the
Mind, instead of submissively representing to it its necessities, it tyrannizes
over it, and ravishes it from God, to whom it ought to be inseparably united,
and continually prompts it to a pursuit of such sensible things as may be
proper for its conservation, the Mind is become as it were immaterial and
earthy by Sin, that relation and Essential Union which it has with God is lost,
I mean God has withdrawn himself from it, as much as possible without
destroying or annihilating it. Innumerable disorders have followed the absence
or estrangement of him who kept it in order, and without making a longer
enumeration of our Miseries, Man is by the fall thoroughly corrupted in all his
parts.

But this fall has not destroyed the Work of God, that which God gave to the
first Man is always sound in him, the immutable Will of God which constitutes
the Nature of every thing, was not changed by the levity and inconstancy of
Adam s Will: every thing that God did Will he yet Wills, and because his Will
is efficacious, he effects whatever he Wills. Man's Sin was indeed the occasion
that the Divine Will did not constitute the Order of Grace, but Grace is not
contrary to Nature, the one destroys not the other; Because God fights not
against himself, he never repents, and his Wisdom having no limits, his Works
will have no end.

The Will of God which constitutes the Order of Grace is joined to that Will
which effects the Order of Nature, not to change it, but to repair it. There
are only two General Wills in God, and whatever is well regulated in the World
depends upon one of these; The Passions are very well ordered, if they are only
considered in order to the Bodies preservation, although they sometimes deceive
us in few and particular Cases, which the Universal Cause has not willed to
remedy; we may then conclude that the Passions are of the, Order of Nature,
though they cannot be of the Order of Grace. It is true, if we consider that
the Sin of the first Man has deprived us of the assistance of a God that is
Omnipresent, and always ready to defend us, it may then be said that Sin is the
Cause of our relation to sensible things, because it has separated us from God
by whom only we can be delivered from their Slavery.

But without insisting any longer upon an Enquiry after the full Cause of our
Passions, let us examine their extention, their nature in particular, their
end, their use, their defects, and whatever relates to 'em.

CHAP. II. Of the Union of the Mind with Sensible Things, or of the power or
extension of the Passions in General.
IF all those who read this Work would be at the trouble of reflecting upon
what they feel in themselves, it would be needless to show here the dependence
we have upon sensible Objects; I can say nothing in this matter which all the
World does not know as well as my self if they will but think; so that I would
forbear to say any of it, if experience did not teach me, that Men are so very
forgetful of themselves, that they do not so much as think upon what they feel,
nor enquire into the reasons of what passes in their Mind: I thought it
necessary to say some things here which may prepare 'em to reflect upon it; and
I hope that those who know 'em already will not be uneasy at the reading of
'em: for although we are not delighted with the bare repetition of what we know
already, yet we may be pleased with the repetition of what we know and think of
at the same time.

The most honorable Sect of Philosophers, and that whose Opinions many Men do
now think it their glory to embrace, would persuade us that it is in our own
power to be happy: The Stoics continually tell us of self dependence, Jam
beatum esse te judica cum tibi in te goudium omne nasc. tur: cum in his que
homines eripiunt, optant, custediunt, nihil inveneris, non d^co quod malis, sed
quod velis, Sen. Ep. 124.
that we must not be afflicted at the loss of our Reputation, Goods, Friends,
or Relations; That we must be always of an even temper of Mind, and easy
whatever happens, whether Exile, Injuries, Affronts, Distempers, and even Death
it self, for these are not Evils to be feared; In fine, they tell us of many
such like things, which we are enough inclined to believe, as well because our
Pride makes us in love with Independence, as because our Reason tells us, that
indeed the greatest part of these Evils which really afflict us, were incapable
of doing it, if all things were in order.

But God has given us a Body, and by this Body united us to all sensible
things; Sin has subjected us to our Body, and by our Body has made us dependent
upon all sensible things; This is the order of Nature, this is the Will of the
Creator, that all Beings which he has made should be united together; thus we
are united to all things, and it is the Sin of the first Man which has made us
dependent upon all Beings to which God has only allied us; Thus is there none
that is not now united and wholly subjected to his Body, and by his Body to his
Relations, his Friends, his City, his Prince, his Country, his Clothes, his
House, his Lands, his Horse, his Dog, to all the Earth, the Sun, the Stars, to
all the Heavens.

It Is therefore ridiculous to tell Men, that it is in their power to be Happy,
Wise, and Free, and they only mock those whom they seriously advise not to be
afflicted at the loss of their Friends or Goods, it is even as ridiculous to
advise Men not to feel pain when they are beaten, or not to be pleased when
they eat with an appetite; Thus the Stoics are either unreasonable, or mock us
when they preach to us to be easy under the death of a Father, the loss of
Goods, Exile, Imprisonment, and such like things, and not to rejoice at the
good success of our Affairs, for we are united to our Country, our Goods, our
Relations, etc. by a Natural Tie, which now depends not upon our Will.

Indeed I cenfess that Reason teaches us to suffer Exile cheerfully, but the
same Reason tells us we ought to endure the cutting off an Arm without pain;
The Soul is above the Body, and according to the light of Reason, a Man's
happiness or unhappiness ought not to depend upon it; but Experience
sufficiently proves to us that things are not as our Reason tells us they
should be, and it is ridiculous to Philosophize against Experience.

Christians don't philosophize after this manner, they confess that pain is an
evil, that it is not without uneasiness that they are ravished from those
things to which Nature has united them; and that it is a difficult thing to be
delivered from the slavery into which Sin has reduced us. They grant that it is
a disorder that the Soul depends upon the Body, yet so as that it may be
delivered from this dependence by the Grace of Jesus Christ. I feel, says St.
Paul, a law in my Body which fights against the law of my Mind, and which
enslaves it to the Law of Sin which is in my Members; unhappy Man that I am!
Who shall deliver me from this Body of death? it will be the Grace of God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Son of God, the Apostles, and all his true
Disciples do recommend patience to us above all things, because they knew that
he that will live holily must endure affliction. In short, true Christians or
true Philsophers say nothing which is not agreeable to good Sense and
Experience, but Universal Nature does continually contradict the Opinion or
Pride of the Stoics.

Christians know, that to deliver themselves in some manner from the dependence
they are in, they must labor to deprive themselves of all things which they
cannot enjoy without pleasure, nor be deprived of without pain; that that is
the only means to preserve the peace and liberty of Mind, which they have
received by the Grace of their Savior. The Stoics on the contrary following
the false Idea's of their Chimerical Philosophy imagined themselves wise and
happy, and that there needed no more than to think on Virtue and Independence,
to become Virtuous and Independent. Reason and Experience tells us, the best
way not to suffer the pain of pricking, is to avoid being pricked. But the
Stoics say, Prick me, and by the force of my Mind, and help of my Philosophy, I
will separate my self after such a manner from my Body, that I will not feel
whatever passes there. I can demonstrate, that my happiness depends not upon
it, that pain is not an evil; and you shall see by the air of my Face, and firm
posture of all the rest of my Body, that my Philosophy makes me invulnerable.

Their Pride maintains their Courage; but it does not hinder them from
effectively suffering Pain with some inquietude, nor prevent them from being
Miserable. Thus the union they have with their Body is not destroyed, nor their
pain dissipated; but the union they have with other Men, fortified by the
desire of their esteem, in some measure resists this other union they have with
their own Bodies. The sensible sight of those who look upon them, and to whom
they are united, stays the course of the spirits which accompany pain, and
effaces the air that would be imprinted on their Countenance; for if no body
looked upon them, this air of Constancy and freedom of Mind would immediately
vanish. Thus the Stoics only in some measure resist the union that they have
with their Bodies, by becoming greater Slaves to other Men, to whom they are
united by the passion of glory. It Is then a certain truth, that all Men are
united to all sensible things, both by Nature and Concupiscence; we
sufficiently discover it by Experience, although Reason seems to oppose it, and
almost all the actions of Men are sensible and demonstrative proofs of it.

Though this union is common to all Men, yet it is not of an equal extension
and power in all; for it follows the knowledge of the Mind; we may say we are
not actually united to unknown Objects; a Countryman in his Cottage does not
interest himself in the glory of his Prince or Country, but only in that of his
own or Neighboring Villages, because his knowledge extends no farther.

The union we have to such sensible Objects as we have seen, is stronger than
that we have to those we have imagined, and which we have only heard of. It Is
by Sensation that we unite our selves more strictly to sensible things; for
Sensation produces much greater Traces in the Brain, and excites a much more
violent motion in the Spirits than the Imagination only.

This union is not so strong in those who continually oppose it, that they may
adhere to the goods of the Mind, as in others who follow the motions of their
Passions, and permit themselves to be subjected to them; for desire augments
and fortifies this union.

In fine, different Employs, different Conditions, as well as different
Dispositions of Mind, make a considerable difference in the sensible Union that
Men have with Earthly Goods. The great are united to many more things than
others, their slavery is farther extended. A General of an Army is united to
all his Soldiers, because they all reverence him: This slavery often creates
valor; and the desire of being esteemed of all those who look upon him, often
obliges him to sacrifice other more sensible and more reasonable desires to it.
It is the same with those that are in power, or that are popular. It Is vanity
often which animates their virtue; because the love of glory, is commonly
stronger than the love of truth. I speak here of the love of glory, not as a
simple inclination, but as a passion; because indeed this love may be sensible,
and it is often accompanied with very lively and violent emotions of the
spirits.

Different Ages and Sexes are also the chief causes of the Passions of Men.
Children do not love the same things, as the adult and aged do; or, at least,
not with so much force and constancy. Women are united only to their Family and
Neighborhood, but Men to their whole Country; It Is their part to defend it,
they choose great Places, Honors, and Commands.

There is so great a variety in the Employments and Affairs of Men, that it is
impossible to express it. The disposition of the Mind of a Married Man is not
the same with one that is a Bachelor; the care of his Family does often wholly
take up his thoughts. Monks have neither a Mind nor a Heart inclined like other
Men, nor even like other Ecclesiastics, they are united to fewer things, but
they are more strongly united to them. We may thus speak in general of the
different Conditions of Men; but we cannot explain the little sensible
engagements which are almost all of them different in each particular Person;
for it often enough happens that Men have particular engagements entirely
opposite to those they ought to have in reference to their Condition. But
although we may in general terms express the different Characters of the Mind,
the different Inclinations of Men and Women, old and young, rich and poor,
learned and ignorant, and in short of the different Sexes, Ages, and
Employment, Yet these things are too well known to those who live in the World,
and who reflect upon what they see, to swell this Volume with them. We need but
open our Eyes to be agreeably and solidly instructed in these things. For those
who choose rather to read them in Greek, than to learn them by any reflection
upon what passes before their Eyes; I refer them to the Second Book of
Aristotle's Rhetoric; which I believe is the best Piece of that Philosopher's,
because few things are there said that can deceive us, tho he seldom proves
what he advances.

It is then evident, that this sensible Union of the Mind of Men, with whatever
has any relation to the preservation of their lives, or the Society whereof
they consider themselves as Members, is different in different Persons, since
it is most extensive in those that have most knowledge, are most noble, have
the highest Employments, and greatest Imaginations; and and that it is more
strict and stronger in those who are most Sensible, have the most lively
Imagination, and who most blindly follow the motions of their Passions.

It is very useful often to reflect upon the almost infinite Manners whereby
Men are tied to sensible Objects; and one of the best ways to become very
knowing in these things, is to study and observe our selves. It Is by the
experience of what we feel in our selves, that we are instructed in the
knowledge of all the inclinations of other Men, and of the Passions they are
subject to: But if to these Experiments we add the knowledge of their
particular Engagements, and that of the Judgments proper to each of the
Passions, of which we shall afterward speak, it may be we shall not have so
much difficulty to guess at the greatest part of their Actions, as Astronomers
have to predict Eclipses. For although Men are free, it is very rare that they
make a good use of their liberty, against their natural inclinations and
violent passions.

Before we end this Chapter we must farther remark, that it is one of the Laws
of the Union of the Soul and Body, that all the Inclinations of the Soul, even
of those it has for the goods that have no relation to the Body, are
accompanied with the emotions of the Animal Spirits, which make these
Inclinations sensible; because Man, not being a pure Spirit, it is impossible
that he should have any inclination so pure as to have no mixture of any
passion. Thus the love of Truth, Justice, and of God himself, is always
accompanied with some Traces of the Brain, which renders this knowledge more
lively, but commonly more confused. It is true, that very often we do not
discover that our Imagination is a little employed, at the same time we
conceive an Abstracted Truth: The reason is, because these Truths have no
Images or Traces instituted by Nature to represent them, and all Traces which
stir them up have no other relation to them, but that of Man's Will, or chance
which has so placed them. For Arithmeticians, and even Algebraists, who only
consider Abstracted Things, often make use of their Imaginations to keep their
Minds fixed upon these Idea's. Ciphers, Alphabetical Letters, and other Figures
which they see or imagine, are always joined to these Ideas; although the
Traces which are formed by these Characters have no relation to them, and so
can make them neither false nor confused: And thus by a regulated use of
Figures and Letters, they discover the most difficult Truths, which otherwise
it would be impossible to find out.

The Idea's of things which can only be perceived by the pure Understanding,
may then be connected to the Traces of the Brain; and the fight of Objects that
we love, hate, and fear by a Natural Inclination, may be accompanied with the
motion of the Spirits: It is plain that the thought of Eternity, the fear of
Hell, the hopes or an Eternal Happiness, although they be Objects that strike
not the Senses, yet may excite violent Passions in us.

So that we may say we are united after a sensible manner, not only to all
things that relate to the preservation of Life; but also to Spiritual things to
which the Mind is immediately united by it self. It even happens very often:
that Faith, Charity, and Self-love make this union to Spiritual things
stronger, than that whereby we are joined to all sensible things. The Souls of
true Martyrs are more united to God than to their Bodies; and those who die to
maintain the truth of a false Religion, sufficiently show that the fear of Hell
has more power over them than the fear of death has. There is often so much
heat and prejudice on both sides in Religious Wars, and in the defense of
Superstitions, that we cannot doubt but there is some Passions in them; and
such a one as is stronger and much more constant than any other, because it is
built upon an appearance of Reason, as well in those that are deceived as in
others.

We are then by our Passions united to what ever appears to us to be a good or
evil to the Mind, as well as to what ever seems to be so to the Body. There is
nothing which we can discover to have any relation to us, which is not capable
of affecting us; and amongst all the things that we know, there is none that
has not some relation to us: We have always some interest even in the most
abstracted Truths, when we know them, because at least there is that relation
of knowledge between them and our Minds. They are ours, if I may so say, by our
knowledge. We feel that they hurt us when we dispute them, and if they hurt us,
it is certain that they agitate and disquiet us. Thus the Passions have so vast
a dominion and extension, that it is impossible to conceive any thing in
respect to them, whereof we could be certain, although all Men were exempt from
their empire. But let us now see what their Nature is, and endeavor to
discover all things they comprehend.

CHAP. III. A particular Explanation of all the changes that happen to the Body
and Soul by means of the Passions.
WE may distinguish seven things in each of our Passions, except in Admiration,
which also is but an imperfect Passion.

The first is the Judgment the Mind makes of an Object, or rather the confused,
and distinct view of the relation this Object has to us.

The second is a new determination of the motion of the Will toward this
Object, supposing it be, or appears to be a good. Before this view the Natural
Motion of the Soul, either was intermixed, viz. carried toward good in
general, or it was otherwise determined by the knowledge of some other
particular Object. But in that moment the Mind perceived the relation this new
Object had to it, this general Motion of the Will is forthwith determined
conformably to what the Mind perceives. The Soul draws near to this Object by
its love, that it may taste it, and discover its good by the sensation of
sweetness, which the Author of Nature gives it as a Natural Recompense for its
inclining to good. It judged that this Object was a good by an abstracted
Reason which affected it not; but it remains convinced by the efficacy of
Sensation, and the more lively this Sensation is, the stronger it unites to the
good it seems to produce.

But if this particular Object be considered as evil, or as capable of
depriving us of any good, no new determination happens to the Motion of our
Will; but only an augmentation of Motion toward the good opposite to this
Object which appears, an evil, which augmentation is so much the greater, as
the appearing Evil is more to be feared. For indeed, we hate only because we
love, and an External Evil is judged as such, only because it deprives us of
some good: Thus Evil being considered as the privation of Good, to fly Evil, is
but to fly the privation of Good, which is the same thing as to incline toward
good. There happens no new determination then in the natural motion of the Will
at the meeting with an Object, which displeases us; but only a sensation of
pain, disgust, or bitterness that the Author of Nature has imprinted in the
Soul as a natural pain, because it is deprived of good. Reason alone would not
be sufficient to carry us to it, there must also be stir it up. Before Sin
sensation was no pain, but only a warning; because, as I have already said,
Adam might when he would stop the motion of the Animal Spirits which would
cause pain; so that if he felt pain, 'twas because he willed it as a good; or
rather he felt it not, because he would not feel it.
So that in all the Passions, all the motions of the Soul toward good, are
only motions of love. But because we are touched by diverse Sensations according
to the different circumstances which accompany the prospect of the good, and
motion of the Soul toward it; we confound the Sensations with the emotions of
the Soul, and we imagine as many different motions in the Passions as there are
different Sensations.

Now we must here observe that Pain is a real and true Evil, and that it is no
more the privation of Pleasure, than Pleasure is the privation of Pain; for
there is a difference between not feeling Pleasure, or being deprived of the
sensation of it, and actually suffering Pain; so that all Evil is not such
precisely, because it deprives us of good; but only, as I have shown, the Evil
which is External, and which is not a manner of being that is in us.
Nevertheless, as by Goods and Evils, we generally mean things Good and Evil,
and not the Sensation of Pleasure and Pain, which are rather Natural Marks
whereby the Soul distinguishes Good from Evil; it seems that we may say without
equivocation, that Evil is only a privation of Good, and that the Natural
motion of the Soul, which drives us from Evil, is the same with that which
inclines us to Good. For all Natural Motion being an impression of the Author
of Nature, who acts only for himself, and can only incline us toward himself;
The true Motion of the Soul is always an essential love of good, and but an
accidenttal aversion to evil.

It is, true, that Pain may be considered as an Evil; and in this sense the
Motions of the Passions that it excites is not real; for we do not will Pain;
and if we will positively that Pain should not be, it is because we would
positively preserve or perfect our Being.

The third thing that we may observe in every Passion, is the Sensation which
accompanies them: for the Sensation of Love, Aversion, Desire, Joy, Sorrow, are
always different in different Passions.

The fourth is a new determination of the course of the Spirits and Blood
toward the External parts of the Body, and toward the Internal ones: before
the sight of the Object that moves the Passion, the Animal Spirits were
dispersed through all the Body, to preserve all the parts of it in general; but
at the presence of this new Object the whole Economy is troubled, the greatest
past of the Spirits are pushed into the Muscles of the Arms, Legs, Face, and
all the External parts of the Body, to put them in a proper disposition for the
Passion that Rules; and to give it the necessary posture and motion for the
acquisition of good, or to fly the evil that presents it self; but if its own
Forces are not sufficient to answer its occasions, these same Spirits are so
distributed that they Mechanically make it utter certain words and cries, which
diffuse over the Face and the rest of the Body such an Air as is capable of
agitating others with the same Passion it self is moved with. For, as Men and
Animals are united together by the Eyes and Ears, when any one of them is
agitated, he necessarily moves all those that look upon him and hear him, and
naturally makes an impression upon their imagination which interests them in
his preservation.

As for the rest of the Animal Spirits, they violently descend into the Lungs,
Liver, Spleen, and the rest of the Bowels, to demand Contributions from all
those parts, and hasten them in a little time to furnish necessary Spirits to
preserve the Body in the extraordinary action it must be in.

The fifth is the sensible emotion of the Soul, which feels it self agitated by
the unexpected overflowing of the Spirits. This always accompanies the motion
of the Spirits, so that it interests it self in whatever affects the Body; even
as the motion of the Spirits are excited in the Body as soon as the Soul is
carried toward any Object: the Soul and Body being mutually united, their
motions are reciprocal.

The sixth, are the different Sensations of Love, Aversion, Joy, Sorrow,
Desire, caused not by the intellectual fight of good or evil, as those we have
already spoke of, but by the different shakings that the Animal Spirits cause
in the Brain.

The seventh is a certain Sensation of Joy, or rather of inward Complacency,
which stops the Soul in its passion, and assures it, that it is in the condition
that is proper for it, in relation to the Object it considers. This internal
Complacency generally accompanies all the Passions, those which proceed from
the prospect of an Evil, as well as those that proceed from the prospect of a
Good, Sorrow, as well as Joy. It Is this Complacency that renders all our
Passions agreeable, and which inclines us to consent and abandon our selves to
them. In short, it is this Complacency that must be overcome by the delight of
Grace, the joy of Faith, and Reason. For as the joy of the Mind always results
from the certain or evident knowledge, that we are in the best estate we can
be, in relation to the things we perceive; so the Complacency of the Passions
is a Natural Consequence of the confused Sensations we have, that we are in the
best condition we can be, in relation to the things we feel. Now by the joy of
the Mind and delights of Grace we must conquer the false Complacency of our
Passions, which makes us slaves to sensible goods.

All these things we have spoke of occur in every Passion, when they are
excited by confused Sensations, and that the Mind perceives neither the good
nor evil which can cause them, for then it is plain the three first things are
not concerned in them.

We likewise see that all those things are not free, that they are in us
without our consent, and even against it since the Fall; and that there is only
the consent of our Will which truly depends upon us. But it seems necessary to
explain all these things more at large, and to render them more sensible by
some Examples.

Let us suppose then that a Man has actually received some affront, or that
being naturally of a very lively and quick imagination, he has been agitated by
some accident, as a disease, a melancholy retirement, or the like, and imagines
to himself in his Closet, that such a Person, who does not so much as think
upon him, is willing and prepared to hurt him. The sensible prospect or
imagination of the relation which is betwixt the actions of his Enemy and his
own Designs, will be the first cause of his Passion.

It is not even absolutely necessary that this Man should receive or imagine he
received some affront, for the motion of his Will to receive some new
determination: It is enough that he think it in his Mind only, without the
Body's having any part in it. But as this new determination would not be a
determination of Passion, but a pure inclination very weak and languishing, we
should suppose that this Man actually suffers some great opposition in his
designs, or that he strongly imagines that he shall do so, rather than make
another supposition wherein the Senses and Imagination have little or no share.

The second thing we may consider in the Passion of this Man, is an increase of
the motion of his Will toward the good, the possession whereof his real or
imaginary Enemy would hinder him; and the increase is so much the greater, as
the opposition that would be made, appears stronger to him. He first hates his
Enemy, only because he loves this good, and his hatred is so much the greater,
as his love is stronger; because the motion of his Will in his hatred is here
in effect only a motion of love, the motion of the Soul toward good, not
differing from that whereby we fly the privation of it, as has been already
said.

The third thing is the Sensation proper to the Passion, and in this it is a
Sensation of Hatred; The motion of Hatred is the same as that of Love, but the
Sensation of Hatred is quite different from that of Love, which every one may
know by his own experience. Motions are actions of the Will; but Sensations are
modifications of the Mind. The Motions of the Will are the Natural Causes of
the Sensations of the Mind; and these Sensations of the Mind in their turn
maintain the Motions of the Will in their determination. The Sensation of
Hatred is in this Man a Natural Consequence of the Motions of his Will, which
is excited at the sight of Evil; and this Motion is afterward maintained by
the Sensation it causes.

What we have said of this Man, might even happen although he should have no
Body. But because he is composed of two parts naturally united, the Motions of
his Mind communicate themselves to his Body, and those of his Body to his Mind.
Thus the new determination, or the increase of the Motions of his Will,
naturally produces a new determination in the Motion of the Animal Spirits,
which always differs in all the Passions, although the Motion of the Soul be
generally the same.

The Spirits then are forcibly pushed into the Arms, Legs, and Face, to give
the Body a disposition necessary for the Passion; and to disperse over the Face
the Air a Man ought to have when we offend him, in relation to all the
circumstances of the Injury he receives, and the quality or power of him that
does, and of him that suffers the Affront. And this diffusion of the Spirits is
so much the stronger, more abundant, and quicker, as the good is greater, the
opposition stronger, and the Brain more sensibly affected.

If then the Person of whom we speak, should only receive some injury in his
imagination, or if he receives a real one, but flight, and such as can make no
considerable shaking in the Brain, the diffusion of the Animal Spirits will be
weak and languishing; and perhaps insufficient to change the common and natural
disposition of the Body. But if the injury be great, and his imagination be
heated, it will cause a great shaking in his Brain, and the Spirits would he
diffused with so much force, that in a moment they would create in his Body the
air and gesture of the ruling Passion. If it is strong enough to overcome, his
air would be threatening and fierce. If it is weak, and cannot resist the evil
that oppresses him, his air would be humble and submissive. His Complaints and
Tears would naturally, excite in the Standers-by, and even in his Enemy,
motions of Pity, and from thence they would draw the relief that could be hoped
for from his own power. It is true that the Spectators and Enemy of this
Miserable Person, have the Spirits and Fibers of their Brain already agitated I
with a violent motion, contrary to that which produces Compassion in the Soul,
the Complaints of this Man would but exasperate their Rage, and so his
Misfortune would be inevitable, should he always continue in the same air and
gesture. But Nature has well provided in this case; for at the sight of the
near loss of a great good, it naturally forms upon the Face, such lively and
surprising Characters of Rage and Despair, as to disarm the most Barbarous
Enemies, and make them become like Statues. The terrible and unexpected fight
of the Lineaments of Death drawn by the Hand of Nature upon the Face of a
Miserable Wretch, stops in the Enemy, who is affected with it the Motion of the
Spirits and Blood which carried him to Revenge; and in that moment of favor
and attention, Nature draws anew a humble and submissive air upon the Face of
this unfortunate Man, who begins to hope because of the change of his Enemy's
Countenance; whose Animal Spirits receive a new determination they were not
capable of a moment before; so that he Mechanically enters into the motions of
Compassion, which naturally incline his Soul to Charity and Mercy.

A Passionate Man cannot without a great abundance of Spirits, either produce
or preserve in his Brain, an Image of his misfortune lively enough, or a
commotion strong enough, to give the Body a forced and extraordinary gesture;
the Nerves, which answer to the inward part of his Body, receive at the sight
of any evil, the necessary shocks and agitations that cause the humors that
are fit to produce the Spirits which the passion requires, to run into all the
Vessels that have communication with the heart. For the Animal Spirits being
dispersed through the Nerves which go to the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and
generally to all the Bowels, they agitate and shake them, and by their
agitation press forth the humors that these parts preserve for the Exigencies
of the Machine.

But if these humors always flowed after the same manner into the heart, if
they there received at diverse times a like fermentation, and if the Spirits,
which are formed therein, equally ascended into the Brain, we should not see
such hasty changes in the motions of the Passions. The sight of a Magistrate,
for instance, would not in a moment stop the transports of of a furious Man who
is persuing his revenge, and his face heated with Blood and Spirits, would not
all of a sudden become pale and languid through the apprehension of some
punishment.

Thus to hinder these humors that are mixed with the Blood, from entering after
the same manner into the Heart, there are Nerves which environ them at their
passage, which by being contracted or dilated, by the impression that the sight
of the Object, and power of the Imagination, produce in the Spirits, shut up,
or open the way to those humors. And to hinder the same from receiving a like
agitation, and fermentation in the heart, at diverse times; there are also
Nerves that cause the Palpitations, which being not equally agitated in the
different motions of the Spirits, do not push the Blood with the same force
into the Arteries. Other Nerves dispersed through the Lungs, distribute the Air
to the heart, by contracting and dilating the branches of the Trachea, which
serve for respiration, and after this manner regulate the fermentation of the
Blood, in relation to the circumstances of the Passion which rules.

And, in fine, to regulate the course of the Spirits with the greatest
exactness and speed, there are Nerves which environ the Arteries, as well those
which go to the Brain, as those which conduct the Blood to all other parts of
the Body. So that the shaking of the Brain, which accompanies the unexpected
sight of some Circumstance, because of which it is proper to change all the
motions of the Passion, suddenly determine the course of the Animal Spirits to
the Nerves which encompass these Arteries, that by their contraction they may
shut up the passage whereby the Blood ascends into the Brain, and by their
dilating, lay open that which disperses it self through all the other parts of
the Body.

These Arteries which carry the Blood to the Brain, being free, and all those
which disperse it through the rest of the Body, being strongly tied by these
Nerves, the Head will be filled with Blood, and the Face colored with it. But
any circumstance changing the shaking of the Brain, which caused this
disposition in these Nerves, the Arteries that were contracted are unloosed,
and the others on the contrary are strongly contracted. Thus the Head is void
of Blood, a paleness diffused over the Face, and the little Blood which goes
out of the Heart, and which the Nerves, we spoke of, admit into it to maintain
life, descend mostly into the lower part of the Body; the Brain is defective of
Animal Spirits, and all the rest of the Body is seized with a weakness and
trembling.

To explain, and particularly prove, what we have already said, it would be
necessary to give a general knowledge of Physics, and a particular one of Human
Bodies. But these two Sciences are also too imperfect to be treated of with all
the exactness I could wish besides, if I should push this matter farther, it
would soon carry me from my subject; and therefore I shall only give a general
and gross Idea of the Passions, and am satisfied, provided this Idea be not
false.

These Shakings of the Brain, and Motions of the Blood and Spirits, are the
fourth thing that is found in each of our Passions, and they produce the fifth,
which is the sensible Emotion of the Soul.

In the same time that the Animal Spirits are pushed from the Brain into the
rest of the Body, there to produce the Motions that is proper to maintain the
Passion, the Soul is carried toward the good that it perceives; and that so
much the more violently as the Spirits go out of the Brain with the more force,
because it is the same shaking of the Brain which acts the Soul and Animal
Spirits.

The Motion of the Soul toward good is so much the greater, as the sight of
good is more sensible; and the Motion of the Spirits which proceed from the
Brain to disperse themselves into the rest of the Body, is so much the more
violent, as the shaking of the Fibers of the Brain, caused by the impression of
the Object or Imagination, is stronger; so this same shaking of the Brain
rendering the sight of the good more sensible, it is necessary that the Emotions
of the Soul in the Passions should augment in the same proportion as the Motion
of the Spirits do.

These Emotions of the Soul differ not from those which immediately follow the
intellectual sight of the good we have spoke of: They are only stronger and
more lively because of the union of the Soul and Body, and the sensibility of
the sight which produces them.

The sixth thing which occurs is the Sensation of Passion; the Sensation of
Love, Aversion, Desire, Joy, Sorrow, etc. This Sensation is not different from
that we have already spoke of; it is only more quick, because the Body has a
great share in it. But it is always followed with a certain Sensation of
Sweetness, which renders all our Passions agreeable to us, and is the last
thing observed in every one of our Passions, as has been already said.

The cause of this last Sensation is thus; At the sight of the Object of the
Passion, or any new Circumstance, some of the Animal Spirits, are pushed from
the Head to the extreme parts of the Body, to put it into the gesture the
Passion requires; and others forcibly descend into the Heart, Lungs, and
Bowels, from thence to draw necessary assistances, which has already been
explained. Now it never happens that the Body is in the condition it ought to
be, but the Soul receives much satisfaction from it; whereas if the Body is in
an estate contrary to its good and preservation, the Soul suffers much pain.
Thus when we follow the Motions of our Passions, and stop not the course of the
Spirits which the sight of the Object of the Passion causes in our Body, to put
it in the condition it ought to be in relation to this Object; The Soul will by
the Laws of Nature receive this Sensation of delight and inward satisfaction,
because the Body is in the state it ought to be in. On the contrary, when the
Soul, following the Rules of Reason, stops the course of the Spirits, and
resists these Passions, it suffers pain proportionably to the evil which might
from thence happen to the Body.

For even as the reflection that the Soul makes upon it self, is necessarily
accompanied with the Joy or Sorrow of the Mind, and afterward with the Joy or
Sorrow of the Senses; when doing its duty, and submitting to the order of God,
it would discover that in a proper condition, or abandoning it self to its
Passions it is touched with remorse, which teaches it that it is in an ill
disposition. Thus the course of the Spirits excited by the good of the Body, is
accompanied with a sensible Joy or Sorrow, and afterward with a Spiritual one,
according as the course of the Animal spirits is hindered or favored by the
Will.

But there is this remarkable difference between the Intellectual Joy that
accompanies the clear knowledge of the good estate of the Soul, and the
sensible Pleasure which accompanies the confused Sensation of the good
disposition of the Body, that the Intellectual Joy is solid, without remorse,
and as immutable as the truth which causes it, whereas sensible Joy is
generally accompanied with Sorrow of the Mind, or remorse of Conscience, whence
it is unquiet and as inconstant as the Passion or Agitation of the Blood which
causes it: In fine, the first is almost always accompanied with a great Joy of
the Senses, when it is a consequence of the knowledge of a great good, that the
Soul possesses; and the other is seldom accompanied with any Joy of the Mind,
although it be a consequence of a great good which only happens to the Body, if
it is contrary to the good of the Soul.

It is therefore true, that without the Grace of JESUS CHRIST, the satisfaction
the Soul tastes in abandoning it self to its Passions, is more agreeable than
that it feels in following the Rules of Reason; and it is this Satisfaction
which is the cause of all the Disorders that have followed Original Sin, and it
would make us all Slaves to our Passions, if the Son of God did not deliver us
from their servitude, by the delights of his Grace; For indeed what I have said
on the behalf of the Joy of the Mind against the Joy of the Senses, is only
true amongst Christians; and was absolutely false in the Mouth of Seneca and
Epicurus, and in short, of all the Philosophers who appeared the most
reasonable; because the Yoke of JESUS CHRIST is only sweet to those that belong
to him, and his Burden only seems light to us, when his Grace supports us
under it.

CHAP. IV. That the Pleasures and Motions of the Passions engage us in Errors,
at the sight of Good; and therefore we ought continually to resist them. With
the manner how to oppose Libertinism.
WHatsoever we have already in general explained about the qualities and effect
of the Passions, shows them not to be free, they take up their residence in our
Breasts without our leave, and there is nothing but the consent of our Will
which absolutely depends upon us. The prospect of Good is naturally followed
with a Motion and Sensation of Love, a Shaking of the Brain, and Motion of the
Spirits, a new Emotion of the Soul which increases the first Motion of Love,
and a new Sensation of the Soul which augments the first Sensation of Love,
and, in fine, a Sensation of Complacency which recompenses the Soul for the
Bodies being in a state convenient for it. All these things pass in the Soul
and Body Naturally, and Mechanically; that is, without their having any part in
it, since our consent only truly depends upon us. This Consent must also be
regulated, preserved, and kept free, notwithstanding all the endeavors of our
Passions to the contrary. It Is to God alone that it must submit its liberty,
yielding only to the Voice of the Author of Nature, Internal Evidence, and to
the secret reproaches of Reason. We should never consent, but when we clearly
see we should make an ill use of our liberty if we refused it: And this is the
chief Rule that must be observed to avoid Error.

It Is God only who evidently shows us, that we must submit to what ever he
requires; to him alone therefore we must wholly devote our selves. There is no
Evidence in the Alurements and Caresses; the Frights and Menaces we receive
from our Passions: They are only confused and obscure Sensations to which we
must never give ear. We must stay till these false lights of the Passions are
dissipated, and wait for a purer light to guide us, till God himself speaks to
us. We must enter into our selves, and there enquire for him that never leaves
us, but continually instructs us, He speaks low, but his Voice is distinct; he
illuminates but little, yet his light is pure; Rather his Voice is as strong as
it is distinct, and his Light as bright and active as it is pure. But our
Passions keep us always out of our selves, and by their noise and darkness
hinder us from being instructed by his Voice, and illuminated by his Light. He
even speaks to those who ask nothing of him, and those whose Passions have put
them at the greatest distance from him, do nevertheless now and then hear some
of his Words; But they are such Words as are strong, threatening and terrible;
and pierce more than a two edged Sword, which penetrates the most secret
Recesses of the Soul, and discerns the thoughts and motions of the Heart: Heb.
4.12, 13.
For all things are open before his Eyes, and he cannot behold the irregularity
of Sinners without making them inwardly to feel his severe Reproaches. We ought
therefore to enter into our selves, to approach near him; to desire him to
inform us of what we would know, to hearken to and obey him: For if we always
give ear to him, we should never be deceived; and by continually Obeying him,
we should free our selves from the miseries and inconstancies of our Passions,
to which Sin has subjected us.

We must not think with some pretended Wits, whom the pride of their Passions
have reduced to the condition of Beasts, and who having so long contemned the
Law of God, seem at last to know no other than that of their infamous Passions:
We ought not, I say, like those Men that are guided merely by Flesh and Blood,
to imagine that in following the motions of our Passions, and secret desires of
our own Hearts, we should follow God, and obey the voice of the Author of
Nature; for this would be the utmost blindness; and according to St. Paul, Romans
1.
the temporal punishment for Impiety and Idolatry: that is, the punishment of
the greatest Crimes. Indeed, this punishment is so much the greater, as that
instead of appeasing the wrath of God, as all other temporal ones do, it
continually exasperates and increases it, until the terrible day, wherein his
just anger shall triumph over all Sinners.

Their Arguments however want not probability, and seeming very agreeable to
common Sense; they are favored by the Passions, and could never be destroyed
by all the Philosophy of Zeno. We must love good, say they, and pleasure is the
character that Nature has, united to it; and by this character we can never be
deceived, since it proceeds from God, who has affixed it thereto that we might
distinguish it from evil. We must also fly evil, continue they, and pain is the
character that Nature has united to that, nor can we be deceived by it, since
God has instituted it, that thereby we might discern it from good. We taste
Pleasure when we abandon our selves to our Passions; and feel Pain and
Bitterness in resisting them. Therefore the Author of Nature would have us give
up our selves to our Passions, and never resist them; since the Pleasure and
Pain he makes us feel in these occurrences are certain proofs of his Will in
respect to them, To follow God therefore is to pursue the desires of our own
Hearts, and to obey him, is to conform our selves to the instinct of Nature,
which enclines us to satisfy our Senses and Passions. After this manner they
confirm themselves in their impious Opinions, and by this means endeavor to
stifle the secret reproaches of their Reason, and for the punishment of their
Crimes, God permits them to be dazzled with these false lights, which blind
instead of enlightening them, but with such a blindness, as they are, insensible
of, and wish not to be delivered from. God gives them over to a reprobate
Sense, abandons them to the desires of their Hearts, to shameful Passions, and
Actions unworthy of Man, as the Scripture tells us, that after being as it were
fatned by their Debauches, they may to all Eternity become the victims of his
Wrath.

But we will solve the difficulty they propose, which the Sect of Zeno not
being able to do, have denied that Pleasure was good, or Pain an evil. But this
was too rash an attempt, and unbecoming Philosophers, and I don't believe it
ever made those change their Opinion, who experimentally found that a great
Pain was a great Misery. Since therefore Zeno and all the Heathen Philosophy
could not resolve this difficulty, offered by the Epicureans, therefore we must
have recourse to a more solid and enlightened Philosophy.

It Is true, that Pleasure is good, and Pain an evil; and that Pleasure and Pain
by the Author of Nature have been affixed to the use of certain things, to make
us capable of judging whether they are good or bad: That we must choose the
good, fly the evil, and generally follow the motions of our Passions. All this
is true, but it only relates to the Body, to preserve which, and long to
continue a Life like to that of Beasts, we must suffer our selves to be
governed by our Passions and Desires. The Senses and Passions were only given
us for the good of the Body; sensible Pleasure is the character which Nature
has joined to the use of certain things, that without taking the pains to
examine them by Reason, we might employ 'em for the preservation of the Body;
but not that we should love them; for we ought to love nothing but what Reason
most certainly discovers to us to be our good.

We are Rational Beings, and God who is our chief Good, requires not of us, a
blind Love, a Love of Instinct, or one that is forced; but a Love of Choice, of
Knowledge, and such a one as subjects our Mind and Hearts to him. He induces us
to love him by discovering to us by the light that accompanies the delection of
his Grace, that he is our Sovereign Good: but inclines us to the good of the
Body only by instinct, and a confused sensation of Pleasure, because the good
of the Body deserves neither the application of the Mind, nor exercise of our
Reason.

But farther, our Body is not our selves; it is something that belongs to us,
without which absolutely speaking, we may exist: The Good of the Body therefore
is not properly our good, for Bodies can be only the good of Bodies, which we
may make use of for the good of our Body, but we must not unite our selves to
them. Our Soul has likewise a Good peculiar to her self, viz. that good only
that is superior to her, who alone preserves, and produces in her the
sensations of Pain and Pleasure. For in fine, all the objects of our Senses are
of themselves incapable of making us perceive them, and it is God alone that can
teach us they are present, by the sensation he gives us of them, which is a
Truth the Heathen Philosophers could never comprehend.

We may, and I confess ought to love what is capable of making us feel
Pleasure. And it is for that reason we must love none but God, because it is only
he who can act in our Souls, since sensible objects can only move the Organs of
our Senses. But perhaps it may be answered by some, what matters it from whence
these agreeable Sensations come, we will enjoy them? Ungrateful as they are,
not to acknowledge the hand that so kindly bestows these Goods. They would have
a just God give unjust Rewards, and recompense them for the Crimes they commit
against him, at the very time they commit them: They would make use of his
immutable Will, which is the Order and Law of Nature, to force undeserved
favors from him. For by a criminal Artifice they produce such motions in their
Bodies which obliges him to make them taste all sorts of Pleasures. But Death
will corrupt this Body, and God whom they have made subservient to their unjust
Desires, will make them submit to his just Anger, and will mock them in his
turn.

It Is true, it is a very hard thing that the possession of the Goods of the Body
should be attended with Pleasure, and that that of the Goods of the Soul should
often be tied to Pain and Sorrow. We may look upon it as a great irregularity,
because Pleasure being the character of Good, as Pain is that of Evil, we ought
infinitely to take more delight in the love of God than in the use of sensible
things, since God is the true, or rather the only Good of the Mind. This will
certainly happen one day, and it is very probable 'twas so before the Fall; at
least it is certain before Sin entered into the World we felt no pain in the
exercise of our Duty.

But God has withdrawn himself from us ever since the Fall of Adam, he is no
longer our Good by Nature, but only by Grace; for now we naturally find no
satisfaction in loving him, and he rather diverts us from, then enclines us to
love him: If we follow him he repulses us, if we run after him he smites us; if
we are constant in our persuit, he still treats us ill, and makes us suffer
very lively and sensible Griefs. But when being weary with walking in the hard
and painful Paths of Virtue, without being encouraged by the relish of Good, or
assisted by any Nourishment, we begin to feed upon sensible things, to which he
unites us by the taste of Pleasure, as if he would reward us for turning aside
from him to follow those perishing Goods. In short, since the first Sin, it
seems as if God were not pleased that we should love or think upon him, or that
we should look upon him as our only and chief Good. It is only through the
Grace of JESUS CHRIST that we are now sensible that God is our Good; since it is
by his Grace that we take any pleasure and satisfaction in the love of God.

Thus the Soul neither discovering her own Good by a clear view, or by
sensation, without the Grace of JESUS CHRIST, she takes the Good of the Body
for her own: She loves it, and is more strictly united to it, by her Will, than
she was by the first Institution of Nature. For the Good of the Body being the
only one left that we are now sensible of, it necessarily acts the more
powerfully upon Man, affects his Brain more livelily, and consequently the Soul
must feel and imagine it after a more sensible manner. And the Animal Spirits
being more violently agitated, the Will must needs love it with more Ardour and
Pleasure.

Before Sin the Soul was able to efface out of the Brain an over lively image
of sensible good, and cause the pleasure that attended this image to vanish.
The Body being thus submitted to the Mind, the Soul could in an instant put a
stop to the shaking of the Fibers of the Brain, and emotion of the Spirits,
only by the consideration of its Duty. But now it remains no longer in its
power, nor do these traces of the Imagination, and motions of the Spirits, any
longer depend upon it; and therefore by a necessary consequence, Pleasure,
which by the order of Nature is affixed to these traces and motions, is become
the only Master of the Heart. Man cannot long resist this Pleasure by his own
strength, it is Grace only that can entirely overcome it; because none but God,
as the Author of Grace, can overcome himself as the Author of Nature, or rather
can appease himself as the Revenger of Adam's Disobedience.

See the Fifth Dialogue of the Christian Conversations toward the end.
The Stoics, who had but a confused knowledge of the disorders of original Sin,
could not confute the Epicureans; their happiness being but barely Ideal, since
there is no felicity without Pleasure; and they could not relish Pleasure in
the mere persuit of virtuous actions: it is true, they might find some
satisfaction in following the Rules of their imaginary Virtue, because it is a
natural consequence of the knowledge our Soul has, that she is in the most
eligible condition she can be in. This joy of the Mind might maintain their
Resolutions for some time, but it was not strong enough to resist Pain and
conquer Pleasure. 'Twas secret Pride, and not Joy, that made them keep their
Countenance; for when no one was present they soon lost all their Power and
Wisdom, like Kings upon the Theater, whose Grandeur vanishes in a moment.

It is very different with those Christians who exactly follow the Rules of the
Gospel. Their Joy is solid, because they most certainly know they are in the
happiest condition they can possibly be at present: Their Joy is also great,
because the Good they taste through Faith and Hope is infinite. For the Hope of
a great Good is always attended with a sensible Joy; and this Joy is so much
the more vigorous, as the Hope is stronger; because a strong Hope representing
the Good as present, necessarily produces that Joy, and sensible Pleasure which
always accompanies the presence of Good. Nor is their Joy uneasy, because it
is founded upon the promises of God, by the Blood of whose Son it is confirmed,
and maintained by the inward Peace, and inexpressible sweetness of Charity,
which the Holy Ghost diffuses in their Hearts. Nothing can separate them from
the true Good, when they taste and are pleased with it through the Delectation
of Grace. The Pleasures of Corporeal Enjoyments are not so great, as those they
feel in the love of God; rather than quit them they choose Contempt and Pain,
they are not affrighted at Reproaches and Disgrace, and the Pleasures they find
in their Sufferings, or to speak more properly, those they meet with in God,
when they contemn every thing to be united to him, are so violent that they
transport them, and makes them speak a new Language, and with the Apostles,
boast of the Miseries and Injuries they suffer. The Scripture tells us, That
when the Apostles departed from the Council, they were filled with Joy that
they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of JESUS. And this is
the disposition of Mind in true Christians, when they have received the
greatest Affronts for defending the Truth.

JESUS CHRIST being come to reestablish that Order that Sin had overthrown, and
Order requiring that the greatest Goods should be accompanied with the most
solid Pleasures; it is plain that things ought to happen after the manner we
have related, But besides Reason, Experience confirms it; for a Person no
sooner takes a resolution of contemning every thing for God, but he is commonly
so affected with a Pleasure, or inward Joy, that he as sensibly feels God to be
his Good, as before he evidently knew him to be so.

True Christians assure us every day, that the Joy they have in the Love and
Service of God is inexpressible; and it is very reasonable to believe them
concerning what passes in themselves. The wicked on the contrary are
perpetually tormented with mortal Disquiets; and such as are divided betwixt
God and the World, partake also of the Joys of the Righteous, and
Dissatisfactions of the Wicked; They complain of their Miseries, and it is
likewise just to believe their Complaints are not groundless. God strikes Men
to the very quick, when they make choice of any other object for their chief
Good but himself, and it is this wound that makes them really miserable: But
fills the Mind of those with excessive Joy, who only unite themselves to him;
and it is this Joy which gives the true Felicity. The abundance of Riches and
possession of Honors and Dignities being external, cannot cure the wound God
makes. And as Poverty and Contempt are also without us, so they cannot hurt us
when the Almighty protects us.

It is evident by what has been said, that the objects of our Passions are not
our Good, and that we must only follow their Motions for the preservation of
our Lives: That sensible Pleasure in respect of our Good, is what our
Sensations are in relation to the Truth; and even as we find our Senses deceive
us in matters of Truth, so our Passions deceive us concerning our Good: That we
must submit to the Delectation of Grace, because it evidently enclines us to
love the true Good; nor is followed with the secret reproaches of Reason, like
the blind instinct and confused pleasure of the Passions; but is always
attended with a secret Joy agreeable to the condition we are in: And last of
all, since God only can act upon our Mind, we can find no Felicity out of God;
except we would suppose that God rewards none but the Disobedient, or Commands
us to love that most which least deserves our love.

CHAP. V. That the Perfection of the Mind consists in its Union with God, by
the knowledge of Truth and love of Virtue; And that on the contrary, its
Imperfection proceeds only from its dependence on the Body, because of the
disorder of its Senses and Passions.
THE least reflection is enough to discover to us, that the good of the Mind
must necessarily be something Spiritual; for Bodies are much inferior to the
Mind, and cannot act upon it by their own strength: They are not able
immediately to unite themselves to it, nor are they intelligible of themselves,
and therefore cannot be its good. On the contrary, Spiritual Things are
intelligible from their own Nature, and may unite themselves to the Mind;
consequently be its good, if we suppose them superior to it; for that a thing
may be the good of the Mind, it is not enough to be Spiritual like that, it
must be above it, that it may be able to act upon it, instruct and recompense
it; otherwise it could neither make it more happy nor more perfect, and
therefore could not be its good. Of all things both Intelligible and Spiritual,
there is none but God that is thus superior to the Mind; from whence it
follows, that nothing but he is, or can be its true good, nor can we therefore
become more perfect or more happy, but in the enjoyment of God.

Every one is convinced, that the knowledge of the Truth, and love of Virtue,
makes the Mind more perfect; and that the blindness of the Mind, and
irregularity of the Inclinations, renders it more imperfect. The knowledge of
Truth, and love of Virtue then, can be nothing else but the union of the Mind
with God, and even a kind of possessing of him: And the blindness of the Mind,
and irregularity of the Heart, can likewise be nothing else but the separation
of the Mind from God, and the uniting the Mind to something inferior to it,
like the Body, since only this union can make it imperfect and unhappy. Thus to
be acquainted with Truth, to know things that are the most agreeable, or
consonant to the Rules of Virtue, is to know God himself.

The Mind is, as it were, placed between God and the Body, Good and Evil;
between what instructs and blinds it, regulates and disorders it, what can make
it perfect and happy, and what can make it imperfect and miserable. When it
discovers any Truth, or sees things as they are in themselves, it sees them in
the Idea's of God; that is, by a clear and distinct view of what it is in God
that represents them. For as I have before intimated, the Mind of Man does not,
in it self, include the Perfections or Idea's, of all the Beings it is capable
of considering: It Is not the Universal Being, and therefore does not see in it
self such things as are distinct from it; by consulting it self, it is neither
capable of enlightening or instructing it self, for it is neither its own
Perfection nor Light; it stands in need of the immense Light of Truth by which
it is united to, and possesses God in some manner.

But we cannot only say, that the Mind, which is acquainted with Truth, does in
some manner know God who includes it, but we may likewise add, That in part it
knows things as God himself knows them; for the Mind knows their true
Relations, and God knows them also; the Mind discovers them by viewing the
Perfections of God who represents them, God sees them likewise by the same
means. For in short, God neither sees nor imagines, but perceives in himself,
as he is the Intellectual World, the Material and Sensible one which he has
created. It is the same with the Mind in its knowledge of Truth, it perceives
it not by Sensation and Imagination: Sensations and Phantoms, only represent
false Relations to the Mind; and whoever discovers the Truth, can only see it
in the Intellectual World to which it is united, and in which God himself sees
it; for this Material and Sensible World, is not intelligible of it self. The
Mind then sees in the Light of God what ever it sees clearly; tho it sees them
but imperfectly, and in that respect very differently from what God sees them.
So that when the Mind discovers the Truth, it is not only united to God, but
possesses, and beholds him; and in one sense, sees the Truth as God himself
does.

Likewise, when our Love is regulated by Virtue, we love God; for when we love
according to these Rules, the impression of love that God continually produces
in our hearts inclines us toward him, and is neither diverted by Free Will,
nor changed into Self-love. The Mind then does only, with the greatest freedom,
follow this impression that God gives it; and the Almighty never giving it any
impression but what tends toward him, since he only acts for himself: It is
evident, that when we love according to the Rules of Virtue, we love God.

But it is not only to love God, it is also to love as God does; who only loves
himself, and his Works, because they relate to his Perfections, and loves these
Works proportionably to the relation they have to these Perfections: And
indeed, it is the same love whereby God loves himself, and whatever he has
created. To love according to the Rules of Virtue, is to love God only; and to
love God in every thing, is to love every thing so far as it partakes of his
Goodness and Perfection, since that is to love them in proportion to their
Amiableness. In short, it is to love by the impression of the same love whereby
God loves himself; for it is that love by which God loves himself, and whatever
relates to him, which animates us, when we love as we ought to do: And
therefore we then love as God loves.

It is then evident, that the knowledge of Truth, and regulated love of Virtue,
produces all our Perfections, since they are commonly the consequences of our
Union with God, and even lead us to the enjoyment of him, as much as we are
capable in this life. And on the contrary, the blindness of our Minds, and
irregularity of our Inclinations, are the cause of all our imperfections, being
the Natural effects of the union of our Mind with our Body, as I have before
proved, in showing that we never discover the Truth, nor love the true Good,
when we follow the impressions of our Senses, Imaginations and Passions.

Though these things are so evident, yet Men, who ardently, desire to perfect
their Being, take very little pains to increase their union with God, but
continually endeavor to strengthen and enlarge that they have with Sensible
things. The cause of this strange irregularity cannot be too fully explained.

The possession of Good must naturally produce these two effects in him that
enjoys it; it makes him more perfect, and at the same time more happy: Yet it
does not always happen so; I confess, it is impossible that the Mind should
actually possess any good, and not be actually more perfect, but it may
actually enjoy a good, without being made more happy by it. Those who are best
acquainted with the Truth, and have the greatest love for the most amiable
good, are always actually more perfect than those that are still subjected to
blindness and disorder, yet are they not always actually more happy. It is the
same thing in respect to Evil, it makes men both imperfect and unhappy at the
same times; yet though it always renders them more imperfect, it does not always
make them more unhappy; or, at least, it does not make them unhappy in
proportion to the imperfection it gives them. Virtue is often unpleasant and
bitter, and Vice sweet and agreeable; so that it is chiefly through Faith and
Hope, that good Men are truly happy, whilst the Wicked actually enjoy Pleasure
and Delights. It ought not to be thus it is true; but so it is, Sin having
caused this disorder, as I have showed in the preceding Chapter; and it is this
disorder that is the chief cause, not only of all the irregularities of our
Hearts, but also of the blindness and ignorance of our Minds.

Our Imagination is by this disorder persuaded, that the Body may be the good
of the Mind; for Pleasure, as I have many times intimated, is the Character, or
Sensible Mark of Good; and the most sensible Earthly enjoyments, are those
which we imagine we receive from the Body. Wherefore, without much reflection,
we judge that Bodies may be, and even truly are our Good: And it is so difficult
to oppose the Instinct of Nature, and to resist the Proofs of Sensation, that
we never so much as think of it. We reflect not upon the disorders that Sin has
produced, and consider not that Bodies can only act upon the Mind as occasional
Causes; That the Mind cannot immediately, or of it self, enjoy any corporeal
thing; and that it can unite it self to no object but by its knowledge and
love: God only being above us, can recompense or punish us with Sensations of
Pleasure, or Pain, which can instruct more; and, in short, act in us. These
truths, although very evident to attentive Minds, are not so powerful to convince
us, as the deceitful Experience of a sensible impression.

When we consider any thing as part of our selves, or look upon our selves as
part of this thing which we judge is good for us to be united to, we have a
love for it; and this love is so much the greater, as the thing which we take
to be united to us* appears a more considerable part of the whole which we
compose with it. Now there are two sorts of Proofs which persuade us that a
thing is part of our selves; the instinct of Sensation, and evidence of Reason.

By the instinct of Sensation, I am persuaded that my Soul is united to my
Body, or that my Body makes up part of my Being; yet I have no full evidence of
it, since it is not by the light of Reason that I conclude it, but by the Pain
or Pleasure I feel when Objects strike my Senses. If I prick my hand I suffer
pain, therefore I conclude my hand to be a part of my Self; but if my Clothes
are torn I suffer nothing, therefore determine they do not belong to my Being.
My Hair is cut without pain, but cannot be plucked off without it: This
perplexes the Philosophers, and they know not how to decide it, but their
indetermination shows the wisest Judge, rather by the instinct of Sensation
than light of Reason, that such things are, or are not a part of themselves:
For if they concluded from Evidence and Reason, they would soon discover that
the Mind and Body are Beings of different Species, and that the Mind cannot be
united to the Body of it self; that it is only through the union we have with
God, that the Soul is wounded when the Body is struck. Therefore it is only by
the instinct of Sensation that we look upon our Bodies, and all the sensible
things we are united to, as parts of our selves; I mean, as part of what thinks
and feels within us, because what is not, cannot be discovered by the evidence
of Reason, since evidence discovers nothing but Truth.

And on the contrary, it is by the light of Reason that we discover the relation
we have with intellectual things; By a clear view of the Mind, we discover that
we are united to God after a more strict and essential manner than we are to
our Bodies; That without him we are nothing; can neither do, nor know, will,
nor feel any thing; That he is our All, and if we may so speak, that we make
but one whole with him, whereof we are an infinitely small part. The light of
Reason discovers a thousand Motives to us, that would induce us to love God
only, and contemn the Body as unworthy of our love; but we are hot naturally
sensible of our union with God, nor by the instinct of Sensation, but only
through the Grace of our SAVIOVR persuaded that he is our All; which Grace
causes such a Spiritual Sensation in some Persons, as it assists them in
conquering that contrary Sensation which unites them to the Body. For God, as
he is the Author of Nature, inclines our Minds to love him, by an enlightened
knowledge, and not one of instinct: And very probable it is, since the Fall,
that he, as Author of Grace, has added Instinct to Illumination, because our
light is now so much diminished, that it is incapable of carrying us to God;
besides its being continually weakened, and made ineffectual by contrary
Pleasure and Instinct.

We, by the light of the Mind, then discover, that we are united both to God,
and the Intellectual World he includes; and by Sensation are convinced, that we
are united to our Bodies, and by them to the Material and Sensible World, which
God has created. But as our Sensations are more lively, moving, frequent, and
even more lasting than our Illuminations, so we cannot think it strange that
our Sensations should agitate us, and stir up our love to all Sensible Things,
and that our light dissipates and vanishes without producing in us any Zeal for
the Truth.

It is true, there are many Men who are persuaded that God is their true Good,
love him as their All, and who ardently desire to increase and strengthen the
union they have with him; but few evidently perceive, that to know and consider
the Truth, is to unite themselves to God with all their Natural power; that
it is a kind of enjoying of him, to meditate on the true Idea's of things; and
that this abstracted view of certain, general, and immutable Truths, which
determine all particular ones, are the flights of a Mind which quits the Body
to be united to God. Metaphysics, Speculative Mathematics, and all Universal
Sciences, which regulate and include particular ones, as the Universal Being
comprehends all particular Beings, seem Chimerical to most Men, even to the
Religious, as well as to those who do not love God: So that I dare hardly say,
that by enquiring into these Sciences, the Mind applies it self to God, after
the most pure and perfect manner it is naturally capable of; and that it is by a
prospect of the Intellectual World, which is the Object of these Sciences, that
God has created, and still knows this Sensible World; from whence Bodies
receive their life, as Spirits live from the other.

Those who only follow the impression of their Senses and Motions of their
Passions, are incapable of relishing truth because it does not flatter them.
And good Men who continually oppose their Passions when they present false
goods to them, do not always resist them, when they obscure the truth, or make
it contemptible to them; because Persons may be Pious without extraordinary
Judgments. To make us acceptable to God, it is not requisite for us exactly to
know that our Senses, Imaginations, and Passions, always represent things
otherwise to us than they are; for indeed it does not appear that JESUS CHRIST
or his Apostles designed to undeceive us of several Errors that D'cartes has
since discovered to us upon this matter.

There is a great deal of difference between Faith and Knowledge, the Gospel
and Philosophy; The most ignorant are capable of Faith, but few are able to
understand Evident Truths. Faith represents God as the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, to the most Simple, which is enough to induce them to love and serve
him: but Reason considers God not only in his Works, because she knows he
existed before he was a Creator, and therefore endeavors to Contemplate him in
himself, or in the great and vast Idea of an infinitely perfect Being which is
included in him. The Son of God, who is the Wisdom of the Father, or the
Eternal Truth, was made Man, and became sensible to discover himself to the
carnal and most ignorant: That he might instruct them by that which caused
their blindness, and incline them to love him, and loose them from sensible
Objects, by the same things that had captivated them. For when he had to do
with Fools, he made use of a kind of simplicity to make them wise; so that the
most Religious and Faithful have not always the greatest Understanding. They
may know God by Faith, and love him through the assistance of his Grace,
without discerning him to be their All, after the same manner as Philosophers
do, and without reflecting that the abstracted knowledge of Truth is a kind of
union with him. We must not therefore be surprised, if there are but few
Persons who endeavor to strengthen their Natural Union they have with God, by
seeking after the Truth; since to this end it would be necessary constantly to
oppose the impression of the Senses and Passions after a very different manner
from that which is familiar to the most Virtuous Persons; for most good Men are
not always persuaded that the Senses and Passions deceive us after the manner
we have explained in the precedent Books.

Those Sensations and Thoughts, wherein the Body has any share, are the true
and immediate cause of our Passions; because it is only the shaking of the
Fibers of the Brain that excites any particular emotion in the Animal Spirits;
so that only our Sensations can sensibly convince us that we depend on certain
things, which they excite us to love: But we feel not the Natural Union we have
with God, when we discover the Truth; nor so much as think upon him, for he is
within us, and operates after such a secret and insensible manner that we
perceive him not: Our Natural Union with him therefore does not excite us to
love him; But our Union with Sensible Things is quite different; All our
Sensations declare this Union, and Bodies present themselves to our Eyes when
they act in us, nor is any thing they do concealed. Even our own Body is more
present to us than our Mind, and we consider it as the best part of our selves.
Thus the Union we have with our Body, and through that, with all sensible
Objects, excites a violent love in us, which increases this Union, and makes us
depend upon things that are infinitely below us.

CHAP. VI. Of the most general Errors of the Passions. Some particular Examples
of them.
It Is the part of Moral Philosophy to enquire into all the particular Errors
wherein our Passions engage us concerning good; to oppose the irregularities of
Love, to establish the sincerity of the Heart, and regulate the Manners. But
our chief intent here is to give Rules for the Mind, and to discover the causes
of our Errors in respect of Truth; so that we shall pursue no further, those
things already mentioned, which relate only to the love of the true Good: We
will then proceed to the Mind, but shall not pass by tne Heart, because it has
the greatest influence over the Mind: We will enquire after the Truth in it
self, and without thinking on the relation it has to us, only so far as this
relation is the occasion that Self-love disguises and conceals it from us: for
we judging of all things according to our Passions, deceive our selves in all
things; the Judgments of the Passions never agreeing with the Judgments of the
Truth.

It Is what we may learn from these admirable words of St. Bernard: Amor sicut
nec odium, veritatis judicium nescit. Vis judicium veritatis audire? Joan 5.30.
Sicut audio sic judico: Non sicut odi, non sicut amo, non sicut timeo. Est
judicium, odii, ut illud: Nos legem habemus and secundum legem Nostram, debet
mori. Joan 19.7. Est and timoris, ut illud: si dimittimus eum sic, venient
Romani, and tollent Nostrum locum and gentem. Joan 11.48. Judicium vero amoris,
ut David de filio parricida. Parcite, inquit, puero Absalom, 2 Reg. 18.5. St.
Bern. de grad humilitatis.
Neither love nor hatred, says he, know how to judge according to truth. But if
you will hear a true Judgment. I judge according to what I hear, not as I hate,
love, or fear. This is a Judgment of hatred, We have a law, and according to
our law he ought to die. This is a Judgment of fear, If we let him alone, the
Romans will come and take away our Place and Nation. This is a Judgment of
love, as David speaks of his parricide son, Spare the young Man Absalom.

Our Love, Hatred, and Fear, cause us to make false Judgments only; and nothing
but the pure Light of Truth, can enlighten our Mind. It Is only the distinct
Voice of our common Master that instructs us to make solid Judgments, and he
will infallibly do it, provided we only judge of what he says, and according to
what he says, Sicut audio, sic judico, As I hear I judge. But let us see after
what manner our Passions seduce us, that we may the more easily resist them.

The Passions have so great a relation to the Senses, that 'twill not be
difficult to discover after what manner they engage us in Error, if we but
remember what has been said in the First Book. For the general Causes of the
Errors of our Passions are entirely like those of the Errors of our Senses.

The most general cause of the Errors of our Senses is, as we have shown in the
First Book, our attributing to our Body, or to External Objects, those
Sensations which belong to our Soul; affixing Colors to the Surfaces of
Bodies; diffusing of Light, Sounds, Odours in the Air; and assigning Pain and
Pleasure to those parts of our Body which receive any change by the motion of
other Bodies which meet them.

The same thing may be said of our Passions: we imprudently attribute to those
Objects which cause, or seem to cause them, all the dispositions of our Heart;
Goodness, Meekness, Malice, Ill Nature, and all the other Qualities of our
Mind. Whatever Object produces any Passion in us; in some manner seems to
include in it self, what it stirs up in us, when we think upon it: Even as
sensible Objects appear to us to include the Sensations their presence excites.
When we love any Person, we are naturally inclined to believe they love us, and
'twould be difficult for us to imagine that they had either any design to hurt
us, or to oppose our desires. But if hatred succeeds love, we cannot believe
that they design us any good; we interpret all their actions in the worst
sense, and are always suspicious and upon our guard, although perhaps they
think not of us, or else intend to do us some service. In short, we unjustly
attribute all the dispositions of our Heart, to those Persons who excite any
Passion in us; even as we imprudently ascribe all the qualities of our Mind to
sensible Objects.

Moreover, by the same reason that we believe all Men receive the same
Sensations of the same Objects as we do, we think that all Men are acted with
the same Passions as we are upon the same subjects, provided we believe they
are capable of being moved by them. We imagine they love, what we love, or
desire what we desire: from whence proceed Jealousies and secret Aversions, if
the good we are in pursuit of cannot be wholly possessed by many: but if
several Persons can possess it without dividing it, as they may the sovereign
Good, Science, Virtue, etc. then it is quite of another matter. We likewise
think they hate, shun, and fear the same things as we do, and from thence comes
Associations and secret Conspiracies according to the nature of the thing we
hate, by this means hoping to deliver our selves from our Miseries.

We attribute therefore the Emotions of our Passions to those Objects that
produce them in us, and believe that all other Men, and even sometimes that
Beasts are agitated like us; besides, we judge yet more rashly, that the cause
of our Passion, which is often only imaginary, is really in some Object.

When we have a Passionate Love for any one, we think every thing is amiable in
them: His Grimaces are Charming, his Ugliness is not displeasing; his Irregular
Motions and Unhandsom Gestures are Just, or at least Natural. If he never
speaks, it is because he is Wise; if he talks much, he is very Witty; if he
speaks upon every thing, his Knowledge is universal; if he continually
interrupts others, it proceeds from his Quickness, Vicacity, and Fire: In
short, if he would be chief in all Company, it is because he Merits it. Thus our
Passion after this manner hides or disguises the Defects of our Friends, and on
the contrary magnifies the least good Quality in them.

But if this Love is only founded upon the agitation of the Blood and Animal
Spirits like the rest of the Passions, in time it cools for want of heat, or
proper Spirits to maintain it; and if interest or any other false relation
change the disposition of the Brain, hatred will succeed this love, and will
not fail to make us imagine in the Object of our Passion, all the defects that
can cause a just Aversion. In the same Person we shall see such Qualities as
are directly contrary to what we admired before; and be ashamed that ever we
loved them; and the Predominant Passion will be sure to justify it self, and
make that it succeeds ridiculous.

The power and injustice of the Passions are not limited to what we have
already said, they are infinitely farther extended. Our Passions do not only
disguise their principal Object, but likewise whatever has any relation to it:
They not only make all the Qualities of our Friends agreeable, but also the
greatest part of the Qualities of our Friends Friends. And even go farther in
those that have a great and strong Imagination, for their Passions have so vast
a dominion and extension, that it is impossible to determine their limits.

What I have already mentioned are such general and pregnant Principles of
Errors, Prejudices, and Injustices, that it is impossible to remark all the
Consequences of them; Most of the Truths, or rather Errors, of certain Places,
Times, Commonalties, and Families, have their rise from them. What is approved
in Spain, is rejected in France; what is Orthodox in Paris, is condemned at
Rome; what the Dominicans espouse, the Franciscans disapprove; and what is
undoubted to the one, is erroneous to the other: The Dominicans think it their
Duty to follow Sr. Thomas, and why? because he was one of their Order; and on
the contrary the Franciscans embrace the Opinions of Scotus, because he
belonged to theirs.

There are also Truths and Errors peculiar to certain times; The Earth moved
about Two thousand years ago, and from thence it has continued fixed till our
days, and now begins to turn again. Aristotle has been formerly burnt, and a
Provincial Council approved of by a Pope, has wisely forbidden the teaching of
his Physics; ever since he has been admired, and now begins again to be
despised. There are some Opinions now received in the Schools, which have
formerly been looked upon as Heresies, and those who maintained them have been
Excommunicated as Heretics by some of the Bishops: Because Passions causing
Factions, these Factions produce such Truths or Errors as are as inconstant as
the Cause which produces them, For instance, Men may be indifferent in respect
to the stability of the Earth, or the essence of Bodies: but continue no longer
so, Council. Angl. per Spelman, An. 1287.
when they are maintained by such as they hate. Thus Aversion upheld by a
confused Sense of Piety, produces an indifferent Zeal, which kindles by little
and little, and at last causes such Events as appears so strange to every one a
long time after they happen.

We can scarcely think that the Passions should go so far, but it is because we
don't consider they extend to whatever can satisfy them. Haman it may be would
have done no harm to the Jews, if Mordecai had saluted him, but he being a Jew,
and refusing it, the whole Nation must perish that his revenge might be the
more magnificent.

When there is a dispute between two Persons who has a right to an Estate, they
ought only to bring their Titles, and speak what relates to their Case, or can
best set it off; yet they fail not to use all manner of reproaches one against
another, to contradict each other in every thing, and to introduce a thousand
unnecessary Accusations, and perplex their Suit with an infinite number of
Accessory Circumstances which confound the Cause. And indeed all Passions
extend as far as the prospect of their Mind who are moved with them; since
there is nothing that we take to have any relation with the Object of our
Passions, to which the motions of these Passions do not extend; which is done
as follows.

The Traces of Objects are really so connected one with another in the Brain,
that it is impossible the course of the Spirits should violently stir up any of
them, without affecting the rest at the same time. The chief Idea therefore of
what we think of, is necessarily accompanied with a great number of accessory
Idea's, which are so much the more increased as the impression of the Animal
Spirits are more violent. And this impression of the Spirits seldom fails to be
violent in the Passions, because the Passions continually and powerfully force
into the Brain an abundance of these Spirits that are proper to preserve the
Traces of the Idea's which represent their Object. Thus the motion of Love or
Hatred extend not only to the principal Object of the Passion, but likewise to
whatever we discover to have any relation to this Object; because in the
Passion the motion of the Soul follows the perception of the Mind; even as the
motion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain, follow the Traces of the Brain as
well as those which excite the chief Idea of the Object of the Passion, as
those that relate to it.

We must not therefore wonder if Men carry their Hatred or Love so far, and
perform such Capricious and Surprising Actions. There is a particular Reason of
all these Effects although we do not know them; because their accessory Ideas
are not always like ours, we cannot discover them. Thus there is always some
cause or other for those actions which appear most ridiculous and extravagant.

CHAP. VII. Of the Passions in particular, and first of Admiration and its ill
Effects.
WHatever I have hitherto said of the Passions is general, but it will not be
very difficult to draw particular Inferences from thence; It is only requisite
to make some reflection upon what passes within our selves, and the actions of
others, for us to discover more of these sort of Truths at one view, than we
could explain in a considerable time. Yet there are so few Persons who think of
retiring into themselves, and make any endeavor to that end, that to excite
them to it, and stir up their attention, it will be necessary to descend to
particulars.

When we hit or strike our selves, it seems as if we were almost insensible;
but if we are only touched by others, we receive Sensations lively enough to
stir up our Attention. In short, we never tickle our selves, or so much as
think of it, and it may be we could not do it if we had a mind to it. It Is
almost for the same reason that the Soul neglects to enquire into and examine
it self, it is immediately displeased with this sort of enquiry, and is
commonly incapable of discovering or perceiving what belongs to it, except when
excited or stirred up by others. Thus to assist some Persons in the knowing of
themselves, it is necessary to relate some of the particular Effects of the
Passions, that by affecting them therewith, we may make them sensible of all
the parts their Soul are composed of.

Those who will read what follows must nevertheless be advertized, that they
will not always be sensible that I touch them, nor will they always find
themselves subject to the Passions and Errors I shall speak of, because all
particular Passions are not always the same in all Men.

It Is true indeed all Men have the same Natural inclinations which have no
relation to the Body, when their Bodies are perfectly well disposed. But the
different temperaments of Bodies, and their frequent changes, cause a great
deal of variety in particular Passions. And if to the diversity of the Body's
constitution we add that which proceeds from Objects, which likewise makes very
different impressions upon all those who have neither the same Employs nor
manner of living; it is evident that such a Person may feel himself strongly
affected in some place of his Soul by certain things, who will yet absolutely
remain insensible of many others. Thus we should often be deceived, if we
judged of what others feel by what passes in our selves.

I am not afraid of being mistaken when I affirm that all Men would be happy,
for I am absolutely assured that the Chinese and Tartars, Angels, Devils, and
even all Spirits whatever, have an inclination for felicity. I know likewise
that God will never produce any Spirit without this desire. Yet is it not
experience that has taught it me, I never saw either Chinese or Tartar; nor is
it the inward testimony of my Conscience, for that only teaches me I would be
happy my self: But it is God alone who can inwardly convince me that all other
Men, Angels, and Devils, have a desire to be happy; and it is he only who can
assure me, that he will never give a Being to any Spirit who will be
indifferent in respect to it. For who is there besides himself that can
positively assure me of what he does, and even of what he thinks? And as he can
never deceive me, so I cannot doubt of what he teaches me. I am therefore
certain that all Men would be happy because this inclination is natural, and
depends not upon the Body.

But it is very different in particular Passions; For though I should extremely
love Music, Dancing, Hunting, Sweetmeats, or Luxurious Dishes, etc. I could
conclude nothing certain from thence concerning the Passions of other Men.
Pleasure doubtless is sweet and agreeable to all Men, but every one does not
find it in the same Object: The love of pleasure is a Natural inclination,
depends not on the Body, and is therefore general to all Men. But the
inclination for Music, Dancing, and Hunting, is not general, because the
disposition of the Body on which it depends, being different in all Men,
whatsoever Passions depend upon it, are not always the same.

General Passions, as Desire, Joy, Sorrow, etc. keep the mean between Natural
inclinations, and particular Passions. They are general as well as the
Inclinations, but not equally strong; because that which produces and maintains
them, is not always it self equally active. There is also a great deal of
variety in the degrees whereby the Animal Spirits are agitated, in their
plenty, and fineness, and in the relation betwixt the Fibers of the Brain and
these Spirits.

Thus it often happens, that we don't at all affect some Persons, when we speak
of particular Passions; but if we chance to touch them, they are violently
moved. But with general Passions and Inclinations, it is quite contrary, we are
always affected when they are mentioned, yet after such a weak and languishing
manner, that we scarcely perceive it. I speak these things to prevent any
Persons judging whether I am deceived, by the Sensation only which he has
received of what I have already or shall afterward say, for I would have every
one judge by considering the Nature of the Passsions I treat of.

If I proposed the treating of every particular Passion, or to distinguish them
by all the Objects which excite them; it is plain I should never conclude, and
should only repeat the same thing: The first is evident because the Objects of
our Passions are infinite; and the last also, since we must always treat of the
same Subject. The particular Passions for Poetry, History, Mathematics,
Hunting, and Dancing, are only one and the same general Passion; for, for
instance, the Passions of Desire or Joy, or for whatever pleases, differ not,
although the peculiar Pleasures which excite them do.

We must not therefore multiply the number of the Passions according to the
number of Objects which are infinite, but only by the chief relations they may
have in respect to us. And after this manner we shall discover, as will further
appear upon our Explanation, that Love and Hatred are the Mother Passions,
Which produce no other general Passions but Desire, Joy, and Sorrow, and that
particular Passions are composed only of these three first; and are so much the
more compounded as the chief Idea of Good or Evil which excites them, is
accompanied with a greater number of Accessory Ideas, or that the Good or Evil
are more Circumstantiated in respect to us.

If we remember what has been said of the connection of Ideas, and that in all
great Passions the Animal Spirits being extremely agitated, stir up in the
Brain all the Traces which have any relation with the Object which affects us;
we shall find, that there are an infinite number of different Passions which
have no particular name, and which we can no way explain, but must confess they
are inexplicable.

If the Original Passions which compose the rest, were not capable of more or
less; we should have no difficulty in determining the number of all the
Passions; but the number of those Passions which are produced by the
complication of others must necessarily be infinite, because the same Passion
having infinite degrees, it may by joining it self with others be infinitely
complicated: So that perhaps two Men were never moved by the same Passion, if
by the same Passion we understand the collecting together of all equal Motions,
and like Sensations, which at the presence of any Object is stirred up in us.

But as the more or less do not alter the Species, so we may say that the
number of Passions is not infinite, because the Circumstances which accompany
the Good or Evil may be limited. But let us explain our Passions in particular.

When we see any thing the first time, or when we have many time seen it
attended with certain Circumstances, we are surprised and admire at it if we
afterward see it appear in another manner. Thus a new Idea, or a new Connection
of old Ideas, begets in us an imperfect Passion, which is the first of all, and
which I name Admiration. I call this Passion imperfect, because it is neither
excited by the Idea nor Sensation of Good.

The Brain being then shaken in certain places which never were before
affected, or after a manner that is perfectly new, the Soul is sensibly touched
with it, and consequently strongly applies it self, to whatever it finds new in
that object; for the same reason, as a simple tickling at the Soles of the
Feet, excites a most lively and moving Sensation in the Soul, rather through
the novelty than the force of the impression. There is yet other Reasons for
the Souls applying it self to Novelties, but I have explained them where I
spoke of Natural Inclinations. We here consider the Soul in relation to the
Body, and according to this relation it is the emotion of the Spirits which is
the Natural Cause of its application to new things.

In Admiration strictly taken, we consider things only as they are in
themselves, or according to their appearances; and not as they relate to us, or
as they are good or bad. And therefore the Spirits diffuse not themselves
through the Muscles, to give a proper disposition to the Body, to pursue good,
or avoid evil; nor agitate the Nerves, which goes to the Heart, and to the rest
of the Bowels, to hasten, or delay the fermentation and motion of the Blood, as
it happens in the rest of the Passions. All the Spirits go toward the Brain,
there to trace a lively and distinct image of the surprising object, that the
Soul may consider and know it again; But the rest of the Body continues in the
same posture, and as if it were immovable. For there being no emotion in the
Soul, there is also no motion in the Body.

If what we admire appears great, the admiration is always followed with
Esteem, and sometimes with Veneration: But on the contrary, it is always
accompanied with Contempt, and sometimes Disdain, when it appears little.

The Idea of Greatness produces a great motion of Spirits in the Brain, and the
trace that represents it is preserved a long time: A great motion of Spirits
likewise excites the Idea of Greatness in the Soul, and strongly fixes the Mind
on the consideration of this Idea.

But the Idea of Littleness creates in the Brain but an inconsiderable motion
of the Spirits, and the trace which represents it does not continue long. Also,
when the Spirits are but little moved, they cause in the Soul an Idea of
Meanness, and stays the Mind but a very little in the consideration of this
Idea: These things deserve to be well observed.

When we consider our selves, or any thing which is united to us, our
Admiration is always attended with some Passion which moves us. But this
agitation is only in the Soul, and in the Spirits which go to the Heart;
because there being no good that it makes us seek after, nor evil that it makes
us shun, the Spirits are not dispersed through the Muscles to dispose the Body
to any action. The thoughts of the perfection of our Being, or of any thing
belonging to it, naturally produces Pride, the esteem of our Selves, contempt
of others, Joy, and some other Passions. The prospect of Grandeur produces
Haughtiness; that of Power, Generosity or Boldness; and the sight of any, other
advantageous quality naturally produces some other Passion, which will be
always a kind of Pride.

On the contrary, the foresight of some Imperfection of our Being, or of any
thing which belongs to it, will naturally produce Humility, contempt of our
selves, respect for others, sorrow, and some other Passions. The prospect of
Poverty creates meanness of Spirit; that of weakness, Timerousness; and thus
the sight of any disadvantageous quality naturally produces a Passion, which
will be a kind of Humility. But this Humility, as well as that Pride, is
properly neither a Virtue nor a Vice. They are both of 'em only Passions or
involuntary Motions, which are nevertheless very useful to civil Society, and
even absolutely necessary in some occurrences for the preservation of the Life
or Goods of those who are actuacted by them.

It is necessary for instance, to be humble and timorous, and even outwardly to
testify the disposition of our Minds by a respectful and modest Air, when we
are in the presence of a Person of Quality, or of a proud and powerful Man: For
it is commonly advantageous for the Good of the Body, that the imagination
should submit at the sight of sensible Grandeur, and that it should give it
external Marks of its Humility, and inward Veneration. But this is Naturally
and Mechanically performed without the Will's having any share in it, and often
even notwithstanding all its Resistance: Even Bruits themselves have need of
it, as Dogs, to prevail with those they live with, have their Machine composed
after such a manner, that they assume such an Air as they ought to have in
relation to those about 'em, as is absolutely necessary for their preservation.
And if Birds, or any other Animals have not a fit disposition of Body to give
'em this Air, it is because they have no occasion to assuage those the effects
of whose Anger they can avoid by flight; and without whose help they can
preserve their lives.

It cannot be too much considered that all the Passions, which are excited in
us, at the sight of some external object, does Mechanically imprint upon the
face of those that are struck with it, a suitable Air, that is, an Air that
Mechanically disposes all those who see it to such Passions and Motions as are
useful to the good of Society; nay Admiration it self, when it is only caused
in us by the fight of something External, and which others may consider, as
well as we, diffuses through our Face an Air which Mechanically imprints
Admiration in others, and which even acts upon their Brain after so regulated a
manner, that the Spirits which are contained in it are impelled into the
Muscles of their Face, to form there an Air like ours.

This Communication of the Passions of the Soul, and Motions of the Animal
Spirits, to unite Men together in relation to good and evil, and to make 'em
resemble each other, not only by the disposition of their Minds, but also by
that of their Body, is so much the greater, and more observable as the Passions
are more violent, because then the Animal Spirits are agitated with more force;
Now this is necessary, because the Evils being greater or more present, we must
apply our selves the more, and be strongly united amongst our selves, to shun,
or to discover them, But when the Passions are very moderate, as Admiration
commonly is, they don't sensibly communicate themselves, nor produce such an
Air by which they are accustomed to do it. For since there is no extraordinary
occasion, 'twould be unnecessary to put any force upon the imagination of
others, or to divert them from their employments; on which perhaps it is more
requisite they should be engaged, than in considering the Causes of these
Passions.

There is nothing more surprising than this Economy of our Passions, and
disposition of our Body in relation to those objects which encompass us.
Whatsoever is Machinally performed in us, is most worthy the Wisdom of him who
Created us. And as God has made us capable Of all the Passions which act in us,
chiefly to unite us to all sensible things, for the preservation of Society,
and of our own Bodies, and his design is so faithfully executed by the
construction of his work, so we cannot but admire the Springs and curiosity
thereof.

Yet our Passions, and all these imperceptible Bands by which we are united to
whatever is about us, often prove through our faults, very considerable Causes
of our Errors and Irregularities: For we make not that use we ought of our
Passions; we permit them every thing, and do not so much as know the limits
that should be prescribed to their Power. Thus even these Passions, which like
Admiration are but weak, and agitate us the least, have yet power enough to
lead us into Error. Of which here follows some instances.

When Men, and chiefly those who have a vigorous Imagination, consider
themselves on the best side, they are commonly very well satisfied with
themselves; and their inward satisfaction never fails of increasing when they
compare themselves with such as are more dull and heavy than they. Besides,
there is many Persons that admire 'em too; and very few who oppose them with
any success or applause; (for Reason is scarcely ever applauded in opposition
to a strong and lively imagination) and in short, such a sensible Air of
submission and respect is formed upon the Face of all their Hearers, who have
likewise such lively traces of admiration at every new word they speak, that
they also admire themselves, and their Imagination swells them up with all
these advantages, and makes 'em extremely satisfied in their own Abilities:
For, if we cannot see a Passionate Man without receiving some impression from
his Passion, or in some measure engaging our selves in his Sentiments; how
could it be possible for those, who are surrounded with a great number of
Admirers, to give no reception to a Passion which so agreeably flatters
Self-Love?

Now this high esteem that Persons of a strong and lively Imagination have of
themselves, and their good Qualities, swell 'em up with Pride, and makes them
assume a Majestic and Decisive Air: They hear others with Contempt, answer 'em
in Raillery, and only think in relation to themselves; Looking upon the
attention of the Mind as a kind of Servitude, even where it is necessary to
discover the Truth, they become wholly Indocible. Pride, Ignorance, and
Blindness, are always Companions. The Mighty Wits, or rather the Proud and
Vainglorious ones, will never be Disciples of the Truth: They never retire
within themselves, but to admire and applaud their own Acquirements: So that
he, who resists the Proud, shines in the midst of their darkness without
dissipating it.

There is, on the contrary, a certain disposition in the Blood and Animal
Spirits, which gives us too mean an opinion of our selves; Their scarcity,
heaviness, and fineness, joined to the grossness of the Fibers of the Brain,
make our Imagination weak and languishing: And the Sight, or rather confused
Sensation of this weakness and languor of our Imaginations, creates such a
vicious humility in us, as we may call meanness of Spirit.

All Men are capable of the Truth, but do not apply themselves to him who is
only able to teach them. The Proud depend upon themselves, and hearken to none
else; And these mistaken humble ones, address themselves to the Proud, and
submit to all their Decisions: Thus both listen only to Man. The Mind of the
Proud, obeys the fermentation of their own Blood, that is their own
Imagination: And that of the mean spirited, submits to the commanding Air of
the Proud; so that both are subjected to Vanity and Lies. The Proud are like a
rich and powerful Man, who having a great Equipage, measures his own greatness
by the number of his Followers, and his strength by that of his Horses which
draw his Coach. These mistaken humble ones, having the same Spirit and same
Principles, resemble a poor miserable languishing wretch, who imagines himself
almost nothing, because he possesses nothing. Yet our Equipage is not our
selves; and so far is the abundance of the Blood and Spirits, vigor and
impetuosity of the Imagination, from leading us to Truth, that, on the
contrary, there is nothing which diverts us more from it. It is the dull, if I
may call them so, the cold and sedate Minds, which are most capable of
discovering the most solid and intricate Troths. In the silence of their
Passions, they may hearken to that Truth which teaches them in the most secret
recesses of their Reason; but unhappily, they think not of applying themselves
to its word, because it speaks without a sensible luster, and in a low voice,
and nothing affects them but a noise: Nothing convinces them but what seems
sparkling, great and magnificent, to the Judgment of the Senses; they are not
pleased without they are dazzled, and choose rather to hearken to those
Philosopbers, who relate their Visions and Dreams to them; and who, with the
false Prophets of Old, affirm the Truth has spoken to them, though it has not,
than to give Ear to the Truth it self. For above this four thousand years, the
Pride of Man has, without opposition, put off lies and falsehoods, which have
been respectfully received, and even preserved as Holy and Divine Traditions.
It seems as if the God of Truth was no longer with them; they neither consult
nor meditate on him any longer, but cover their idleness and neglect with the
deceitful appearance of an holy Humility.

Indeed, of our selves, we cannot discover the Truth, but we may all times do
it by the assistance of him who enlightens us; although we never can do it by the
help of all the Men in the World. Those even, who are best acquainted with it,
cannot discover it to us, if we do not our selves inquire of him who has
informed them, and if he answer not our attention as he has answered theirs. We
must not therefore receive any thing upon the credit of Man, for they are all
Liers; but because he who cannot deceive us has spoken to us, we ought
continually to beg his Instruction. We must not believe those, who speaking to
the Ear, instruct only the Body, or, at most, act upon the Imagination; but we
must attentively hearken, and faithfully believe him who speaks to the Mind,
instructs the Reason, and who penetrating into the most secret recesses of the
inward Man, is capable of enlightening and fortifying it against the outward
and sensible Man, which continually endeavors to seduce and abuse us. I so
often repeat these things, because I think them most worthy of a serious
reflection; It Is God alone that we must Honor, since there is none but ha who
is able to give us knowledge, or make us capable of Pleasure.

There is sometimes to be observed in the Animal Spirits, and the rest of the
Body, a certain disposition, which inclines us to Hunting, Dancing, Running,
and to all Exercises in general, wherein the strength and agility of the Body
are most conspicuous. This disposition is commonly in Young men, and chiefly in
those whose Bodies are not perfectly formed. Children cannot stay long in one
place, but are always in action when they follow their humor: For as their
Muscles are not yet strong, nor perfectly finished, God, the Author of Nature,
regulates the pleasures of the Soul, in relation to the good of the Body, so as
to make them find pleasure in these Exercises, which help to fortify and
confirm the strength of their Bodies. Thus, whilst the Flesh and Fibers of the
Nerves are still soft, the little passages, through which the Animal Spirits
must necessarily flow, to produce all sorts of motions, are kept open and
preserved; the humors have no time to settle, and all Obstructions, and causes
of Putrefaction, are prevented.

The confused Sensation which Young men have of the disposition of their
Bodies, make them please themselves in the thoughts of their strength and
activity. They admire themselves when they know how to measure their motions,
or are able to make any uncommon ones; and even wish to be in company of such
persons as may behold and admire them. Thus, by little and little, they
strengthen their inclination for all bodily Exercises, which is one of the
chief causes of the Ignorance and Brutality of Men: For besides the time that
is lost in these Exercises, the little use Men make of their Minds, is the
cause that the chief part of the Brain, (whose flexibility produces a strength
and vivacity of Mind) becomes wholly untractable, and the Animal Spirits are
not easily dispersed through the Brain, after such a manner, as to make them
capable of thinking of whatever they please.

This is the reason that most part of the Nobility, and such as are trained up
to the War, are incapable of applying themselves to any thing; they argue upon
things according to the Proverb, A Word and a Blow. And if we say any thing to
them, they have not a mind to hear, instead of thinking what answer ought to be
made; their Animal Spirits insensibly flow into the Muscles, by whose
assistance they lift up their Arms, and answer without any reflection, by a
blow, or some threatening gesture, because their Spirits being agitated by the
words they hear, they are carried to those places which are most open, through
habit and exercise; and the knowledge they have of the strength of their
Bodies, confirms them in these insolent behaviors: And observing the
respectful Air of those who hear them, they are puffed up with a foolish
confidence, which makes them utter many fierce and brutish impertinencies,
believing, at the same time, that they have spoke many fine things, because the
fear and prudence of others was favorable to them.

It is not possible to apply our selves to any Study, or actually to make a
profession of any Science without it; we can be neither Authors nor Doctors,
without remembering what we are. But this alone, often, naturally, produces in
the Mind of good men so many Defects, that 'twould be very advantageous for
them if they were without those honorable Titles. As they imagine them to be
their chief Perfections, they always think on them with Pleasure, discover them
to others with all possible Artifice, and even pretend they have given them a
right to judge of all things without examination. If any Person has Courage
enough to oppose them, they soon Craftily, and with a sweet and obliging Air,
insinuate what they are, and the right they have to decide all things. But if
afterward any is so bold as to resist them, and they want an answer, they will
then openly say what they think of themselves, and those who oppose them.

All inward Sensation of any advantage that we possess naturally increases our
Courage; A Soldier well Armed and Mounted, who wants neither Blood nor Spirits,
is ready to undertake any thing: The disposition he finds himself in makes him
bold and daring. It is the same with a Learned Man, when he believes himself
so, and when the vanity of his Heart has corrupted his Mind; he becomes, if we
may say so, bold and confident against the Truth. Sometimes he rashly opposes
it without knowing it, and sometimes betrays it after he has discovered it, and
confiding in his false Learning, he is always ready to maintain the Negative or
Affirmative, according as the Spirit of Contradiction possesses him.

It is very different with those who boast not of their Learning; they are not
decisive: It is rare that they speak if they have not something to say. Nay, it
often happens, that they are silent when they ought to speak; they have not
that reputation, nor those external marks of Learning, which persuade them to
speak they know not what. These may safely hold their Tongues, but Pretenders
to Sciences are afraid to continue silent, for they know, well they shall be
despised if they hold their Tongues, although they have nothing material to
say; and on the contrary, they will not always be condemned, although they say
only impertinent things, provided they speak them after a Scientific manner.

What makes men capable of thinking, makes them fit to discover Truth; but it is
neither Honor, Riches, nor Dignities, nor false Learning, that can give them
this capacity, it proceeds from their Nature: They are made to think, because
they are made for Truth. Even Health it self is not sufficient to make them
think well, all that it can do is, not to be so great an impediment as Sickness
is. Our Body, in some manner, assists us by Sense and Imagination, but it does
not help our Conception: For although, without help of the Body, we might, by
meditation, oppose out Idea's to the continual Efforts of the Senses and
Passions, which perplex and efface them, because we can only, at present,
overcome the Body by the Body: Yet it is plain, that the Body cannot illuminate
the Mind, nor produce the Light of Understanding in it, for every Idea which
discovers the Truth, comes from Truth it self. What the Soul receives by the
Body, is only for the Body it self, and when it persues those Phantoms, it
discovers nothing but Illusions and Chimera's; I mean, it does not see things
as they are in themselves, but only as they relate to the Body.

If the Idea of our own greatness or littleness is often an occasion of our
Error, the Idea we have of external things, and what has any relation to us,
causes not a lest dangerous impression. We have just said, that the Idea of
greatness is always attended with a great Motion of Spirits, and that a great
Motion of Spirits is always accompanied with an Idea of greatness; and that, on
the contray, the Idea of littleness is always attended with a weak motion of
Spirits, and that a weak Motion of the Spirits is always accompanied with an
Idea of littleness. From this Principle it is easy to conclude, that such
things as produce a great Motion of to the Spirits in us, must naturally appear
to us to have more Greatness, that is, more Power, more Reality, and more
Perfection, than others, for by Greatness I mean all these things, and many
such like. So that Sensible Things must appear to us greater, and more solid,
than those which cannot be felt, if we judge of them by the Motion of the
Spirits, and not by the pure Idea of Truth. A great House, a magnificent Train,
fine Furniture, Offices, Honors, Riches, etc. appear to have more greatness
and reality in them, than Virtue and Justice do.

When we compare Virtue with Riches by a clear view of the Mind, then Virtue
gains the preference; but when we make use of our Eyes and Imaginations, and
judge of these things only by the emotion of the Spirits that they excite in
us, we undoubtedly prefer Riches to Virtue.

It Is from this Principle that we have so mean an Opinion of Spiritual things
which do not affect the Senses; That the Idea's of our Minds are less Noble
than the Objects they represent; That there is less reality and substance in
Air than in Metals, in Water than in Ice; That the spaces betwixt Earth and
Heaven are avoid, or else that the Bodies which fill it, have not so much
reality and solidity as the Sun and Stars have. In fine, if we fall into an
infinite number of Errors about the Nature and Perfection of every thing, it is
because we argue upon this false Principle.

A great motion of Spirits, and consequently a strong Passion, always
accompanies a sensible Idea of greatness; and a small motion of Spirits, and a
weak Passion likewise, attends a sensible Idea of littleness; We apply our
selves much, and bestow a great deal of our time in the Study of whatever may
excite a sensible Idea of greatness, and neglect what gives us a sensible Idea
of littleness. Those great Bodies, for instance, which move about us, have
always made an impression upon us; we at first adored them, because of the
sensible Idea we had of their greatness and brightness. Some bolder Genii have
examined their Motions; and in all Ages, the Stars have been the Object either
of the Study or Veneration of many Men. We may even say, that the fear of these
imaginary influences, which at this day terrify Astrologers and some weak
Persons, is a kind of adoration that a depraved Imagination pays to the Idea of
greatness, which represents these Celestial Bodies.

The Body of Man, on the contrary, though infinitely more admirable and worthy
our application, than whatever can be known of Jupiter and Saturn with all the
rest of the Planets, is almost unknown to us. The sensible Idea of the
dissected parts of the flesh has nothing great in it, and even causes disgust
and horror; so that it is but a few years since Ingenious persons looked upon
Anatomy as a Science which merited their application. Kings and Princes have
been Astronomers, and proud of that Title. The grandeur of the Stars seemed to
agree well with the greatness of their Dignities, but I don't believe they
thought it any honor to understand Anatomy, and to be able to dissect a Heart
or a Brain well. It is the same with many other Sciences.

Rare and extraordinary things, produce greater and more sensible Motions in
the Spirits than those which we see every day; we admire them, and consequently
affix some Idea of greatness to them, and thus they excite in the Spirits
Passions of esteem and veneration. It Is this which overturns the Reason of many
Men, for some are so curious and respectful for every thing of Antiquity, what
comes from far, or is rare and extraordinary, that their Minds become Slaves to
it, because the Mind dares make no Judgment upon what it respects.

Truth, I grant, is in no great danger, because some Men wholly employ
themselves about Medals, Arms, the Dress of the Ancients, the Chinese or
Barbarians. It is not absolutely useless to know the Map of Old Rome, or the
Roads from Tomquin to Nanquin, although it be more useful to know those we shall
have more occasion to Travel. In fine, we have nothing to object against the
knowledge of the true History of the War of the Greeks with the Persians, or of
the Tartars with the Chinese; or that persons should have an extraordinary
inclination for Thucidides and Xenophon, or for any other that pleases them.
But we cannot suffer that Reason should be so subjected to the admiration of
Antiquity; that we must be forbidden to make use of our Understanding to
examine the Opinions of the Ancients, and that those who discover and show the
falseness of them, should pass for presumptious and rash Persons.

There has been Truths in all Ages; if Aristotle has discovered some of them,
further discoveries may be also made to this day: The Opinions of this Author
must be proved by good Reasons, for if Aristotle's Sentiments were solid in his
time, they will be so now. It Is a pure illusion, to pretend to prove Natural
Truths by Humane Authority; perhaps we may prove, that Aristotle had such and
such thoughts upon certain Subjects, but 'twou'd not be very reasonable to read
Aristotle, or any other Author whatever, with much assiduity and pains, only to
learn his Opinions Historically, and to instruct others after the same manner.

We cannot, without some dislike, consider certain Universities which were
Established only for an Enquiry into, and Defense of the Truth, that have now
Espoused a particular Sect and Glory in studying and defending the Opinions of
some Men: Nor can we, without some regret, read those Philosophers and
Physicians who fill their Books with lo many Citations, that one would rather
take them for Commentaries upon Divinity and Civil Law, than Treatises of
Physics or Medicine: For who can be content to quit Reason and Experience,
blindly to follow the Imaginations of Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, or any other
Philosopher whatever?

However we might, perhaps, continue unmoved, and without reply, at the sight
of so strange a Conduct, if we did not feel our selves offended by it; I mean,
if those Gentlemen did not oppose themselves to the Truth, to which only they
ought to be united. But their Admiration for the Visions of the Ancients,
inspires them with a blind Zeal against any new discoveries of the Truth; they
decry them without knowing them, oppose them without apprehending them, and by
the power of their Imaginations, infuse into the Mind and Heart of those who
hear and admire them, the same Sensations wherewith they are affected.

As they judge of these new Discoveries only by the esteem they have of their
Authors, and since those they have seen, and with whom they converse, have not
this great and extraordinary Air that the Imagination attributes, to Ancient
Authors, they cannot esteem them: For the Idea of the Men of our own Age, not
being attended with these extraordinary motions which strike the Mind, it
naturally excites nothing but Contempt.

Limners and Statuaries, never represent the Ancient Philosophers like other
Men; They make them great Heads, large and high Foreheads, long and magnificent
Beards. This is a good proof, that the generality of Men naturally form a like
Idea of them, for Painters draw things as they appear to them; they follow the
natural motions of their Imaginations. Thus we generally look upon the Ancients
as extraordinary Men; but, on the contrary, the Imagination represents the Men
of our time like those we see every day, and that producing no extraordinary
motion in the Spirits, it only excites in the Soul a contempt and indifferency
for them.

I have seen D'Cartes, says one of these Learned Men who only admire Antiquity;
I have known, and discoursed with him many times; he was an honest Man; nor did
he want Wit, yet he had nothing extraordinary. Thus he has a mean Idea of
D'Cartes Philosophy, because he had discoursed some moments with him, and
discovered nothing of this great and extraordinary Air in him which heats the
Imagination. He even thinks it a sufficient answer to any difficult Arguments
of this Philosopher which perplexed him a little, to say considently that he
had formerly known him. It were to be wished, that these sort of Men could see
Aristotle otherwise than in Painting, and have an hours Conversation with him,
provided he spoke not to them in Greek, but in their own Tongue, without
knowing who he was till after they had made a Judgment of him.

Whatever bears the Character of Novelty, whether because it is new in it self,
or that it appear in a new order or situation, it agitates us much, for it
affects the Brain in places which are so much the more sensible, as they are
less exposed to the course of the Spirits; and such things as have a sensible
mark of greatness also affects us much, because they excite a great Motion of
Spirits in us. But what, at the same time, bears the Character of Greatness and
Novelty too, does not only agitate us, it confounds, elevates, and astonisheth
us by its violent agitations.

Those, for Instance, who speak Paradoxes, make themselves admired, for they
say only such things as have the Character of Novelty. Such as speak in
Sentences, and only use choice and proper Words, cause themselves to be
respected, for they seem to say something great: But those who join Eloquence
to Novelty, the Great to the Extraordinary, seldom ever fail of ravishing and
astonishing the vulgar sort, although they speak nothing but impertinencies. This
pompous and magnificent Jargon, insano fulgoret, these false Lights of Orators,
commonly dazzle weak Minds; they make so lively and surprising an impression
upon their Imagination that they remain, confounded, and respect: this power
which abases and blinds them, and admire, as the brightest Truths, such
confused Sentiments as cannot be expressed.

CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the same Subject; of the good Use that may be
made of Admiration, and the rest of the Passions.
All the Passions have two very considerable Effects, they apply the Mind, and
gain the Heart. By the former they may be very useful to the discovery of
Truth, provided we know how to make use of them, for application produces
knowledge, and knowledge discovers the Truth. But in respect to their gaining
the Heart, they always produce an ill Effect; because they only win it by
corrupting the Reason, and representing things to it not as they are in
themselves, or according to truth; but according to the relation they bear to
us.

Of all Passions, that which least affects the Heart is Admiration: For it is
the prospect of things that are either good or evil which agitates us, for the
sight of things as they are great or small without any other relation to us,
affects us very little or not at all. Thus Admiration which accompanies the
knowledge of the greatness or smallness of new things which we would consider,
corrupt the Reason much less than any other Passion; and. it may even be of
great use in the knowledge of the Truth, provided we take care to hinder its
being followed by any of the other Passions, as it commonly happens.

In Admiration the Animal Spirits are forcibly impelled toward those places in
the Brain which represent the new Object as it is in it self: They make
distinct Traces there, and deep enough to continue a long time; consequently
the Mind has a clear Idea of them, and can easily resolve them. Thus we cannot
deny but Admiration may be very useful in the Sciences since it applies and
instructs the Mind. It is not so with the rest of the Passions, they apply the
Mind, but instruct it not. They apply it because they stir up the Animal
Spirits; but they instruct it not, or else do it by a false and deceitful
light, since after such a manner they impel these same Spirits, as they
represent Objects only according to the relation they have to us, and not as
they are in themselves.

There is nothing so difficult as to apply our selves long to any thing when we
don't admire it, the Animal Spirits are not then easily carried to those places
which are necessary to represent it; 'twould be in vain to solicit our
attention, we could not animadvert, or at least not very long; although we
might otherwise be persuaded after an abstracted manner, and which agitated not
the Spirits, that the thing very well deserved our application. It is requisite
we should deceive our Imagination to stir up our Spirits, and that we should
after a new manner represent the Subject we would meditate on, that we might
excite in our selves some motion of Admiration.

We every day see such Persons as have no inclination for Study, nothing
appears more painful to them than application of Mind; yet are they convinced
they ought to study certain things, and to that end they use their utmost
endeavors; but they are unsuccessful, and they advance not much; but
immediately leave them. It is true the Animal Spirits obey the orders of the
Will, and make it attentive whenever we desire it: But when the Will, which
commands, is purely reasonable, and depends not upon any Passion, it is
performed after so weak and languishing a manner, that our Ideas then resemble
Phantoms which are but just seen, and disappear in a moment. Our Animal Spirits
receive so many secret orders from our Passions, and both by Nature and habit,
have so great a facility to execute them, as that they are very easily diverted
from the new and difficult ways where the Will would engage them to go, so that
it is chiefly in these Occurrences that we have need of particular Grace to
assist us in the discovery of the Truth, because we cannot by our own power
long resist the influences of the Body which conquer and suppress the Mind; or
if we have this ability, we never make use of it.

But when we are excited by any motion of Admiration, the Animal Spirits
naturally disperse themselves toward the Traces of the Object which caused it:
They clearly represent it to the Mind; and produce in the Brain what is
necessary to create knowledge and evidence, without troubling the Will to
fatigue it self by forcing these unwilling Spirits. Thus those who are capable
of Admiration are much fitter for Study than such as are not susceptible of it:
The first are quick and ingenious, the last dull and stupid.

Yet when Admiration becomes excessive, and proceeds either to astonish or
affright us, or does not incline us to Rational Curiosity, it commonly produces
ill Effects. For then the Animal Spirits are all employed to represent the
Object we admire on one side only; we don't even think whether we may consider
it farther or not; nor do the Animal Spirits disperse themselves so much as
into the common parts of the Body, to perform their functions there; but
imprint such deep footsteps of the Object they represent, and break so great a
number of the Fibers of the Brain, that the Idea they create can never after be
effaced from the Mind.

It is not enough for Admiration to render us attentive, it must also make us
curious: Nor is it sufficient for us to consider one side of any Object to
discover it fully, we must examine it thoroughly, or else we cannot judge truly
of it: So that when Admiration does not induce us to examine things with the
utmost exactness, or when it hinders us from it, it is very useless in the
discovery of Truth: Then it only fills the Mind with probabilities and
appearances, and inclines it to judge rashly of every thing.

To Admire for Admiration sake, is not sufficient, we must Admire that we may
afterward examine with the more facility; the Animal Spirits which naturally
stir up Admiration in us, freely offer their assistance to the Soul, that it
may use them to represent the Object more distinctly, and that it may better
discover it. This is the institution of Nature; for Admiration must lead us to
Curiosity, and Curiosity guide us to the discovery of Truth. But the Soul does
not know how to make use of its power; it prefers a certain Sensation of
Complacency which it receives from this abundance of Spirits that affect it,
before the knowledge of the Object which excites them: It chooses rather to
enjoy plenty of Spirits than to dissipate them by use, in which it resembles
certain Covetous Persons, who prefer the possession of their Silver, before the
benefits they might in their Necessities receive from it.

Men generally please themselves with whatever affects them in any Passion;
They don't only give their Money to make themselves affected with Sorrow at the
representation of a Tragedy, but likewise throw it away upon Leigerdemain that
may raise their Admiration; for we cannot say they give it to be deceived. The
Sensation of Internal Pleasure which the Soul feels in Admiration, is then the
chief cause why we dwell upon it without making that use of it that Reason and
Nature prescribes us: For it is this Sensation of Complacency which keeps the
Admirers so strictly united to the Subjects of their Admiration; that they will
fall into a Passion if we show them the vanity of it. When an Afflicted Person
tastes the sweetness of Sorrow, we anger him if we try to divert him from it;
It is the same with those who admire any thing, it seems to 'em as if we would
injure them, when we endeavor to show them their Admiration is without any
Reason; because they feel that secret Pleasure they received from the Passion
diminish proportionally as the Idea which caused it is effaced out of their
Mind.

The Passions always endeavor to justify themselves, and insensibly persuade
us that it is reasonable to follow them: The Complacency and Pleasure they make
the Mind feel, which ought to be their Judge, corrupts it in their favor; and
inspires it with such like Reasoning: I ought to judge of things only according
to the Ideas I have of 'em: And of all my Ideas, the most sensible, are the
most real, since they act the most powerfully upon me; It is therefore by them
I ought the rather to judge: Now the Subject I admire includes a sensible Idea
of greatness; then I must judge according to this Idea, for I ought to have an
esteem and love for greatness. So that I have reason to stop at this Object,
and employ my self upon it; Indeed the pleasure I feel, at the sight of the
Idea which represents it, is a Natural proof that it is my good to think upon
it; for it seems to me that I grow great my self whilst I consider it, and that
my Mind has more extension when it embraces so great an Idea. The Mind ceasing
to be when it thinks of nothing, if this Idea should vanish it seems to me that
my Mind would vanish with it, or that it would become less and more contracted
if it applied it self to an Idea that was less. The preservation of this great
Idea, is then the preservation of the greatness and perfection of my Being; and
therefore I have reason to admire it. Others also ought to admire me if they
would do me justice, since I am something great through the relation I have to
great things: I in some measure possess them by the admiration I have for them,
and I feel the good by a foretaste that a kind of hope makes me enjoy. Other
Men would be happy as well as I, if knowing my greatness they like me applied
themselves to the Cause which produced it; but they are blind and have no
knowledge of either great or fine things, and know not how either to raise or
make themselves become consider able.

We may say the Mind naturally reasons after this manner, without making any
reflection when it permits it self to be guided by the deceitful lights of its
Passions. These Arguments have some probability, bus it is plain they have no
solidity in them: And this appearance or rather confused Sensation of it which
attends these Natural Reasonings made without reflection, have so much power,
that if we don't take great care they will never fail of seducing us.

For instance, when Poetry, History, Chimistry, or any other Humane Science,
has struck the Imagination of a young Man with any Motions of Admiration; if he
don't carefully watch the efforts these Motions make upon his Mind; If he does
not thoroughly examine what the advantages of these Sciences are; and compare
the troubles he shall have in the learning, with the profit he shall afterward
receive from them; and, in short, if he is not as curious as is requisite to
judge well, there is a great deal of danger that his Admiration will not only
show him these Sciences with the fairest side outward, but seduce him also. It
is likewise very much to be feared that it will corrupt his Heart after such a
manner, that he shall not be able to destroy the illusion, though he afterward
come to know it to be such; because it is impossible to efface such deep Traces
out of his Brain as a continual Admiration shall have wrought there. For that
reason he must continually stir up the purity of his Imagination, he must
hinder these dangerous Traces from being formed which will corrupt the Mind and
Heart. I shall here prescribe a very useful way to prevent not only the excess
of Admiration, but also of all other Passions in general.

When the Motion of the Animal Spirits is violent enough, to make such deep
Traces in the Brain as corrupt the Imagination, it is always attended with some
emotion of the Soul. Thus the Soul cannot be moved without being sensible of
it, it is sufficiently advertised to take care or it self, and to examine
whether it is advantageous that these Traces should be strengthened and made
complete. But in the time of the emotion, the Mind not being free enough to
judge of the usefulness of these Traces, because this emotion deceives and
inclines it to favor them; it must make its utmost endeavor to stop this
emotion, or else divert the motion of the Spirits which cause it; and in the
mean time it is absolutely necessary for it to suspend its Judgment.

Now it must not be imagined that the Soul can always barely by its own Will
stop this course of Spirits which hinder it from making use of its Reason. Its
common powers are not sufficient to make such Motions cease which it has not
excited. So that it must make use of artifices to endeavor to deceive an
Enemy, that attacks it only by surprise.

As the motion of the Spirits stir up certain thoughts in the Soul, so these
Thoughts also excite certain motions in our Brain. Thus, when we would stop any
motion of the Spirits, which is stirred up in us, it is not sufficient to will
that it should cease, for that is not always capable of stoping it: We must
make use of some Artifices, and represent things contrary to those which excite
and maintain this motion, and this would cause a Revulsion. But if we would
only determine a motion of Spirits already excited to some other place, we must
not think of contrary things, but only on such things as differ from those
which produce it, and this will undoubtedly divert them.

But because a Diversion and Revulsion will be great or little in proportion as
our new thoughts shall be attended with a great or less motion of Spirits; we
must be very careful in observing well what those Thoughts are which agitate as
most, that in pressing occasions we may be able to represent, them to our
Imagination which seduces us, and we must endeavor to form so strong an habit
of resistance by this method, that the motion which surprises us may be no more
excited in our Souls.

If we take care to make an intent application of the Idea of Eternity, or any
other serious Thoughts to these extraordinary motions which are excited in us,
those violent and great motions will never happen again without stirring up in
us at the same time this Idea, and which will consequently furnish us with the
means to resist them. Those things are proved both by Experience, and the
Reasons brought in the Chapter Of the Connection of Idea's: So that we ought
not to think it absolutely impossible by any Artifice to conquer the efforts of
our Passions, when our Wills are firmly determined to do it.

However we must not pretend that we can become Impeccable, or shun all error
by this manner of Resistance. For first, it is difficult to acquire and preserve
such an habit, as that our extraordinary Motions shall stir up in us such Ideas
as are proper to oppose them. Secondly, supposing we have acquired it, these
motions of the Spirits would directly excite those Ideas which we must oppose,
and but indirectly those which we must oppose to them. So that the ill Idea's
being the principal, they will always have more power than those which are only
accessory: and it will be always necessary for the Will to assist the latter.
In the third place, these motions of the Spirits may be so violent, that they
may fill the whole capacity of the Soul, so that there remains no more room, if
we may be permitted so to speak, to receive the accessory Idea that is fit to
make a Revulsion in the Spirits, or to receive it after such a manner as we may
consider it with any attention: In fine, there are so many particulas
circumstances which may make this remedy useless, that we must not too much
confide in it, although on the other side we ought not to neglect it. We must
continually have recourse to Prayer, that we may receive from Heaven those
assistances as are necessary in the time of Temptations, and also endeavor to
present to the Mind some Truth that is so solid and strong, that by this means
we may conquer the most violent Passions. For I must needs advertize by the
way, that several pious Persons often fall again into the same Errors, because
they fill their Minds with a great number of such Truths as have more luster
than power, and are fitter to dissipate and divide their Minds than to fortify
it against Temptation; whereas unlearned and ignorant Persons are faithful in
their Duty, because they make some great and serious Truth familiar to them,
which fortifies and upholds them in all Occurrences.

CHAP. IX. of Love and Aversion, and of their principal kinds.
LOve and Aversion are the first Passions which succeed Admiration. We do not
long consider an object without discovering the Relations it has to us, or to
something that we Love: The object that we Love, and to which consequently we
are united, by Love, being almost always present to us, as well as that which
we actually admire; our Mind without any pain, or great reflection, makes the
necessary Comparisons to discover the Relations they have to each other, and to
us, or else it is naturally advertized of 'em by the preventing Sensations of
Pleasure and Complacency. And then the motion of Love we have for our selves,
and the object that we Love, extends it self unto that we admire, if the
relation that it immediately has with us, or with any thing we are united to,
appears advantageous to us, either by Knowledge or Sensation. Now this new
motion of the Soul, or rather motion of the Soul newly determined, being joined
to that of the Animal Spirits, and followed with the Sensation which
accompanies the new disposition, that this new motion of Spirits produces in
the Brain, is the Passion that we here call Love.

But if we feel by any Pain, or discover by a clear and evident Knowledge, that
the union or relation of the object we admire, is disadvantageous to us, or to
any thing we are united to: Then the motion of Love that we have for our
selves, and for what is united to us, is limited in us, or carried toward it;
and follows not the sight of the Mind, nor employs it self on the object of our
Admiration. But as the motion toward good in general, which the Author of
Nature continually imprints in the Soul, carries us toward what we know, and
feel, to be so, because what is intelligible and sensible is good in it self:
We may say that the resistance which the Soul makes against this natural motion
that draws it away, is a kind of voluntary motion which terminates in
Nothingness.

Now this voluntary motion of the Soul being joined to that of the Spirits and
Blood, That we may not be mistaken in respect to what I here call voluntary
Motion, it is requisite to read the first explanation upon the first Chapter.
and followed with the Sensation which accompanies the new disposition that
this motion of Spirits produces in the Brain, is the Passion that we here call
Aversion.

This Passion is absolutely contrary to Love, yet is never without Love: It is
wholly contrary, because this separates, I should only perplex the thought if I
spoke whatever related to it, to satisfy some difficult Persons,
and that unites: The former has Nothingness for its object, and the latter
always some Being, whereby it is excited: Aversion refists natural Motion, and
makes it of no effect, whereas Love yields to it, and makes it victorious. But
it is never separated from Love; for if evil, which is its object, is taken for
a privation of good, to fly evil is to fly the privation of good, that is, to
incline toward good; and so that to hate the privation of good, is to love
good it self. But if evil is taken for Pain, and the aversion of Pain is not an
aversion of the privation of Pleasure, since Pain is as real a Sensation as
Pleasure, it is not therefore the privation of it: but the aversion of Pain
being the aversion to some inward Misery, we should not have this aversion if
we had not love. Indeed, evil may be taken for whatever causes Pain in us, or
deprives us of good: and then aversion depends upon the love of our selves, or
of something to which we wish to be united. Love and Hatred are then the two
Mother Passions, and opposite to each other; but Love is the first, chief, and
most Universal.

Being also since the Fall so far removed and separated from good as we are,
and looking upon our own being as the chief part of every thing we are united
to, we may in one Sense say, that the motion of Love, which we have to all
things, is only a consequence of Self-Love. We love Honors, because they raise
us above others; Riches, because they defend and preserve us; Our Relations,
Prince, and Country, because we are interested in their preservation. The
motion of love that we have for our selves extends to every thing that relates
to us, and to whatever we are united: For it is even this motion which unites,
and diffuses, if I may so say, our Being into those which encompass us, in
proportion as we discover by Reason, or discern by Sensation, that it is
advantageous to be united to them.

So that we must not think that since the Fall, Self-Love is only the cause and
rule of all other Loves, but that most Loves are only kinds of Self-Love. For
when we say a Man loves a new object, we must not think that a new motion of
love is produced in this Man: But rather that knowing that this object has some
relation or union with him, he loves himself in that object, and by a motion of
Love as old as himself. For indeed, without Grace, there is only Self-Love in
the Heart of Man. For the love of Truth, Justice, and even of God himself, and
every other Love that has been in us from the first Inftitution of Nature, is
ever since the fall the Sacrifice of self-love.

We doubt not nevertheless, but the most wicked and barbarous Men, as
Idolaters, and even Atheists themselves, are united to God by a Natural Love,
and of which consequently Self Love is not the cause. By Love they are united
to Truth, Justice, and Virtue: They praise and esteem good Men; and it is not
because they are Men that they love them, but because they see good qualities
in them which they cannot avoid loving, since they cannot hinder themselves
from admiring and judging them aimable. Thus we love something else besides our
selves; but Self-Love is always predominant over all other loves. Men abandon
Truth and Justice for triffling Interests: and if by their natural Powers they
hazard their Lives and Fortunes to defend oppressed innocence, or any other
occasion. They are induced by little else than Vanity; and to make themselves
considerable by the apparent possession of some Virtue which all the world
reverences. They love Virtue and Justice, but never when it is against
themselves. They may love them when they agree, but never when they are
opposite to their Interest: for they can never without Grace gain the least
conquest over Self-Love.

There are also many other natural loves: We Naturally love our Prince, our
Country, our Relations, and those that we find conformable to our Humors,
Designs, Employments; but all these loves are very weak, as well as the love of
Truth and Justice, and Self-Love being the most violent of all loves, it always
overcomes them, without finding any other resistance than what it makes it self.

Bodies which strike one another lose their motion, in proportion as they
communicate it to those they meet; and they may at last lose it all if they
shock many other Bodies. But it is not so with Self-Love; it determines all
other loves by the impression it gives them, yet its motion diminishes not: On
the contrary it acquires new Powers by its new Victories: and as its motion
goes not out of the Heart, it is not lost, although it is continually
communicated.

Self-Love is then the commanding and universal Love; since it is found every
where, and reigns wherever it is found. So that all the Passions have no other
motion than that of Self-Love, we may also say, that Self-Love is the most
extensive, and strongest of all Passions, or that it is the commanding and
universal Passion. For even as all Virtues are only kinds of the first Virtue,
that we call Charity, as St. Augustine has shown; so all Vices, and even all
Passions, are likewise only consequences or kinds of Self-Love, or proceed from
this general Vice we call Concupiscence.

We often distinguish in Morality, the Virtues or Kinds of Charity by the
difference of its Objects: but that sometimes confounds the true Idea we ought
to have of Virtue, which rather depends upon its own motive than on any thing
else, and therefore we shall not follow this method in treating of the Passions:
We will not here distinguish them by their objects, because one object alone
may excite them all, and yet ten thousand objects must excite but one: For
although objects differ amongst themselves; they are not always different in
relation to us, and they excite not different Passions in us. A promised
Marshal's Staff differs from a promised Bishop's Crosier; yet these two marks
of Honor excite very near the same Passion in Ambitious Persons; because they
stir up a like Idea of Good in the Mind. But the same Mareschal's Staff, when
promised, granted, enjoyed, or taken away, excites very different Passions,
since it raises in the Mind different Ideas of Good.

We must not therefore multiply the Passions according to the different Objects
which cause them, but only admit so many of 'em, as there are accessory Ideas,
which attend the principal Idea of Good or Evil, and considerably change it in
relation to us. For the general Idea of Good, or the Sensation of Pleasure,
which is a good to him who tastes it, agitating the Soul and Animal Spirits, it
produces the general Passion of Love: And the accessory Ideas of this Good,
determine the general agitation of the Soul, and the course of the Animal
Spirits after a particular manner, which puts the Mind and Body into the
disposition it ought to be in relation to the Good we perceive, and thus they
produce all particular Passions.

Thus the general Idea of Good produces an indeterminate Love, which is only an
extension of Self-Love.

The Idea of the Good which we possess producs a a love of Joy.

The Idea of a Good that we do not yet, but hope hereafter to possess, that is,
which we judge we may be able to possess, produces a love of Desire.

In fine, the Idea of a Good which we possess not, nor have any hopes of
possessing; or which is the same, the Idea of a Good that we have no hopes of
possessing without the loss of some other, or such an one as we cannot preserve
when we possess it, produces a love of Sorrow. These are the three simple or
primitive Passions which have Good for their object; for the hope which
produces Joy, is not an emotion of the Soul, but a simple Judgment.

But we must observe that Men limit not their being in themselves, but extend
it to ail things and Persons to whom it may appear advantageous to be united.
So that we must conceive that they in some manner possess a good when their
Friends enjoy it, although they do not immediately possess it themselves. Thus
when I say, that the possession of Good produces Joy, I mean not only of the
immediate union or possession, but of all others; for we naturally feel Joy
when any good fortune happens to those we love.

Evil, as I have before said; may be taken in three different ways, either for
the privation of Good, or for Pain, or in fine, for the thing which causes the
privation of Good, or produces Pain.

In the first Sense, the Idea of Evil being the same with the Idea of a Good
that we possess not, it is plain this Idea produces Sorrow, or Desire, or even
Joy: For Joy is always excited when we feel our selves deprived of the
privation of Good, that is, when we possess Good. So that the Passions which
regard evil, taken in this Sense, are the same with those which regard Good,
because in effect they have Good likewise for their object.

But if by Evil we mean Pain, which only is always a real Evil to him who
suffers it, whilst he suffers it; then the sensation of this Evil produces the
Passions of Sorrow, Desire, and Joy, which are kinds of Hatred and not Love:
for their motion is absolutely opposite to that which accompanies the sight of
Good; this motion being only the opposition of the Soul, which resists the
natural impression.

The actual Sensation of Pain produces ah aversion of Sorrow.

Pain, which we do not actually suffer* but are afraid of suffering, produces
an aversion of Desire.

In fine, the Pain that we do not suffer, nor are apprehensive of suffering; or
which is the same, the Pain that we do not foresee we shall suffer without some
great Recompense, or the Pain which we feel our selves delivered from, produces
an aversion of Joy. These are the three primitive or simple Passions which have
Evil for their object, for fear which produces Sorrow is not an emotion of the
Soul, but a simple Judgment.

Lastly, if by Evil we mean the Person or thing which deprives us of Good, or
makes us suffer Pain; the Idea of Evil produces a motion of Love and Aversion
together, or simply a motion of Aversion. The Idea of Evil produces a motion of
Love and Aversion together, when the Evil is what deprives us of a Good: For
it is by the same motion that we incline toward Good, and remove our selves
from what hinders our possession of it. But this Idea only produces a motion of
Aversion, when it is the Idea of an Evil, which makes us suffer Pain: for it is
by the same motion of Aversion that we hate Pain, and whatever produces it.

Thus there are three simple or primitive Passions which respect Good, and as
many others which regard Pain, or which causes it, viz. Joy, Desire, and
Sorrow: For we have Joy when a Good is present, or an Evil past: We feel Sorrow
when Good is past, and Evil present; and are agitated with Desire, when Good
and Evil are to come.

The Passions which regard Good are particular determinations of the motion
which God gives us toward Good in general, and therefore their object is real:
But others who have not God for the cause of their motion, terminate only in
nothingness.

CHAP. X. Of the Passions in particular, the manner of explaining them in
general, and of discovering the Errors of which they are the cause.
IF we consider how compound the Passions are, we shall plainly discover that
their number cannot be determined, and that there are many more of them than we
have terms to express. The Passions do not only draw their differences from the
various Combinations of the three first, for then there would be but a few of
them; but their difference proceeds likewise, from the different Perceptions,
and different Judgments which cause or accompany them. The different Judgments
which the Soul makes of Good and Evil, cause different Motions in the Animal
Spirits, to dispose the Body in relation to the Object; and consequently,
create such Sensations in the Soul, as are not absolutely alike. Thus they are
the cause, as we have observed, of the difference between certain Passions,
whose emotions resemble each other.

However, the emotion of the Soul being the chief thing which occurs in each of
our Passions, it is much better to refer them all to the three Original ones,
in which these emotions are very different, than to treat of them confusedly
and without order, in relation to the different perceptions that we may have of
the Good and Evil which causes them, for we may have so many different
perceptions of Objects, in relation to time; to our selves, to what belongs to
us, in relation to Persons or Things, to which we are united, either by Nature,
or the choice of our Will, that it is absolutely impossible to make an exact
enumeration of them.

When the Soul perceives a Good which she may enjoy, we may, perhaps, say, she
hopes for it, although she desires it not: But it is plain, this Hope is not a
Passion, but a simple Judgment. So that it is the emotion which accompanies the
Idea of Good, the possession of which we judge to be possible, which makes
this. Hope to be a true Passion. When Hope is changed into Security, it is still
the same thing; it is not a Passion only because of the emotion of Joy which is
then mixed with that of Desire, for the Judgment of the Soul, which considers a
Good as not being likely to fail of it, is a Passion only, because the
foresight of Good agitates us. In short, when Hope diminishes, and Despair
succeeds it, it is also plain that this Despair is a Passion only, because of
the emotion of Sorrow, which is then mixed with this Desire; for the Judgment of
the Soul, which considers a Good as not being able to happen, is not a Passion
except this Judgment agitates us.

But because the Soul never considers Good or Evil without some emotion, and
even without some change happen in the Body, we often give the Name of Passion
to the Judgment which produces this Passion, because we confound whatsoever
passes in the Soul and Body at the sight of any Good or Evil; for the words,
Hope, Fear, Rashness, Shame, Impudence, Anger, Pity, Derision, Regret, in
short, the Names we commonly give to all the other Passions, are short
expressions whereby we can expalain, in particular, whatever the Passions
include.

By the word Passion, we understand the view of the relation that any thing has
with us, the emotion and sensation of the Soul, the shaking of the Brain, and
motion of the Spirits, a new emotion and new sensation of the Soul; and, in
fine, a sensation of Complacency, which always attends the Passions, and makes
them agreeable: All these things we mean by it. But sometimes, by the Name of
Passion, we only understand either the Judgment that excites it, or the emotion
of the Soul, or the motion of the Spirits and Blood, or something else which
attends the emotion of the Soul.

To abridge Idea's and their expressions, is a very useful thing in the
knowledge of Truth; yet it is often the cause of some great Error, when these
Idea's are abridged through Popular Custom, for we must never abridge our
Idea's, but when we have made them clear and distinct by a great application of
Mind, and not, as we commonly do, by the Passions, and all sensible Things,
when once we have made them famillar by Sensations, and the mere action of the
Imagination which deceives the Mind.

There is a great deal of difference between the pure Idea's of the Mind, and
the sensations or emotions of the Soul. The pure Idea's of the Mind are clear
and distinct, but difficultly made familiar; whereas, on the contrary, the
sensations and emotions of the Soul are very famillar, but impossible to be
discerned clearly and distinctly. Numbers, extension, and their Properties, we
clearly know; but before we have made them sensible by some Characters which
express them, it is difficult to present them, for whatever is abstracted
affects us not. Sensations, and the emotions of the Soul, on the contrary, are
easily represented to the Mind, although we only know them after a very confused
and imperfect manner, and all the terms which excite them strongly agitate the
Soul, and render it attentive. From whence it happens, that we often imagine we
very well apprehend such Discourses as are absolutely incomprehensible; and
when we read certain descriptions of the Sensations and Passions of the Soul,
we persuade our selves that we understand them perfectly, because we are
livelily touched with them, for all the words we read agitate the Soul. We have
no sooner pronounced the words Shame, Despair, Impudence, but it as soon stirs
up in our Minds a certain confused Idea, and obscure Sensation, which strongly
applies us; and because this Sensation is very familiar, and represented to us
without any trouble or effort of the Mind, we persuade our selves that it is
clear and distinct. Yet these words are the Names of compounded Passions; and
consequently, the abridged expressions that vulgar Custom has made of many
confused and obscure Idea's.

As we are obliged to make use of such terms as are approved by Custom, so we
must not be surprised to find obscurity, and sometimes a kind of contradiction,
in our words. And if we reflected, that the sensations and emotions of the
Soul, which answered to the terms we make use of in the like Discourses, are
not perfectly the same in all Men, because of their difference dispositions of
Mind, we should not so easily condemn others when they are not of our Opinions.
I don't say this so much to prevent the Objections which may be made against
me, as to make the Nature of the Passions be well apprehended, and to teach us
what we ought to think of Treatises which are written upon this Subject.

After all these precautions, I believe I may say that all the Passions may be
referred to the three Primitive ones, Desire, Joy, and Sorrow; and that it is
chiefly through the different Judgments the Soul makes of Good and Evil, that
those which relate to one and the same Primitive Passion differ amongst
themselves.

I may say that Hope, Fear, and Irresolution, which keep the Mean between these
two, are kinds of desire; that Boldness, Courage, Emulation, etc. relate more
to Hope than to the other two; and that Fearfulness, Cowardice, and Jealousy,
etc. are kinds of Fear.

I may further say, that Cheerfulness and Glory, Favor and Acknowledgment, are
kinds of Joy, caused by the sight of the good we discover in our selves, or in
those to whom we are united; as Laughing and Rallery is a sort of Joy which is
commonly excited in us, at the sight of the Evil which happens to our Enemies.
Lastly, disgust, tediousness, regret, pity, and indignation, are kinds of
sorrow caused at the sight of something which displeases us.

But besides these Passions, and many others which I mention not, and which
particularly relate to some one of the Primitive Passions, The number of the
Passions is greater than the number of terms we express 'em by.
there are also many others whose emotion is almost equally compound, either of
Desire and Joy, as Impudence, Anger, Revenge, or of Desire and Sorrow, as
Shame, Regret, and Despite; or of all three when we meet with Motives of Joy
and Sorrow joined together. But although these last Passions have not, as I know
of, any particular Name, they are nevertheless the most common, because in this
Life we hardly ever enjoy any Good without the mixture of some Evil, and that
we scarcely ever suffer any Evil without some hopes of being delivered from it,
and of possessing some Good. And although Joy be quite contrary to Sorrow, it
nevertheless admits it, and even with his Passion shares the Souls capacity of
Willing, as he prospect of Good and Evil divides the Souls capacity of
perceiving.

All the Passions therefore are kinds of Desire, Joy, and Sorrow; and the chief
difference to be observed between the Passions of the same kind, proceeds from
the different Perceptions, or different Judgments which cause or accompany
them; so that it is necessary to enquire into the different Judgments that we
make of Good and Evil. But as our chief design here is to search after the
cause of our Error, we ought not so much to stop at the examining the Judgments
which follow them, and which the Soul makes of Objects when it is agitated by
any Passion, for it is these last Judgments which are the most liable to Error.

Those Judgments which precede and cause the Passions, are commonly false in
something, for they are generally upheld upon the perceptions of the Soul, in
as much as it considers things in relation to it self, and not according as
they are in themselves: But those Judgments which follow the Passions are false
in every respect, for the Judgments which form the Passions are upheld only
upon the perceptions the Soul has of Objects in relation to it self, or rather
in relation to its emotion.

In those Judgments which precede the Passions, both the true and the false are
joined together; but when the Soul is agitated, and Judges of every thing
according to the inspiration of the Passion, the true is dissipated, and the
false preserved, from whence are drawn so many more false conclusions as the
Passion is greater.

Every Passion justifies it self; they continually represent to the Soul that
Object which affects it, after such a manner as is most proper to preserve and
increase its agitation. The Judgment or Perception which causes it, is
fortified in proportion as the Passion increases; and the Passion increases ini
proportion as the Judgment which produces it, is in its turn fortified: False
Judgments and Passions continually contribute to their mutual preservation. So
that if the Heart ceased not sometimes to supply such Spirits as are proper to
maintain the traces of the Brain, and the distributions of the same Spirits,
which are necessary to preserve the sensation and emotion of the Soul which
accompanies the Passions, they would continually increase, and we should never
discover our Errors. But as all our Passions depend upon the fermentation and
circulation of the Blood, and as the Heart cannot always furnish such Spirits
as are requisite for their preservation, they must necessarily cease when the
Spirits diminish and the Blood cools.

If it is so very easy to discover the common Judgments of the Passions, we
ought not to neglect it; There are few Subjectys more worthy the application of
those who enquire into the Truth, and endeavor to deliver themselves from the
dominion of their Bodies, and who would judge of all things according to the
true Idea's of them.

We may instruct our selves upon this Subject two different ways, either by
reason only, or by the internal sensation that we have of our selves when we
are agitated with any Passion. For instance, we know by our own Experience,
that we are inclined to judge disadvantageously of those we love not, and to
discover all the malignity of our hatred, by that means, to the Object of our
Passion. We may also, by pure Reason, discover that hating only what is Evil,
it is necessary for the preservation of hatred, that the Mind should represent
its Object on the worst side; for, indeed, it is sufficient to suppose all the
Passions justify themselves, and that they divert the Imagination, and
afterward the Mind, in such a manner as is fit to preserve their own emotion,
that we conclude what those Judgments are which all the Passions cause us to
make.

Those who have a strong and lively Imagination, are extremely sensible, and
very subject to the Motions of the Passions, may perfectly instruct themselves
in these things by the sensation they have of what passes within them; and even
speak of them after a more agreeable manner, and sometimes more instructive,
than those who have more Reason than Imagination. For, we must not think that
such as best discover the Springs of Self-love, that penetrate farthest, and
after a more sensible manner, unfold the secrets of Man's heart, are always the
most Learned: It Is, indeed, often a mark that they are more lively, more
imaginative, and sometimes more malicious than others.

But those who without consulting their internal Sensation, only make use of
their Reason to discover the Nature of their Passions, and what they are
capable of producing, if they are not always as penetrating as others, they are
always more reasonable, and less subject to Error, for they judge of things as
they are in themselves: They see very near what the Passions can perform,
according as they suppose them more or less moved, and they do not judge rashly
of such things as others would, or would not do in such occurrences, by what
they would do themselves; for they very well know, that all men are not equally
sensible of the same things, nor equally susceptible of involuntary emotions,
so that it is not by consulting the Sensations which the Passions excite in us,
but by harkening to Reason, that we must speak of the Judgments which accompany
the Passions, lest we should only discover our selves instead of showing the
Nature of the Passions in general.

CHAP. XI. How all the Passions justify themselves, and of the judgments they
cause us to make in their vindication.
IT will not be necessary to bring many Arguments to demonstrate that all the
Passions justify themselves: This Principle is evident enough by the internal
Sensation we have of our selves, and the conduct of those whom we see agitated
with any Passion; it will be sufficient to expose it, that we may afterward
take heed of it. The Mind is such a slave to the Imagination, that it always
obeys it, when it is heated by it: It dares not answer it when it is incensed,
because it treats it ill if it makes any resistance, and always recompenses it
with some pleasure when it acquiesses in its designs. Those even whose
imagination is so irregular that they believe themselves transformed into
Beasts, find some reasons to prove that they ought to live like them; walk upon
all four, feed upon Grass, and imitate all the actions which agree only to
Beasts. They find a great deal of pleasure in following the impressions of
their Passions; and feel themselves inwardly afflicted when they resist them:
and it is enough, if reason, which accommodates it self, and is commonly
serviceable to pleasure, argues after such a manner as is proper to defend the
cause of it.

If therefore it be true that all Passions justify themselves, it is evident
that desire of it self inclines us to judge advantageously of its Object, if it
is a desire of love; and disadvantageously, if it is a desire of aversion. The
desire of love is a motion of the Soul excited by the Spirits, to will the
enjoyment or use of such things as are not in our power; for if we desire the
continuation of our enjoyment, it is because future things are not in our power.
It is therefore necessary to justify desire, that the Object which produces it
should be judged good in it self, or in relation to some other; and we must
think the contrary of that desire which is a kind of aversion.

It is true we cannot judge a thing to be good or bad, if there is not some
reason for it; but there is no Object of our Passions which is not good in some
sense: If we can say that there is some of them which include no good, and
which consequently cannot be perceived as good by the sight of the Mind; yet it
cannot be said but they may be relished as good, since we suppose our selves to
be agitated by them; and this taste or sensation is sufficient to incline the
Soul to judge advantageously of an Object.

If we judge so easily that Fire contains in it self the heat we feel, and
Bread the savor we taste, because of the sensations that these Bodies excite
in us, although it be wholly incomprehensible to the Mind, since that can only
conceive heat and savor, to be the manners of being of a Body; there is no
Object of our Passions how vile and contemptible soever it appears to be, that
we do not judge to be good when we feel pleasure in the enjoyment of it. For as
we imagine that heat goes our of Fire when we feel it, we blindly believe that
the Object of the Passions cause the pleasure that we taste when we enjoy them;
and that therefore they are good since they are capable of doing us good; the
same may be said of those Passions which have evil for their Object.

But as I have just before said, there is nothing which is not worthy of love
or aversion, either in it self, or something else to which it has relation; and
when we are agitated by any Passion, we soon discover the good or evil in its
Object which favors or opposes it. Thus by reason it is easy to find out what
Judgments these Passions, whereby we are agitated, form in us.

For if it is a desire of love which acts us, we soon apprehend that it will not
fail to justify it self by the advantageous judgments it will make upon its
Object. We easily see these Judgments will be so much the more extended, as the
desire is more violent; and that they will be often full and absolute although
the thing appears only good in part, without we easily conceive that these
advantageous Judgments will extend to every thing which has or seems to have
any connection with the principal Object of the Passion; and that so much the
more as the Passion is stronger, and the Imagination more extensive. But if it
be a desire of aversion, the quite contrary will happen, for Reasons as easily
apprehended. Experience sufficiently proves these things, and therein it
perfectly agrees with Reason; but we will make these Truths more sensible by
some Instances.

All Men naturally desire Knowledge, for every Mind is made for the Truth: But
the desire of knowing, how just and reasonable soever it may be in it self,
often becomes a very dangerous Vice through the false Judgments which attend
it. Curiosity often offers to the Mind the main Objects of its Meditations and
Cares: It often affixes false Ideas of greatness to these Objects: It elevates
them by the deceitful luster of rarity, and represents them so charming and
attractive, that it is difficult to contemplate them without too much pleasure
and application.

There is no trifle whatever, but some Persons are wholly taken up about, and
their employment is always justified by the false judgments their vain
curiosity induces them to make. Those, for instance, who are curious about
words, imagine it to be a knowledge of certain terms wherein all Sciences
consist: They find a thousand Arguments to persuade themselves of it, and the
veneration paid them by those, who are confounded by unknown terms, is none of
the weakest although it be the least reasonable.

Some Men are learning all their lives to speak, who yet perhaps ought to be
silent as long as they live; for it is evident we should hold our Tongues when
we have nothing to say that is worth the hearing; but they don't learn to
speak, to remain silent. They do not sufficiently consider, that to be able to
speak well, it is requisite to think well, have an exact judgment, to discern
truth from falsehood, clear Ideas from those which are obscure, and distinguish
those of the Mind, from such as proceed from the Imagination. They think
themselves uncommon and curious Wits, because they know how to satisfy the Ear
by an exact measure, flatter the Passions by figures and agreeable motions, and
delight the Imagination by sensible and lively Expressions, whilst they leave
the Mind empty of Ideas without knowledge and understanding.

Those who employ a great part of their time in the study of their own Tongue,
have some appearance of Reason to justify them, since they make use of it all
their lives; and this is enough to excuse the Passion of some Persons. But I
confess it difficult with any shadow of Reason, to excuse the Passion of such
as indifferently apply themselves to all sorts of Languages. Something may be
said in favor of their Inclination who make a complete Library of all sorts of
Dictionaries, as well as for the Curiosity of such, who collect the Coins of
all Nations and Ages; since it may be useful in some Occurrences; and if it is
no great advantage to them, at least it is no injury; for they have a Storehouse
of Curiosities which does not perplex them, since they carry about them neither
their Books nor their Medals; But I don't see how we can justify the Passion
of those who make their Head a Library of Dictionaries; They even forget their
Affairs and most essential Duties, for Words of no use; They speak their own
Tongue with hesitation, and at every turn mix unknown and barbarons terms in
their Discourses, and never speak to their Countrymen in their own Language.
And indeed their Reason is no better managed than their Tongue, for every
corner and recess of their Memory is full of Etymologies, that their Minds are
as it were choked with an innumerable company of Words, which continually fly
about it.

Nevertheless it must be granted that Philologists and Linguists will not fail
to justify their trifling Studies; But how! only hear the Judgments that those
falsely Learned Persons make of the Tongues, and you shall know it: Or else do
but suppose certain Axioms which pass amongst them for indisputable, and from
thence draw their usual Consequences; for instance, that those who understand
several Languages, are as many different Men, as they can speak Tongues, since
it is by speech they are distinguished from Beasts: That being unaquainted with
the Tongues, is the reason we are ignorant of an infinite number of things,
since the Ancient Philosophers and Strangers are much more learned than we are;
Thus, if we suppose the like Principles and Conclusions, we shall soon form
such Judgments as are fit to produce a Passion for Languages, and which
Judgments will consequently be like those that the same Passion creates in
Philologists for the justification of their Studies.

The meanest and most contemptible Sciences, will in some part or other appear
glorious to the Imagination, and will easily dazzle the Mind through the false
luster that Passion diffuses through it. It is true, this splendour vanishes,
when the Spirits and Blood are cooled, and the light of truth begins to appear;
but this light is likewise dissipated when the Imagination becomes warm, and
obscurely presents to us those solid Reasons which seemed to condemn our
Passion.

But when the Passion which animated us, feels it self decaying, it does not
repent of its conduct; on the contrary we may say, that it disposes of all
things in such a manner, that it may dye with honor, or else revive again soon
after: That is, it always inclines the Mind to form such Judgments as justify
it. In this condition it also contracts a kind of Covenant with all the rest of
the Passions, which can assist it in its weakness, supply it with Spirits and
Blood at its necessity, rekindle its ashes, and give it new life; for the
Passions are not indifferent in respect to each other; and those which can live
together faithfully contribute to one another preservation. Thus the
Judgments, which justify the inclination we have for Languages, or what else
pleases us, are continually solicited and fully confirmed by all the Passions
which are not opposite to it.

A pretender to Learning sometimes fancies himself surrounded with such Persons
as hear him with respect, sometimes as victorious over those whom he has
astonished by his incomprehensible Words, and generally thinks himself far
above the common sort of Men. He flatters himself with the praises they give
him, the preferments proposed to him, and with the courships made to his
Person. He is of all times and Countries, and not limited like common Wits, to
the present time, or within the Walls of his own Town; but continually
communicates himself, and this communication creates his pleasure. Thus many
Passions combine with that he has for false Learning, which all endeavor to
justify it, and warmly solicit the Judgments in its favor.

It every Passion acted only for it self, without being concerned for the rest,
they would immediately dissipate after they were produced; not being able to
make false Judgments enough for their own subsistence, nor to maintain long the
representations of the Imagination against the light of Reason. But every thing
is regulated in our Passions after the most exact manner that is possible, for
their mutual preservation.

They fortify one another, the most remote giving some assistance; and it is
enough for 'em, if they are not declared enemies, to observe amongst themselves
all the rules of a well ordered Society.

Should the Passion of Desire be alone, every Judgment that proceeded from it,
could only tend to represent the good as possible; for the desire of love,
considered as such, is produced only by the Judgment that we make of the
possession of some good that is attainable; so that this desire could only form
Judgments upon the possibility of enjoying it, since those Judgments which
follow and preserve the Passions, are wholly like those which precede and
produce them. But desire is animated by love, fortified by hope, increased by
joy, renewed by fear, attended with courage, emulation, anger, irresolution,
and many other Passions; which in their turns form an infinite variety of
Judgments, that succeed one another, and so maintain the desire which produced
them. It is no wonder therefore if the desire of a pure trifle, or of something
that is manifestly useless, or injurious, continually justifies it self in
opposition to Reason, for many years, or during the whole Life of a Man who is
agitated by it, since there are so many Passions which plead in its behalf. And
that I may explain things by distinct Ideas, I shall briefly show how the
Passions justify themselves.

All Passion agitates the Blood and Spirits; and these agitated Spirits are
carried to the Brain, either by the sensible sight of the Object, or power of
the Imagination, after such a manner as is proper to form deep Traces to
represent this Object: By their impetuous course they bend, and even sometimes
break the Fibers of the Brain, and the Imagination is thereby sullied and
corrupted. For these Traces submit not to Reason, they are not effaced when
that wishes it; but on the contrary do violence to it, and even continually
oblige it to consider Objects, after such a manner as agitates and inclines it
to favor the Passions. Thus the Passions act upon the Imagination, and the
Imagination being corrupted fights against Reason, by continually representing
things to it, not according as they are in themselves, whereby the Mind might
make a true Judgment, but as they relate to the present Passion, to incline it
to make a Judgment in favor of it.

The Passions do not only corrupt both the Imagination and Mind in favor of
'em, but likewise produce in the rest of the Body every disposition that is
necessary for their preservation. The Spirits which are agitated by them stop
not in the Brain, but are carried, as I have already intimated, to all the
other parts of the Body; They are chiefly dispersed into the Heart, Liver,
Spleen, and into the Nerves which encompass the principal Arteries: In short,
they are thrown into all parts whatever, which can supply necessary Spirits for
the preservation of the ruling Passion. But when these Spirits are thus
dispersed into the parts of the Body, they by little and little destroy
whatever can resist their course; till at last they make their passage so
slippery and smooth, that the smallest Object extremely agitates us, and
consequently inclines us to form such Judgments as favor the Passions. And
it is after this manner that they establish and justify themselves.

If we consider how various the constitution of the Fibers of the Brain is, how
different the agitation and abundance of the Spirits and Blood in different
Sexes, and at different Ages; it will be easy enough to discover very near
what Passions certain Persons are most subject to, and consequently what
Judgments they will make upon such Objects. For Instance; we may nearly guess
by the abundance or scarcity of Spirits, which we observe in certain Persons,
that the very same thing being equally proposed and explained to them, many
will form Judgments of hope and joy upon it, and others of fear and sorrow.

For those who have abundance of Blood and Spirits, as commonly Young Men,
Sanguine and Choleric Persons have, easily conceive hope, because of the
secret sense of their Strength; They will not believe they shall find any
opposition in their designs which they cannot conquer; and immediately please
themselves with the foretast of a good they hope to possess; and will form all
sorts of Judgments which are fit to justify their hope and joy. But such as
want agitated Spirits, as Old Men, Melancholy and Phlegmatic Persons do, being
inclined to fear and sorrow, because their Soul grows weak, and is destitute of
Spirits to execute its Orders, they form quite contrary Judgments, imagining
unconquerable difficulties to justify their fear, and abandon themselves to
envy, sorrow, despair, and to certain kinds of aversion, of which weak Persons
are most susceptible.

CHAP. XII. That such Passions, as have Evil for their Object, are most
dangerous and unjust; and such as are attended with the least knowledge, are
the most lively and sensible.
OF all the Passions, those whose Judgments are most unreasonable, and most to
be feared, are all kinds of Aversion. There are no Passions whatever that
corrupts the Reason more in favor of 'em, than hatred and fear do: Hatred
chiefly in the Choleric, or in such whose Spirits are in continual agitation;
and Fear in the Melancholic, or in those whose gross and heavy Spirits are
neither soon agitated, nor easily appeased. But when Hatred and Fear conspire
together to corrupt the Reason, which is very common, then there are no
Judgments so unjust and fantastic, but they are capable of producing and
maintaining with an insuperable obstinacy.

The reason of which is, because the Soul is in this life more lively affected
with evil than good, the sensation of pain being more quick than that of
pleasure. We are much more sensible of injuries and reproaches than praises and
applause; and if we meet with some Persons that have a great indifference for
the enjoyment of certain pleasures, or the receiving of certain honors, yet
would it be very difficult to find any who would quietly suffer pain and
contempt.

Thus Hatred, Fear, and the other kinds of Aversion which have Evil for their
Object, are very violent Passions. They give the Mind such unforeseen shocks,
and stupify and discompose it; and soon penetrate into the most secret recesses
of the Soul; They dethrone Reason, and upon all sorts of subjects pronounce
erroneous and unjust Judgments, in favor of their folly and tyranny.

Of all the Passions these are the most cruel and distrustful, the most
destructive to Charity and Civil Society, and likewise the most ridiculous and
extravigant: for they form such impertinent and fantastic Judgments, as excites
the laughter and indignation of all Men.

These Passions put these extravagant Speeches in the Mouth of the Pharisees:
Joh. c. 11.47.
What do we? this Man works many Miracles. If we let him alone all Men will
believe in him: And the Romans will come and destroy both our City and Nation.

They agreed that JESUS CHRIST did many Miracles; the resurrection of Lazarus
was undeniable. But what was the Judgment of their Passions? To put JESUS
CHRIST to death, and Lazarus whom he had raised to life: And why must JESUS
CHRIST die? because, if we let him alone, all Men will believe him, and the
Romans will come and ruin our Nation: And why must Lazarus be put to death?
because, upon his account many Jews went away and believed in JESUS. Joh. c.
12.11.
These are both cruel and extravagant Judgments together; cruel through hatred,
and extravagant through fear: The Romans will come and ruin our City and
Nation.

'Twas the same Passions induced a great. Assembly, consisting of Annas the
High Priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all those who were a kin to the
High Priest, to speak thus; What shall we do with these Men? for that indeed a
notable Miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. Acts c. 4. 16, 17.
But that it spread no farther amongst the People, let us threaten to punish
them, if henceforward they teach any more in the Name of JESUS.

All these great Men pronounced both an impertinent and an unjust Judgment,
because they were agitated by their Passions, and blinded by their false Zeal.
They durst not punish the Apostles because of the People, and because the Man
who had been miraculously cured, was above 40 years old, and present in the
Assembly; But threatened them to hinder 'em from preaching in the Name of
JESUS. Believing they ought to condemn a Doctrine, whose Author they had put to
death, You intend, say they to the Apostles, to bring this Man's Blood upon us.

When false Zeal is joined to Hatred, Acts c. 5.
it shelters it from the reproaches of Reason, and after such a manner
justifies it that we do not scruple to follow its motions; and when ignorance
and weakness accompany fear, they extend to an infinite number of subjects, and
so well fortify its emotions, that the least suspicion frightens and disturbs
the Reason.

False Zealors think they do God service when they submit to their Passions;
they blindly follow the secret motions of their Hatred, as proceeding from the
Internal Truth; and stopping with satisfaction at such sensible proofs as
justify their excess, they confirm themselves in their errors with an
unconquerable obstinacy.

As for Ignorant and Weak Persons they create to themselves ridiculous and
imaginary subjects of fear; and like Children, who walk in the dark without a
guide, they imagine frightful Bugbears, are disturbed and cry out as if they
were undone; light re-assures them if they are ignorant, but if Men have weak
Minds, their imagination is always disturbed: The least thing which relates to
that frightful Object renews the traces and course of the Spirits which causes
the symtom of their fear; so that it is absolutely impossible to cure or appease
them for ever.

But when false Zeal meets with Hatred and Fear, in a weak Mind, it continually
produces such unjust and violent Judgments in it, that we cannot think on 'em
without horror. To change the Mind possessed with these Passions requires a
greater Miracle than that which converted St. Paul, and to cure it would be
absolute impossible, if we could set bounds to the Mercy and Power of God.

Those who walk in the dark rejoice at the appearance of light, but this Man
cannot endure it, since it hurts him, because it resists his Passion. His fear
being in some manner voluntary, because it is produced by his hatred, he loves
to be affected by it, since we love to be agitated by those Passions which have
Evil for their Object, when the Evil is imaginary; or rather, when we know as
in Tragedies, that the Evil cannot hurt us.

The Phantoms that these form to themselves who walk in the dark, vanish at the
approach of light: But this Man's Phantoms cannot be dissipated by the light of
the truth; for instead of dissipating the darkness of his Mind, it only
incenses his imagination; so that whilst he applies himself to the Object of
his Passion the light reflects, and it seems to him as if these Phantoms had
real Bodies, since they reflect some weak rays of light which strike upon them.

But if we should suppose in these Persons a sufficient docility and reflection
to make 'em listen to, and apprehend such Reasons as are capable of dissipating
their Errors, yet their imagination being disordered through fear, and their
Hearts corrupted through hatred and false zeal, these Reasons, how solid soever
they might be in themselves, would not be able long to stop the impetuous
motions of these violent Passions, nor hinder them from speedily justifying
themselves by sensible and convincing proofs.

For we must observe that there are some Passions which never return again,
whereas there are others that are constant and durable. Those which are not
maintained by the sight of the Mind, but only produced and fortified by the
sensible view of some Object, and the fermentation of the Blood continue not,
but commonly die immediately after they are produced. But those which are
attended with the contemplation of the Mind are lasting; for the Principle
which causes them is not subject to change like the Blood and Humors. So that
Hatred, Fear, and all the rest of the Passions which are stirred up or
preserved by the knowledge of the Mind, and not by the sensible sight of some
Evil, must necessarily subsist long. These Passions are therefore more durable,
violent, and unjust, but not more lively and sensible, as has already been
shown.

The perception of Good and Evil, which excite the Passions, is produced three
several ways, by the Senses, Imagination, and the Mind. The perception of Good
and Evil by the Senses, or Sensation of Good and Evil, produces the quickest
and most sensible Passions; Good and Evil perceived by the Imagination only,
excites them after a much weaker manner; and the perception of Good and Evil by
the Mind purely, never produces true ones, because it is always attended with
some motion of the Animal Spirits.

The Passions are given us only for the good of the Body, and by that to unite
us to all sensible things; for although sensible things can be neither good or
bad in respect to the Mind, they are so however in relation to the Body to
which they are united. Thus the Senses discovering much better the relation
that sensible Objects have to the Body, than the Mind it self can: They must
excite much more lively Passions than a clear and evident knowledge is able to
do. But because all our discoveries are attended with some motion of the
Spirits, a clear and evident knowledge of a great Good and great Evil, which is
not perceived by the Senses, always excites some secret Passion.

Yet all our clear and evident discoveries of Good and Evil, are not followed
by some sensible Passion which we perceive; and so on the other side all our
Passions are not attended with some knowledge of the Mind. For, if we sometimes
think of Good and Evil without feeling our selves moved, we often find our
selves moved with some Passions without knowing what they are, nay sometimes
without perceiving the cause of 'em. One who breaths in a good Air feels a
motion of Joy, without knowing from whence it proceeds, or what good it is he
possesses which causes this Joy. And if there is any invisible Body which
mingles with the Blood, and hinders its fermentation, it will produce sorrow;
and perhaps he will attribute the cause of his sorrow to any visible thing
which occurs in that moment of his Passion.

Of all the Passions none are more sensible, or more quick, and consequently
less attended with the knowledge of the Mind, than horror and antipathy,
agreeableness and sympathy. It sometimes happens that a Man sleeping under a
shady Tree would of a sudden and unexpectedly be waked at the sting of a Gnat,
or tickling of a Leaf, even as if he were bitten with a Serpent. The confused
Sensation of something as terrible as death frights him, without perceiving
that he is agitated with a most powerful and violent Passion, which is an
aversion of desire. On the contrary, a Man in some necessity by chance
discovers a small good, the satisfaction of which surprises him, and he applies
himself to this trifle as to the greatest good imaginable, without making the
least reflection upon it: The like also happens in the motions of sympathy and
antipathy. We sometimes see a certain Person, whose habit and external
appearance has some secret alliance with the present disposition of our Body,
we are forthwith touched with a vehement inclination for him, and without any
reflection, are induced to love and wish him well: It Is this, I know not what,
which agitates us, since Reason has no share in it: And the contrary happens in
respect to those, whose Air and Manners excite disgust and horror in us; They
have, I know not what, disagreeableness which shocks and terrifies, but the
Mind perceives it not, since the Senses are the only proper Judges of sensible
Beauty and Deformity, which are the Objects of these sorts of Passions.

A SEARCH AFTER TRUTH.
BOOK VI. Of Method.
CHAP. I. The Design of this Book, and the two general Means to preserve
Evidence in an Enquiry after Truth, which will be the Subject of this Book.
IN the preceding Books we have seen how subject to Error the Mind of Man is;
that he is deceived every Moment by the Illusions of his Book 1.
Senses, the Book 2.
Visions of his Imagination, and Abstractions Book 3.
of his Mind, that the Inclinations Book 4.
of his Will, and his Book 5.
Passions are a Means to obscure the Truth, and never suffer it to appear,
except it has a Tincture of those false Colors which flatter Concupiscence. In
a word, we have in part discovered the Errors of the Mind, and their Causes: It
is now Time to show the Way which will conduct us to the Knowledge of the
Truth, and give the Mind all the Power and Assistance we can, to enable it to
keep this Way, without either straying, or vainly fatiguing it self.

But to avoid giving the Reader any unnecessary Trouble in the Perusal of this
last Book; I think fit to advertise him, that it is only writ for those, that
would, of themselves, seriously enquire into Truth; and to this end employ the
utmost Power of their own Minds. I would have them for a time lay aside all
probable Opinions, and hot rely on the strongest Conjectures; but neglect the
Authority of all Philosophers, and as much as possible, divert themselves of
their Prejudices, Self-love and Passions: Very much distrusting their Senses
and Imaginations: And in fine, that they well remember the greatest Part of
those things that have been told them in the preceding Books.

The Design of this last Book is an Endeavor to help the Mind to all the
Perfection it is naturally capable of, by furnishing it with whatsoever is
necessary to render it more capacious and attentive; and in prescribing such
Rules as must be observed in an Enquiry after Truth, to prevent its being ever
deceived, and to teach it, in some time Time, all that can be known.

If we were to carry this Design to its utmost Perfection, which we pretend not
to do, since this is only an Essay; it might be said, That we ought to have
given an universal Science, that those that would have made use of it, might
have been truly learned; since they would have had the Foundation of all
particular Sciences, and acquired them proportionably to the use they had made
of this universal one. For we endeavor, by this Treatise, to make the Mind
capable of forming true and certain Judgments upon all Questions which shall be
proportioned to it.

As a Memory that is able to retain all the Demonstrations of Euclid,
Archimedes, Pappus, Apollonius, and all that have writ of Geometry, is not
suffic ent to make a Man a good Geometrician; so neither is it enough to have
read Plato, Aristotle, and Descartes, and perfectly to know their Sentiments
about Philosophy, to make a Man a learned Philosopher. The Knowledge of all the
Opinions and Judgments of other Men, whether Philosophers or Geometricians,
cannot so properly be called a Science as an History: For true Science, which
alone can give the Mind of Man that Perfection it is now capable of, consists
in a certain Ability to judge solidly of all things that are adapted to it. But
not to lose Time, and to prevent the prejudicing any Person by precipitated
Judgments, we will begin to treat of this important Matter.

We must first call to mind the Rule that has been proved and established in
the beginning of the first Book, because it is the Foundation and chief
Principle of whatsoever we shall hereafter say; therefore I Will repeat it: We
ought never to give our entire Assent, except to such Propositions as appear so
evidently true, that we cannot refuse it them, without feeling some inward
Pain, and secret Reproaches of our Reason; that is, without a clear knowledge,
that we should make an ill use of our Liberty, if we would not give our Assent.
Every Time we assent to Probabilities, we put our selves into a certain Danger
of being deceived, and are almost always actually deceived; and if we are not,
it is a mere Effect of Chance and Good Fortune. Thus a confused Sight of a great
Number of Probabilities upon different Subjects, can never add any Perfection
to our Reason; for it is only a clear Sight of the Truth, that can give either
that, or any solid Satisfaction.

The Conclusion therefore is very plain, That Evidence only, according to our
first Rule, can secure us from being deceived: We ought above all things, to be
very careful to preserve this Evidence in all our Perceptions, that we may be
able to make a sound Judgment of whatsoever may be submitted to our Reason, and
to discover all the Truths we are capable of.

Such things as can either produce or preserve this Evidence, are of two Sorts.
Some of which are within, or in some manner depending on us; and others which
have no Connection with us. For to see Objects distinctly, it is necessary to
have a good Sight, and to give a good Attention to these Objects, and both
these are within us, or in some manner depend upon us: A good Understanding is
likewise necessary, and a strong Application for the penetrating into the
Bottom of intelligible Truths; which also are either in, or in some manner
depend upon us.

But as the Eye has need of Light to see, and this Light depends upon external
Causes: The Mind also has need of Idea's to conceive; and these Idea's as has
been elsewhere proved, depend not upon us, but on an external Cause, which
furnishes us with them. If therefore it should happen, that some Idea's of
things were not presented to our Minds, every time that we wished to have them;
and if he who enlightens the World, would conceal them from us, 'twou'd be
impossible to remedy it, and to know any thing, even as it is impossible for us
to see Objects without Light. But we shall never have any reason to fear it;
for the Presence of Idea's to our Mind being natural, and depending on the
general Will of God, which is always constant and immovable, we can never fail
of discovering such things as are naturally subjected to our Reason. For the
Sun that enlightens the Mind, is not like the Sun that enlightens the Body: It
is never eclipsed, and it penetrates every thing without having its Light
divided.

The Idea's of all things being therefore continually present to us, even when
we do not consider them attentively, there is nothing requisite in order to
preserve this Evidence in all our Perceptions, but to find a means of making
our Minds more attentive and capacious: So to be able well to distinguist such
visible Objects as are presented to us, it is necessary, on our Part, to have a
good Sight, and to consider them steadfastly:

But because the Objects that we consider, have often more Relations than we
can be able to discover at one View, by a simple Effort of the Mind: We have
yet need of some Rules, to assist us in the disentangling all Difficulties so
well, that being helped by those Rules which will make our Mind more attentive
and capacious, we discover, with an entire Evidence, all the Relations of those
things that we examine.

We shall therefore divide this Book into two Parts. In the first we shall
treat of the Helps the Mind may make use of to become more attentive and
capapacious: And in the second, give those Rules that ought to be followed in
the Enquiry after Truth, to form solid Judgments thereof, without Fear of
deceiving our selves.

CHAP. II. Attention is necessary to preserve Evidence in all our Perceptions,
that the Modifications of the Soul make it attentive, but do much divide its
Capacity of Perception.
WE have showed in the Beginning of this Work, That the Understanding only
perceives, and that in respect to the Understanding there is no Difference
between simple Perceptions, Judgments and Reasonings, except that Judgments and
Reasonings are much more compound than simple Perceptions are; because they do
not only represent many things, but even the Relations that these things have
amongst themselves. For simple Perceptions only represent things to the Mind;
but Judgments represent to the Mind the Relations that are betwixt these
things; and simple Reasonings represent the Relations which are between the
Relations of things: But compound Reasonings represent the Relations of
Relations, or the compound Relations which are between the Relations of things,
and so on ad Infinitum. For whilst these Relations are multiplied, the
Reasonings which represent them to the Mind become more compounded. But
Judgments, simple and compound Reasonings are only pure Perceptions, in respect
to the Understanding; because the Understanding only simply perceives, as has
been before intimated.

Thus Judgments and Reasonings, as to the Understanding, being pure
Perceptions: It is plain that the Understanding never falls into any Error;
since there is none in Perceptions, neither is Error so much as intelligible.
For, as we have often said already, it consists only in a precipitate Consent
of the Will, which suffers it self to be dazzled by some false Light, and
instead of preserving its Liberty as long as it can, negligently relies on the
Appearance of Truth.

Nevertheless, since it commonly happens that the Understanding has only
confused and imperfect Perceptions of things, we may say it is certainly the
occasional Cause of our Errors. For as our Eyes often deceives us, because they
represent external Objects very confused and imperfectly to us: Confused when
they are too distant from us, or for want of a due Light; and imperfectly,
because they only represent to us those Sides which are toward us: So the
Understanding having often only a confused, and imperfect Idea of things,
because they are not sufficiently represented to it, and because it discovers
not all their Parts, causes the Will to fall into a great Number of Errors, in
yielding too easily to these obscure and imperfect Perceptions.

It is therefore necessary to find some means to hinder our Perceptions from
being confused and imperfect; and because nothing can make them more clear and
distinct than Attention, which all the World is convinced of; our Care must be
to find such a Method as will make us become more attentive than we yet are.
This will be a Way to preserve Evidence in all our Reasonings, and make us
able, at one View, to perceive a necessary Connection between all the Parts of
our longest Deductions.

In order to find this means, it is necessary that we should be well convinced
of what has already been said elsewhere, That the Mind carries not an equal
Attention to every thing it perceives; for it applies it self infinitely more
to those that affect, modifie, and penetrate it, than to those that are present
to it, but affect it not, nor belong to it. And in fine, it imploys it self
much more about its own Modifications, than about the simple Idea's of Objects,
which are something different from it self.

This is the Reason that with some Uneasiness, and without much Application, we
consider the abstracted Idea's of the pure Understanding, and apply our selves
much more to such things as fall under our Imagination, especially if our
Imagination is strong enough to make deep Traces in our Brain: And indeed, it
is the Cause why we entirely employ our selves about sensible Qualities, even
without being able to apply our selves to the pure Idea's of the Mind, whilst
we feel any thing that is either very agreeable or very painful. for Pain,
Pleasure, and the rest of the Sensations being only the Modifications of the
Mind, it is impossible that we should exist and not perceive them, and that the
Capacity of our Mind should not be employed about them, since our Sensations
are only simple Perceptions.

But it is not the same with the pure Idea's of the Mind; since they may be
intimately united to it, without considering them with the least Attention. For
although God be most intimately united to us, and comprehends the Ideas of
whatsoever we see: Yet these Idea's, though present and within our selves, are
hid from us, when the Motions of the Spirits stir up no Traces of them, or when
our Will applies not our Mind thereto; I mean when it forms no Acts to which
the Representation of these Idea's are connected by the Author of Nature. This
is the Foundation of whatsoever we shall propose about such Assistances as may
render our Minds more attentive, so that these Helps will be founded upon the
very Nature of the Mind, and there is some Reason to hope they will not be so
chimerical and useless as many others, which more perplex than assist the Mind.

But if they are not so useful as might be wished, all the Time that is
employed about the reading them will not be lost, since by it the Reader will
be better acquainted with the Nature of his Mind.

The Modifications of the Soul have three Causes; the Senses, Imagination and
Passions: Every one knows by his own Experience, that Pleasures, Pains, and in
general, all Sensations, strong Imaginations, and great Passions, so much
possess their Mind, that it is not capable of Attention, when it is too
livelily touched by these things; because then its Capacity or Faculty of
perceiving is wholly filled. And although these Modifications should be
moderated, they would nevertheless in some manner divide the Capacity of the
Mind, so that it could not wholly employ it self in considering the Truth of
things that are never so little abstracted.

It will be necessary to draw this important Conclusion: That all those that
would seriously apply themselves to a Search after Truth, ought to be very
careful to shun, as much as possible, all strong Sensations, as a great Noise,
too brisk a Light, Pleasure, Pain, etc. and continually to stir up the Purity
of their Imagination, and prevent its making in their Brain such deep Traces as
continually disquiet and dissipate the Mind. And above all, to put a Stop to
the Motions of their Passions, which cause such powerful Impressions in the
Body and Soul, that it is generally impossible the Mind should think of any
thing else. For although the pure Idea's of Truth are always present to us, we
cannot consider them, when the Capacity we have of thinking is filled with
these Modifications which possess us.

However, as it is impossible that the Soul should exist without Passion,
Sensation, or any other particular Modification: We must make a Virtue of
Necessity, and even draw from these Modifications some Helps to render us more
attentive. Yet must we make use of much Artifice and Circumspection in the
applying these Helps to gain some Advantage from them. The need we have of them
must be well examined, and we must only make use of 'em so far as the Necessity
of rendering our selves attentive constrains us to.

CHAP. III. Of the use that may be made of the Passions and Senses, to preserve
the Attention of the Mind.
THE Passions which it is necessary for us to make use of to excite us to an
Enquiry after Truth, are those that give us Strength and Courage enough to
surmount all the Trouble we may meet with in endeavoring to render our selves
attentive, some of which are good and some bad; of which the good are a Desire
to find the Truth, to acquire a sufficient Knowledge to conduct our selves, to
render us useful to our Neighbor, and some others of the like Nature: But the
bad or dangerous ones are such as a desire to acquire Reputation, to make some
Establishment of our Fortune, to raise our selves above our Neighbors, and
some others that are yet more irregular, of which it is not necessary to speak.

In the unhappy Estate we now are in, it often happens, that the most
unreasonable Passions do most powerfully excite us to search after the Truth,
and give us a more agreeable Satisfaction for all the Pains we take in our
Pursuit, than the most just and reasonable Passions do. Vanity, for instance,
excites us much more than the Love of Truth; and we every Day see some
continually applying themselves to Study, when they find Persons to whom they
may relate what they have learnt; but who entirely abandon their Studies when
they have not an Opportunity to discover their Acquirements. The confused
Prospect of some Glory they gain when they put off their Opinons, maintains
their Courage in the most barren and tiresome Studies. But if by Chance or
Necessity of their Affairs, they find themselves far distant from their little
flock of Admirers, their Ardour is soon cooled, and even the most solid Studies
cannot attract them: Disgust, Wearisomness, and Chagriu seizes them, and they
quit all. Vanity triumphs over their natural Laziness, but Laziness in its turn
triumphs over the Love of Truth, for Vanity sometimes resists Idleness, but
Idleness is generally victorious over the Love of Truth.

Yet the Passion for Gloty may be subservient to a good End, since we may make
use of it for the Glory of God and the Profit of others: Some Persons may be
permitted, on several Occasions, to make use of this Passion as an Help to make
the Mind more attentive; but we must take great Care to use it only when those
reasonable Passions we have already mentioned, are not sufficient; and when our
Duty obliges us to apply our selves to such Subjects as we are discouraged
from. First, because this Passion is very dangerous in respect of the
Conscience: Secondly, because it insensibly engages us in unprofitable Studies,
which have a more tempting Appearance than either Usefulness or Truth in them:
In fine, because this Passion is very difficult to be moderated, we are often
abused by it; and while we believe our Mind is illuminated by it, we often
strengthen our Concupiscence; which not only corrupts the Heart, but disperses
such a Darkness through the Mind as is morally impossible to be dissipated.

We ought to consider that this Passion is insensibly increased, fortified, and
established in the Heart of Man; and that when it is too violent, instead of
assisting the Mind in a Search after Truth, it strangely blinds it, and makes
it believe things, even as it wishes them to be.

Without doubt, we should not have met with so many false Inventions and
imaginary Discoveries, if Men had not suffered their Brains to be disordered by
their Zeal of appearing Inventers. For the firm and obstinate Persuasion many
Men have had, that they have found, for instance, the perpetual Motion, the
squaring of the Circle, and Duplication of the Cube by common Geometry, has
apparently proceeded from the great Desire they had of appearing to have
effected what many Persons had unsuccessfully attempted.

It is therefore better to excite those Passions in us which are so much the
more useful in the Search after Truth, as they are more strong, and in the
Excess of which there is least to be feared; as the Desires of making a good
use of our Wit; of delivering our selves from Prejudices and Errors; of
acquiring so much Wisdom as will enable us to conduct our selves through
whatsoever Condition we are in, and other the like Passions; which engage us
not in unuseful Studies, nor incline us to make too precipitate Judgments.

When we begin to taste the Pleasure that is found in the Exercise of the Mind,
discover the Advantage that recurs from it, destroy those violent Passions, and
disdainfully reject those sensible Pleasures, which, whilst we imprudently
permit them to tyrannize over our Reason, we have no need of any other Passions
than those we have before mentioned, to make us attentive upon whatsoever
Subject we would consider.

But the Generality of Mankind are not in this Condition. They have no good
Relish of any thing but only what touches the Senses. Their Imagination is
corrupted with an almost infinite Number of deep Traces, which only stir up
false Idea's: For they are united to every thing that falls under the Senses
and Imagination, and judge always according to the Impression they have
received from them, in Relation to themselves. Pride, Debauchery, Engagements,
unquiet Desires to raise their Fortune, so commonly obscure the Discovery of
Truth in the Men of this World, that it stifles in them the Sentiments of
Piety; because they separate them from God, who only can enlighten us, as he
only can govern us. For we cannot increase our Union with sensible things,
without diminishing that which we have with intellectual Truths: Since in the
same Time we cannot be so strictly united to things that are so different and
opposite.

Those therefore who have a pure and chaste Imagination, I mean such whose
Brain is not filled with deep Traces, which unite them to sensible things, may
easily be united to God, and be made attentive to the Truth which speaks to
them: The most just and most reasonable Passions will be sufficient to
determine such Persons. But those that live in the World who are united to too
many things, and whose Imagination is spoiled by false and obscure Idea's,
which sensible Objects have excited in them, cannot apply themselves to the
Truth, if they are not born up by some Passion that is strong enough to
counterballance the violent Inclination of the Body which draws them aside, and
to form such Traces in their Brain as may be capable of making a Revulsion in
the Animal Spirits. But as all Passion of it self can only confound Idea's,
they ought to make no more use of them than Necessity requires, and all Men
ought so to study themselves, as may enable them to proportion their Passions
to their own Weaknesses.

It is not difficult to find some means of exciting such Passions in our selves
as we wish. The Knowledge we have given of the Union of the Soul and Body, in
the preceding Books, affords a sufficient means to accomplish it: For, in a
Word, it is enough to think attentively upon such Objects, which according to
the Institution or Natture are capable of exciting the Passions. Thus we may
almost always raise such Passions in our Hearts as we have Occasion for: But
though we can so easily cause them, we cannot always so easily extirpate them,
nor remedy the Disorders that they cause in the Imagination, and therefore we
ought to use them with great Moderation.

Above all things, we must be cautious that we do not Judge of things by our
Passion, but only by a clear Sight of Truth, which it is almost impossible to
observe, when the Passions are a little vigorous. Passion ought only to serve
us to stir up our Attentions, but it always produces its own Idea's, and it
presently obliges the Will to judge of things by these Idea's that affect it,
rather than by the pure and abstracted Idea's of the Truth, which affect it
not. So that such Judgments are often formed, which last no longer than the
Passion it self, because it is not a clear Sight of the immutable Truth, but
the Circulation of the Blood which produces them.

It is certain, that Men are strangely obstinate in their Errors, and that they
generally maintain them all their Lives. But either these Errors have often
other Causes than the Passions, or else they depend upon certain durable
Passions, which proceed from the Conformation of the Body, Interest, or some
other Cause, which continues a long Time. Interest, for instance, indures
always, it creates a Passion which never dies, and the Judgment that these
Passions form are very lasting. But all other Sentiments of Men, which depend
upon particular Passions, are as inconstant as the Fermentation of their
Humors are. They speak sometimes after one manner, and sometimes after
another; and What they say is generally conformable to what they think. They
run from one false Good to another as false, by the Motion of their Passion,
which they again dislike as soon as this Passion ceases. So also they run from
one false System to another. They ardently embrace a false Notion, when their
Passion renders it probable; but this Passion being once extinguished, they
abandon it. They taste of every Good by their Passions, without finding any
thing that is really so: And by the same Passions they see all Trtuths, without
discovering any: Although, whilst the Passion continues, what they taste
appears to them to be the Sovereign Good; and what they see, seems to them to
be an indisputable Truth.

The Second Source, from whence we may draw any Helps to render the Mind
attentive, is the Senses. Sensations are the proper Modifications of the Soul,
pure Idea's of the Mind are something different: Sensations. then stir up our
Attention in a much more lively manner than pure Idea's do; so that it is plain
we may remedy this Defect of the Application of the Mind to Truths that do not
affect us, in expressing them by sensible things which do.

Ths is the Reason that Geometers express the Proportions between those
Magnitudes they would consider by sensible Lines. By drawing Lines upon Paper,
they trace, if I may so say, the Idea's upon their Minds which answer them:
They make them more familiar to them, because they see them in the same Time
they would conceive them. After this manner many things that are difficult
enough in themselves, might be taught to Children, who are not capable of
abstracted Truths, because of the Tenderness of the Fibers of their Brain. They
see only with their Eyes Colors, Pictures, Images; but with the Mind they
consider not the Idea's which answer to these Sensible Objects.

A particular Care must be taken not to obscure Objects that we would consider
our selves, or discover to others with so much Sensibility, lest the Mind
should be more taken up with it than with the Truth it self, which is a very
considerable and common Fault. We every Day see Orators, who apply themselves
only to that which affects the Senses, and who express themselves after so
sensible a manner, that the Truth is almost stifled under the Weight of their
vain Ornaments and false Eloquence. So that those who hear them, being much
more touched with the Measure of their Periods, and Motions of their Figures,
than by their Arguments, suffer themselves to be overcome, without either
knowing what persuades them, or of what they are persuaded.

Much Care therefore ought to be taken so to moderate the Sensibility of our
Expressions, that they may only render the Mind more attentive. There is
nothing so beautiful as the Truth, we cannot pretend to render it finer by
painting it with some Sensible Colors, which have nothing solid in them, and
can only charm for a little Time. Perhaps we might give it some pretty Strokes,
but we should diminish its Strength; we ought not to cloth it so bright and
sparkling as to make the Mind more attentive to its Ornaments, than to the
Truth it self: It would be to treat it like certain Persons who load themselves
with so much Gold and precious Stones, that at last they appear the least
considerable thing in the Figure they make.

Truth ought to be clothed like the Magistrates of Venice, who are obliged to
wear such a simple Robe, and a Cap, as may only distinguish them from other
Men, that they may look upon them with Attention and Respect, rather than their
Apparel. And indeed, Care must be taken not to give it too great a Train of
agreeable things, that will only serve to dissipate the Mind, and hinder it
from discovering it, lest we should give to something else the Honors that are
only due to that: As sometimes happens to Princes, that we see amongst a great
Number of Courtiers which are about them, and who partake too much of that
Great and Majestic Air as is only fit for Sovereigns.

But to give a greater Example: I say that Truth must be so manifested by
others as it has manifested it self. All Men, since the Fall of their first
Parents, have too weak a Sight to consider Truth in it self, therefore the
Sovereign Truth has rendered it self sensible, by taking upon it our Humanity,
that it may attract our Thoughts, enlighten us, and make it self amiable in our
Eyes. Thus by its Example we may cover With any sensible thing those Truths
that we would comprehend our selves, or teach to others, Co that we may attract
the Mind, which loves what is sensible, and which is not easily taken with any
thing that does not flatter the Senses. The Eternal Wisdom has made it self
Sensible, but not Resplendent: It is become sensible, not to make us acquiesce
in sensible things, but to raise us to intelligible things: It became sensible
to condemn and sacrifice in its own Person all sensible things; we ought
therefore in our Pursuit after the Truth, to make use of such sensible things
as dazzle not too much, or stop us at the Sensible Part: But such as can only
maintain the Presence of our Minds in the Contemplation of Truths purely
intelligible: Such sensible things we must make use of, as we can dissipate,
annihilate, or sacrifice with Pleasure, as soon as we shall have discovered
those Truths for which we made use of it. The Eternal Wisdom has presented ^t
self externally in a sensible manner to us, not to de^ain us abroad, but to
recall us into our selves, and that according to the inward Man, we might
consider tt after an intelligible manner.

Thus in an Enquiry after Truth, we ought to make use of such sensible things
as may not stop us at their external Brightness; but cause us to enter within
our selves, make us attentive, and unite us to the eternal Truth, which alone
presides over the Mind, and can instruct it in any Subject whatsoever.

CHAP. IV. Of the use that may be made of the Imagination, to preserve the
Attention of the Mind, and of the Advantage of Geometry.
GReat Circumspection must be used in the Choice and Use of such Helps as may
be drawn from our Passions and Senses to render us attentive to Truth: Because
our Passions and Senses too livelily affect us, and after such a manner fill
the Capacity of the Mind, that we often see only our own Sensations when we
think we have discovered the things themselves that we sought for; but it is
not the same with those Advantages that may be drawn from the Imagination. They
make the Mind become attentive without fruitlessly dividing its Capacity, and
so wonderfully assist us to perceive Objects clearly and distinctly, that it is,
for the most part, beneficial to make use of them. But we shall make this plain
by some Instances.

We know that a Body is moved by two or many different Causes, toward two or
many different Places; that these Forces impel it equally or unequally, that
they increase or diminish continually, according to such a continued
Proportion. And it may be demanded what is the Line this Body ought to move in,
the Place it must be in such a Moment, what its Swiftness when arrived to such
a Place, and other things of the like Nature?

diagram representing the connections between imagination, thought and the body

From the Point A, where suppose it to be when this Body begins to move, draw
the indefinite Lines A B, A C, which make the Angle B A C, is they cut each
other: for A B and A C are direct, and cut not each other, when the Motions
they express are directly opposite. After this manner is distinctly represented
to the Imagination, or if you will, to the Senses, the Way that this Body would
follow, if there was only one of these forces which pushed it toward one of
these Sides C or B.

2. If the Force which moves this Body toward B, is equal to that which moves
it toward C; we must divide the Lines A B and A C into the Parts 1, 2, 3, 4,
and I, II, III, IV, equally distant from A. If the Force which moves it toward
B is double to that which moves it toward C, then take the Parts in A B double
to those that are in A C. If this Force is subduple, they must be taken
subduple: If three times greater or less, they must be taken proportionably.
The Division of these Lines furthe^ express to the Imagination, the Magnitude
of the different Powers which move these Bodies, and in the same Time the Space
they shall cause the Body to run through.

3. Through these Divisions draw Parallels upon A B, and A C, to have the
Lines, 1 X, 2 X, 3 X, etc. equal to A I, A II, A III, etc. and I X, II X, III
X, equal to A 1, A 2, A 3. which express the Spaces that these Forces are
capable of causing this Body to run through, and through the Intersection of
these Parallels, draw the Line A X Y E, which represents to the Imagination,
first, the true Magnitude of the compound Motion of this Body, that in the same
time we conceive to be pushed toward B, and toward C, by two different
Forces, according to such or such a Proportion. Secondly, the Way it ought to
keep: In fine, every Place where it must be in such a determined Time, so that
this Line serves, not only to maintain the Presence of the Mind in the Enquiry
after all Truths that we would discover concerning the Question proposed: But
even represents the Resolution after a very sensible and convincing manner.

See the first Figures.
First, This Line A X Y E, expresses the true Magnitude of the compound Motion;
for we see sensibly, if the Forces that produce it, can each make this Body
advance a Foot in a Minute, its compound Motion shall be two Foot in a Minute,
if the compounding Motions perfectly agree. For in this case it suffices to add
A B to A C; and if these Motions do not entirely agree, the compounded A C
shall be greater than one of the compounding A B or A C, by the Line Y E. But
if these Motions are opposite in any thing, the compounded will be less than
either of the compounding by the Line Y E, and if they are entirely opposite,
it will be nothing at all.

Secondly, This Line A X Y E represents to the Imagination the Way that this
Body ought to follow; and sensibly shows, according to what Proportion it
advances more on one Side than another. It is evident also that all the
compounded Motions are right, when each of the compounding is always the same,
although they be unequal amongst themselves, or else when the compounding are
equal amongst themselves, although they are not always the same. In fine, it is
visible that the Lines which describe these Motions, are Curves, when the
compounding are unequal amongst themselves, and are not always the same.

This Line further represents to the Imagination all the Places where this
Body, pushed by two different Forces to two different Places, will be found: So
that we may precisely mark the Point this Body must be in at what Instant of
Time we please. For instance, If we would know where it would be in the
Beginning of the fourth Minute: We only need divide the Lines A B or A C, into
such Parts as express the Space that these known Forces will each of them be
capable of making this Body run through in a Minute, and take off three of
these Parts in some one of these Lines, and afterward by the Beginning of the
fourth; draw 3 X, parallel to A B or III X parallel to A C. For it is evident
that the Point X, which one or other of these Parallels determine in the Line A
X Y E, marks the Place where this Body will be in the Beginning of the third
Minute of its Motion. Thus this Method of examining Questions does not only
maintain the Presence of the Mind, but even shows it the Resolution thereof,
and gives it a sufficient Light to discover things unknown, by the Help of a
very few of those that are known.

It is sufficient, for Instance, after what has been said that we only know
that a Body which was in the Point A, in such a Time, will be in E, in another
Time; and that the different Forces push it by Lines, which make a given Angle,
as B A C; to discover the Line of its compounded Motion, and the different
Degrees of the Velocities of simple Motions, provided we now these Motions to
be uniform or equal amongst themselves. For when we have two Points of a right
Line, we have the whole; and we may compare the right Line A E, or the
compounded Motion which is known with the Lines A B and A C, viz. the simple
Motions which are unknown.

diagram representing the fall of a stone

C, by an unequal Motion, like to that which we commonly believe Bodies weigh
in their Tendency toward the Center of the Earth; that is, that the Spaces run
through, are amongst themselves, as the Squares of the Times taken up in
running through them: The Line which it will describe will always be a
Parabola; and we may determine with the greatest Exactness where the Point will
be in such a Moment of its Motoin.

For if in the first Moment this Body falls two Foot from A to C, in the second
six, in the third ten, in the fourth fourteen, and be pushed by an uniform
Motion from A to B, which is sixteen Foot long, it is plain that the Line which
it will describe will be a Parabola, whose Perameter will be eight Foot long.
For the Square of the Ordinates to the Diameter, which mark the Times and
regular Motion of A to B, will be equal to a Rect-angle of the Perameter into
the Lines which mark the unequal and accelerated Motion; and the Squares of the
Ordinates, that is, the Squares of the Times will be amongst themselves, as the
Parts of the Diameter comprehended between the Vertex and Ordinates: 16.64 2.8,
64: 14 4 8: 18, etc. It is sufficient to consider the sixth Figure to be
Persuaded of this. For the Semicircles show that A 2, is to A 4, that is, to
the Ordinate 2 X, which is equal to it, as 2 X is to A B. That A 18 is to A 12,
that is, to the Ordinate 18 X, as 18 X, is to A 8, etc. so also the Rectangles
A 2 into A B, and A 18 into A 8; are equal to the Squares of 2 X, and 18 X,
etc. And consequently these Squares are between themselves, as these Rectangles
are.

The Parallels upon A B and A C, which intersect one another in the Points X.
X. X. likewise very sensibly discover the Way that this Body must keep; and
mark the Places it ought to be in at such a Time. In fine, they represent to
the Eyes in a determined Time, both the true Magnitude of the compounded
Motion, and of its Acceleration.

Suppose again that a Body is moved unequally from A to C, as well as from A to
B: If the Inequality is alike both in the Beginning and all along, viz. if the
Inequality of its Motion toward C is like to that toward B, or if it
increases in the same Proportion, the Line that it describes will be right.

But if we suppose that there is some Inequality in the Increase or Diminution
of simple Motions; although we suppose this Inequality what we please, it will
be always easy to find the Line, which represents the compounded Motion of
these simple Motions to the Imagination; in expressing these Motions by Lines,
and drawing Parallels to these Lines which shall intersect them. For the Line
that shall pass through all the Intersections of these Parallels, will
represent the compounded Motion of these unequal Motions, and which are
unequally accelerated or diminished.

For instance, if we suppose a Body be moved, by two equal or unequal Forces
whatever, that one of these Motions continually increases or diminishes,
according to any Geometrick or Arithmetic Progression: And likewise that the
other Motion increases or diminishes according to any Arithmetic or Geometrick
Progression, to find the Points by which the Line must pass that represents the
Motion compounded of these two Motions both to the Eyes and Imagination.

diagram representing actual and imagined motion

As we have before intimated, we must first draw the two Lines A B and A C, to
express the two simple Motions, and divide these Lines according to the
Computation of the Acceleration of these Motions. If we suppose the Motion
expressed by the Line A B, in, creases or diminishes according to this
Arithmetic Progression, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, it must be divided in the Points
marked, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5: And if we suppose the Motion expressed by the Line A C,
increases according to this continued Geometrick Progression, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16,
or diminishes according to this, 4, 2, 1,,,, we must, afterward, by these
Divisions, draw Parallels to A B and A C, and the Line A E, which must express
the compounded Motion that is sought, shall necessarily pass through all the
Points where these Parallels intersect, and so we discover the Way that this
Body, once put in Motion, ought to keep.

If we would know exactly how long this Body has begun to be moved, when it is
arrived to such a Point: The Parallels drawn from this Point upon A B or A C,
will mark it, for the Divisions of A B and A C mark the Time; so if we would
know the Point where this Body will be in such a Time, the Parallels drawn from
the Divisions of the Lines A B and A C, which represent this Time, by their
Intersection mark the Point which is sought, A. For the Distance of the Place
from whence it began to move, it will always be easily known by drawing a Line
from this Point A: For the Length of this Line will be known, by the Proportion
it has to A B or to A C, which are known. But for the Length of the Way that
this Body will have run through before it arrives to this Point, will be
difficult to be known, because the Line of its Motion, A E, being a Curve, we
cannot compare it to any of these right Lines.

But if we would determine the infinite Points by which this Body must pass,
that is exactly, and by a continued Motion describe the Line A E, we must make
a Pair of Compass, the Motion of whose legs should be regulated according to
the Conditions expressed in the Computation we have already made, which is
often very difficult to invent, impossible to excute, and unuseful enough to
discover the Relations that things have amongst themselves. Since commonly we
have not need of all the Points whereof this Line is composed, but only of some
of them which serve to guide the Imagination when it considers such Motions.

These Examples will be sufficient to show, That we may express by Lines, and
so represent to our Imaginations the greatest Part of our Idea's; and that
Geomertry which shows us how to make all the Comparisons that are necessary in
order to knowing the Proportion betwixt Lines, is of a much more extensive Use
than is commonly thought. For in fine, Astronomy, Music, Mechanics, and in
general all Sciences which treat of Objects that are capable of more and less,
and which consequently we may look upon as extended, that is, all exact
Sciences have Relation to Geometry: Because all Speculative Truths consisting
only in the Relation of things, and in the Relation that is found between their
Relations, they may all relate to Lines. We may draw from hence many
Geometrical Consequences, and these Consequences being made sensible by Lines
which represent them, it is almost impossible to deceive our selves, and we may
carry on Sciences very far with much Ease.

For instance, the Means be which we discover very distinctly, and precisely
mark, in Music, an Eighth, a Fifth, a Fourth, is that Sounds may be expressed
by Cords, exactly divided; and we know that a String which sounds an Eighth is
in double Proportion to another by which an Eighth is made; that the Fifth is
in sesquialter Proportion, or as 3 to 2, and so of the rest. For the Ear only,
cannot judge of Sounds with that Preciseness and Justness which is necessary to
a Science. The most skilful Practitinoners, who have the most delicate and fine
Ear, have not been hitherto sufficiently able to discover the Difference there
is between certain Sounds; and they falsely persuade themselves there is none,
because they judge of thing only by the Sensations they have of them. Some
cannot distinguish any Difference between an Octave and three Ditons; and some
even think that the greater Tone is not different from the less; so that a
Comma which constitutes the Difference is to them insensible, and much more a
Schisma, which is but half a Comma.

It is only Reason therefore which manifestly shows that the Space of the Line
which makes the Difference betwixt certain Sounds, being divisible into many
Parts, there may also be a great Number of different Sounds, which would be
useful in Music, that the Ear cannot discern; from whence it is plain that
without Arithmetic and Geometry, regular and exact Music, would be unknown to
us, and we could not accomplish any thing in this Science, but by chance and
Imagination; and so Music would no longer be a Science founded upon
indisputable Demonstrations, although Airs that are composed by the Strength of
the Imagination, are more fine and agreeable to the Senses, than those that are
composed by Rules.

So in Mechanics, the Gravity of some Weights, and the Distance of the Center
of Gravity of these Weights from the Fulciment being capable of more or less,
may be expressed by Lines, so that we may very advantagiously make use of
Geometry to discover and demonstrate an infinite Number of new Inventions, that
are very useful to Life, and also very agreeable to the Mind, because of the
Evidence which accompanies them.

If for instance, we have a Weight given of six Pound, that we would put in
Equilibrio with one of three Pound only; and that this Weight of six Pound be
suspended on the Beam of a Balance, two Feet distant from the Fulciment, only
knowing the general Principle of all Mechanics: That the Weights to continue
in Equilibrio, must be in Reciprocal Proportion to their Distance from the
Fulciment: That is, one Weight must be to the other Weight as the Distance
which is between the last Weight from the Fulciment, is to the Distance between
the first from the same Fulciment; it will be easily found by Geometry, what
the Distance of the Weight of three Pound ought to be, so that both may be
brought into Equilibrio; in finding a fourth stance between the first from the
same Fulciment; it will be easily found by Geometry, what the Distance of the
Weight of three Pound ought to be, so that both may be brought into Equilibrio;
in finding a fourth proportional Line, according to the twelfth Propotition of
the sixth Book of Euclid, which will be of four Foot. Thus only knowing the
Fundamental Principle of Mechanics, we may clearly discover all the Truths
that depend upon it, by applying Geometry to Mechanics; that is, by expressing
by Lines all things that are to be considered in Mechanics.

Geometrical Lines and Figures then are most proper to represent to the
Imagination the Relation that is between Magnitudes, or between things which
differ as to more or less, as Spaces, Times, Weights, etc. as well because they
are very simple Objects, as because they are imagined with great Facility. We
may even say further to the Advantage of Geometry, that Lines can represent to
the Imagination more things than the Mind can receive: Since Lines can express
the Relation of incommensurable Magnitudes, that is, of Magnitudes whose
Relations we cannot know, because they have no common Measure by which can
compare them. But this Advantage is not very considerable in an Enquiry after
Truth, since these sensible Representations of incommensurable Magnitudes
discover nothing to the Mind.

Geometry is then very useful to render the Mind attentive to such things whose
Relations we would discover: But it must be confessed that it is sometimes an
Occasion of Error, because we so very much apply our selves to evident and
agreeable Demonstrations which this Science furnishes us with, that we do not
sufficiently consider Nature. It Is chiefly for this Reason, that all Machines
that have been invented, have not been perfected: That all Musical Compositions
wherein the Proportions of Consonancy's are the best observed, are not the most
agreeable; and that the most exact Computations in Astronomy do not always best
foretell the Greatness and Duration of Eclipses. Nature is not abstracted:
Levers and Mechanical Wheels are not Mathematical Lines and Circles: The Taste
of Musical Airs is not always the same in all Men, nor even in the same Men at
different Times. They change according to the different Motions of the Spirits,
so that there is nothing more uncertain. As for what respects Astronomy, there
is no perfect Regularity in the Course of the Planets: Moving in these great
Spaces they are disorderly hurried by the fluid Matter which encompasses them:
So that the Errors we are subject to in Astronomy, Mechanics, Music, and in
all the Sciences to which we apply Geometry, Proceeds not from Geometry, which
is an indisputable Science, but from the false Application we make of it.

We suppose, for instance, that the Planets, by their Motions, describe Circles
and Elipses perfectly regular, which though it is not true, yet it is necessary
to reason from it, for the Error misses but very little of truth; but we ought
always to remember, that the Principle upon which we reason is but a
Supposition: So in Mechanics we suppose that Wheels and Levers are perfectly
hard, and like Mathematical Lines and Circles, without Gravity and Attrition,
or rather we do not sufficiently consider their Gravity, Attrition, Matter, or
the Relation that these things have amongst themselves, that Hardness or
Magnitude increases Gravity; that Gravity increases Attrition, and Attrition
diminishes the Machine. Thus, what is often accomplished in a small Portion of
Matter, is seldom ever affected in a greater.

It is no Wonder then if we deceive our selves, when we would reason upon
Principles that are not exactly known: Nor can we conclude Geometry to be
unuseful, because it delivers us not from all our Errors. Suppositions
established, make us argue consequently; rendering our selves attentive to what
we consider, make us know it evidently. We even by that means discover when our
Suppositions are false; for being always certain that our Reasonings are true,
and Experience agreeing not with them, we discover that our Principles are
false. But without Geometry and Arithmetic we can discover nothing exactly, if
there is never so little Difficulty in it, although we have certain and
indisputable Principles.

Therefore we ought to look upon Geometry as a kind of universal Science, which
inlarges the Mind, makes it attentive, and gives it the Art of regulating the
Imagination, and from whence may be drawn all the Helps that it can receive:
For by the Assistance of Geometry the Mind regulates the Motion of the
Imagination; and the Imagination thus regulated maintains the Presence and
Application of the Mind.

But that we may make a good use of Geometry, we must observe that all things
which fall under the Imagination, cannot be imagined with an equal Facility;
for all Images do not equally fill the Capacity of the Mind. It is more
difficult to imagine a solid than a plane, and a plane than a simple Line; for
there is more Thought in the clear View of a solid, than in that of a Plane or
Line. It is so likewise with different Lines, more Thought is requisite, that
is, a greater Capacity of Mind, to represent a Parabolick, Eliptical, or some
other Line more compounded, than to represent the Circumference of a Circle;
and more for the Circumference of a Circle, than for a right Line; because it is
more difficult to imagine Lines which are described by very compounded Motions,
and which have many Relations, than those which are described by the most
simple Motions, or which have fewer Relations. For Relations cannot be clearly
perceived without the Attention of the Mind to many things, and so much the
more Thought is required to perceive them, as they are in greater Number. There
are some Figures so compounded that the Mind has not Extension enought to
imagine them distinctly; but there is also some others that the Mind very
easily imagins.

Of the three kinds of right lined Angles; the acute, the right, and obtuse; it
is only the right that raises a very distinct and fixed Idea in the Mind. There
is an infinite Number of acute Angles which differ amonst themselves; it is the
same also with the obtuse. So that when we imagine an acute or an obtuse Angle,
we imagine nothing exact or distinct; but when we imagine a right Angle we
cannot deceive our selves; the Idea is very distinct, and even the Image that
we form of it in the Brain is commonly exact enough.

It is true, we may also determine the general Idea of an acute Angle, by a
particular Idea of an Angle of thirty Degrees; and the Idea of an Angle of
thirty Degrees, is as exact as that of an Angle of Ninety, or of a right Angle.
But the Image that we form of it in the Brain, would not be near so Just as
that of a right Angle. We are not accustomed to represent this Image to our
selves, and we can trace it only by thinking upon a Circle, or such a
determined Portion of a Circle divided into equal parts. But to imagine a right
Angle, it is not necessary to think on this Division of the Circle, the Idea
only of a Perpendicular is sufficient for the Imagination to trace the Image of
this Angle; and we find no difficulty to represent Perpendiculars, because we
are accustomed to see all things stand upright.

It is therefore very easy to judge, that to have a simple, distinct and
well-determined Object proper to be easily conceived, and consequently to make
the Mind attentive, and preserve evidence in the Truths it enquires after, we
must compare all Magnitudes, as we consider them, to simple Surfaces determined
by Lines and right Angles, as perfect Squares and other right-lined Figures, or
else to simple right Lines; for these are the Figures whose Nature we know.

We do not pretend that all Subjects, whose Knowledge we may enquire into, can
be expressed by Lines and Geometrical Figures. There are many that cannot, nay
that ought not to be subjected to this Rule: For instance, The Knowledge we
have of a God infinitely Powerful, infinitely Just, upon whom all things depend
in all respects, who wills that all his Creatures should execute his orders to
make themselves capable of Happiness. This Knowledge. I say, is the Principle
of all Morality; and from hence may be drawn an infinite number of certain and
indisputable Consequences; and yet neither this Principle nor its Consequences
can be expressed by Geometrical Figures; neither is it possible to determine or
represent by Lines an infinite number of Physical Notions, which may
nevertheless evidently discover several Truths to us. Yet is it certain that
there are a great many things which may be examined and learned by this
Geometrical Method; and that it is always advantageous to use it, because it
accustoms the Mind to Attention, by causing it to make a regular use of the
Imagination; and that things which are learned by this way, appear more clearly
demonstrated, and are more easily remembered than others.

I might have attributed to the Senses, the Assistance which is drawn from
Geometry, but I thought that Geometry did rather belong to the Imagination than
to the Senses, although Lines are something sensible: It would be unnecessary
here to give he Reasons that I had for it. Since they would only serve to
justify the order that I have kept in what I have said, which is not
essential. I have neither spoke of Arithmetic nor Algebra, since the Numeral
Figures, and Letters of the Alphabet, which are used in these Sciences, are not
so useful to increase the Attention as the Capacity of the Mind, as shall be
explained in the following Chapter.

These are the General Helps which may make the Mind more attentive, I know no
other, except it be the will of being so; which I do not treat of, because it
is supposed that all those who Study, are willing to give Attention to what
they Study.

Nevertheless there are many others which are peculiar to certain persons, as
some sort of Drinks, certain Meats, certain Places, and certain Dispositions of
Body; with some other helps, of which every one ought to be instructnd by his
own Experience. The Condition of our Imagination ought to be observed after
Eating; and we must consider what things they are that maintain or dissipate
the Attention of the Mind. What more general might be said, is, That the
moderate use of such Food as creates many Animal Spirits, is very fit to
increase the Attention of th Mind, and Strength of the Imagination, in those
who have them Weak and Languishing.

CHAP. V. Of the Means to increase the Extension and Capacity of the Mind. That
Arithmetic and Algebra are absolutely necessary to this end.
IT ought not immediately to be imagined that we can truly increase the
Extension and Capacity of the Mind. The Soul of Man is, if we may so say, a
determined Quantity or Portion of Thought, which has limits that cannot be
exceeded: The Soul cannot become more Extensive or Capacious than it is: It is
not swelled nor enlarged after the same manner as we see Liquors and Metals
are. In fine, It never Perceives more in one time than in another.

It is true this seems contrary to Experience; for often we think upon many
Objects, and as often but upon one only; and we often say likewise, that we think
upon nothing at all. Yet if we consider, that Thought is to the Soul what
Extension is to the Body, we shall plainly discover, that as a Body cannot be
truly more extended at one time than another, so, if we conceive aright,
neither can the Soul think more at one time than another: Whether it perceives
many Objects, or but one, or even in the time that we say we think on nothing
at all.

But the reason why we imagine we think more at one time than another, is,
because we do not sufficiently distinguish between confused and distinct
Perceptions; without doubt there is more Thought required, or the Capacity of
Thinking is more fitted, to perceive many things distinctly at once, than to
perceive but one only: But there is not more Thought requisite to perceive many
things confusedly, than to perceive one distinctly. So there is no more Thought
in the Soul when it thinks of many things, than when it thinks of but one;
since when it thinks of but one only, it always perceives it much more clearly,
than when it applies it self to many.

For it must be observed, that a pure simple Perception sometimes includes as
much Thought, or fills as much the Capacity that the Mind has of Thinking, as
a Judgment, nay even a compounded reasoning: Since Experience teaches us, That
a lively, clear and evident Perception but of one thing only, imploys and takes
up the Mind as much as a compounded Reasoning, or an obscure and confused
Perception of several Relations between many things.

For even as there is as much or more Sensation in the sensible view of an
Object that I hold near my Eyes and carefully examine, as in the prospect of a
whole Field, that I look upon negligently and without Attention: so that the
clearness o the Sensation that I have of the Object which is near my Eyes,
recompenses the Extension of the confused Sensation I have of many things, that
I see without Attention in a Field: Thus the Prospect the Mind has of one
Object only, is sometimes so lively and distinct, that it includes as much or
even more Thought, than a Prospect of the Relations which are between many
things.

It is true at certain times, it seems to us that we think of but one thing,
and nevertheless we have some difficulty to comprehend it well; and at other
times we comprehend both this thing and many others with great Facility. From
thence we imagine that the Soul has more Extension, or a greater Capability of
Thinking at one time than another; but it is plain we deceive our selves. The
Reason why at certain times we have some Difficulty to conceive the most easy
things, is not because the Thought of the Soul, or its Capacity of Thinking, is
diminished; but because this Capacity is filled either by some lively Sensation
of Pain or Pleasure, or by a great number of weak and obscure Sensations, which
cause a kind of Vapor, and which for the most part proceeds from a confused
Sensation of a great number of Things.

A piece of Wax is capable of a very distinct Figure, yet it cannot receive
two, but then one will confound the other, for it cannot be entirely round and
square at the same time; indeed if it received a Million, none of them would be
distinct. Now if this piece of Wax was capable of knowing its Figures, it could
not know by what Figure it must be determined, if the number of them were too
great. It is the same with our Soul, when a great number of Modifications fill
its Capacity, it cannot perceive them distinctly, because it sees them not
separately; this makes it think it perceives nothing at all. It cannot say that
it is sensible Pain, Pleasure, Light, Sound, Taste; it is none of all these,
and yet it is all these that it perceives.

But although we should suppose the Soul not to be subjected to the confused
and irregular Motions of the Animal Spirits; or so disingaged from the Body,
that its Thoughts should not depend upon whatsoever passed in it; it might then
happen that we should more easily comprehend certain things in one time than in
another, and yet the Capacity of the Soul be neither diminished nor increased.

The general Idea of Infinity is inseparable from the Mind, and it wholly takes
up its Capacity when it thinks not of some particular thing.

For when we say we think of nothing, it does not follow that we do not think
of this general Idea, but simply that we do not think of any thing in
particular.

Certainly if our Mind was not filled with this Idea, we could not think of all
sorts of things as we do; for indeed we cannot think of those things that we
have no knowledge of. And if this Idea was no more present to the Mind, when it
seems to us that we think of nothing, than when we think of any thing in
particular, we should have as much Facility to think of what we would, when we
vigorously apply our selves to any particular Truth, as when we apply our
selves to nothing; which is contrary to Experience. For instance, When we are
attentive to any Proposition in Geometry, we cannot so easily think of any
thing else, as when we are diverted by no particular Thought: So we think more
upon the General and Infinite Being, when we think least on Particular and
Finite Beings: Thus we think as much at one time as another.

We cannot therefore increase the Extension and Capacity of the Mind by
swelling it up, if we may so say, and in giving it more Reality than it
Naturally has, but only by managing it artificially, which is perfectly done by
Arithmetic and Algebra. For these Sciences afford means of abridging our
Idea's so methodically, and considering them in such an order, that although
the Mind has little Extension, it is able, by the help of these Sciences, to
discover the most compounded Truths, which at first appear incomprehensible.
But we must take things in their first Principles, to explain them with the
utmost Clearness and Certainty.

Truth is nothing else but a real Relation of Equality or Inequality: Falsehood
is only a Negation of Truth, or a False and Imaginary Relation. Truth is that
which Exists, Falsehood has no Being; or if you will, it is that which is not:
We never deceive our selves when we see real Relations, since we are not
deceived when we see the Truth: We always deceive our selves, when we judge
that we see certain Relations, and these Relations are not: For when we see
Falsehood, we see what is not, or rather we see nothing at all. Whosoever sees
the Relation of Equality between twice two and four, sees a Truth, because he
sees a relation of Equality, which is what he sees it to be. So whosoever sees
a relation of Inequality, between twice two and five, sees a Truth, because he
sees a relation of Inequality which truly Exists: But if any one judges he sees
a relation of Equality between twice two and five he deceives himself, because
he sees, or rather thinks he sees a relation of Equality which is not. Truths
are only Relations therefore, and the Knowledge of Truth is the Knowledge of
these Relations. But Falsehood is not, and the Knowledge of Falsehood, or a False
Knowledge, is the Knowledge of what is not, if we may so speak; for as we
cannot know what is not, only in relation to what is, we can discover Error
only by comparing it with Truth.

We may distinguish as many different kinds of Falsehood, as of Truth: And as
there are relations of three sorts, viz. of one Idea to another, of an Object
to its Idea, or of an Idea to its Object; and lastly, between one Object and
another, so there are Truths and Falsities of three sorts: There are some
between Idea's, between Things and their Idea's, and between Things only. It is
true that twice two is four; it is false that twice two are five: Here is a
Truth and a Falsity between Idea's. It is true that there is a Sun; it is false
that there is two: Here is a Truth and a Falsehood between Things and their
Idea's. It is true also that the Earth is greater than the Moon; and it is
false that the Sun is less than the Earth: Here is a Truth and a Falsehood which
is only between Things.

Of these three sorts of Truths, those that are between Idea's are Eternal and
Immutable; and because of their Immutability, they are also the Rules and
Measures of all other; for all Rules and Measures ought to be unchangeable. And
therefore in Arithmetic, Algebra, and Geometry, we only consider these sorts
of Truths, because these general Sciences regulate and include all particular
Sciences. All Relations, or Truths which are between created things, or between
Idea's and things created, are subject to the Changes that all Creatures are
capable of. The Truths only, which are between our Idea's and the Supreme Being
are immutable; as are those that are between Idea's only; because God is no
more subject to Change, than the Idea's which he includes.

The Truths also that are between Idea's, are only those that we endeavor to
discover by the Exercise of the Mind; for we generally make use of our Senses
to discover others; we prove the Existence of things by our Eyes and Hands, and
by them discover the Relations of Equality or Inequality that there is betwixt
them. It Is the Relations between Idea's only, that the Mind can Discover of it
self without the use of the Senses. But there are not only Relations between
Idea's, but also between the Relations that are between Idea's, between the
Relations of the Relations of Idea's; and in fine, between the aggregate of
many Relations, and between the Relations of these Aggregates of Relations, and
so on ad infinitum, that is, There are compounded Truths ad infinitum.

A simple Truth of Geometry, or the Relation of one entire Idea to another, as
the Relation of four to two, or to twice two, is called a Geometrick or simple
Ratio; for the Excess or Defect of an Idea, or to use the common Terms, The
Excess or Defect of a Magnitude, is not properly a Ratio, nor are equal
Excesses or Defects equal Ratio's: When Idea's or Magnitudes are equal, it is a
Ratio of Equality; when they are unequal, the Ratio is of Inequality.

The Relation that is between the Relation of Magnitudes, that is, between
their Ratio's, is called a Compounded Ratio, because it is a compounded
Relation: As the Relation that is between the Relation of 6 to 4, and of 3 to 2
is a compounded Ratio; and when the compounded Ratio's are equal, this
compounded Ratio is called Proportion or double Ratio: The Relation that is
between the Relations of 8 to 4, and of 6 to 3, are a Proportion, because these
Relations are equal.

Now it must be observed, that all Relations, or Ratio's, whether Simple or
Compounded, are true Magnitudes; and that the Term Magnitude is relative, and
necessarily includes some Relation; for there is nothing great of it self, and
without Relation to any thing else, except Infinity and Unity. All whole
Numbers are as really Relations as fracted Numbers, or Numbers compared to, or
divided by others: Although we cannot reflect thereon, because these whole
Numbers may be expressed by one Arithmetic Designation: For instance, 4/1 or
8/2 is as real a Relation, as or 2/8: The Unity to which 4 reates is not
expressed, but it is understood, for 4 is a Relation as well as 4/1 or 8/2,
since 4 is equal to 4/1 or to 8/2. All Magnitudes then being a Relation, or all
Relations a Magnitude, it is evident that all Relations may be expressed by
Figures, and represented to the Imagination by Signs.

Thus all Truths being only Relations, to discover exactly all Truths as well
Simple as Compound, we should know all Relations as well Simple as Compound:
There are two sorts of them, as we have already said, Relations of Equality and
Inequality: It is plain that all Relations of Equality are alike, and as soon
as we know one thing is equal to another known thing, we know exactly the
Relation of it. But it is not the same with those of Inequality; we know that a
Tower is commonly higher than six feet, and lower than a thousand; and yet we
know not its just Magnitude, nor the Relation it has to six Feet.

To compare things amongst themselves, or rather exactly to measure the
Relations of Inequality, we must have an exact measure; we must have a simple
and infinitely Intelligible Idea, which may be accommodated to all forts of
Subjects. This Measure is Unity; by that it is that we exactly measure all
things, and without it is impossible to know any thing exactly. But all Numbers
being compounded of Unity, it is self-evident, that without the Idea's of
Numbers, and manner of comparing and measuring these Idea's, that is, without
Arithmetic, it is impossible to advance to the Knowledge of compounded Truths.

Idea's, or the Relations between Idea's, in a word, Magnitudes, when they are
greater or less than other Magnitudes, cannot be made equal except by More or
Less, which is compounded of Unity; so many times repeated as is necessary: So
it is only by Addition and Substraction of Unity, and the parts of Unity (when
we conceive it divided) that we exactly measure all Magnitudes, and discover
all Truths. Now of all the Sciences Arithmetic and Algebra are principally the
only ones, which teach us to make these Operations artificially, instructively,
and admirably, to manage the Capacity of the Mind; since they furnish it with
all the Perfection and Extension it is capable of; because it is by them only
that we discover all knowable Truths with the greatest Exactness.

Common Geometry perfects the Imagination more than it does the Mind; and the
Truths which we discover by this Science, are not always so evident as
Geometers imagine. For instance, They think they have expressed the value of
certain Magnitudes, when they have proved them equal in value to certain Lines,
as the Hypothenusa's in right Angle Triangles whose Legs are known; or of
others which are determined by some of the Conick Sections. But it is plain
they deceive themselves, for these Hypothenusa's for instance are themselves
unknown: We more exactly know the 8 or 20, than a Line that we imagine, or
describe upon Paper for the Hypothenuse of a right-angled Triangle, whose sides
are two, whereof one is two and the other four: We know at least that 8
approaches very near to 3, and that 20 is about 4; and by certain Rules we can
approach Infinitely nearer and nearer to their true Magnitude; and if we cannot
arrive to it, it is only because the Mind cannot comprehend Infinity: But we
have only a very confused Idea of the Magnitude of Hypothenusa's, and we are
even obliged to have recourse to 8 or 20 to express them. Thus Geometrick
Constructions, which serve to express the values of unknown quantities, are not
so useful in regulating the Mind, and discovering the Relations or Truths which
we enquire after, as to regulate the Imagination. But as we are much more
pleased to make use of our Imagination than our Mind, Studious Persons have
commonly more Esteem for Geometry, than for Arithmetic and Algebra.

To Make it perfectly apprehended, that Arithmetic and Algebra together are
the true Logic, which serves to discover things as they are, and to give the
Mind all the Extension it is capable of: It ill be sufficient to make some
Reflections upon the Rules of these Sciences.

We have a little before said, that all Truths are only Relations; that the
most simple and best known, is that of Equality: That this is the beginning from
whence others must be measured, to have an exact Idea of Inequality; that the
Measure we are obliged to make use of is Unity; that we must add of substract
it as many times as is necessary, to measure the Excess or Defect of the
Inequality of these Magnitudes.

From thence it is plain that all Operations, which may be of use to discover
the Relations of Equality, are only Additions or Substractions: Additions of
Magnitudes to Equal Magnitudes, Additions of Relations to equal Relations, or
to place Magnitudes in Proportion: In short, Addition of relations to equal
relations, or to put Magnitudes in compounded Proportion.

To equal 2 to 4, it is only requisite to add 2 to 2, or cut off 2 from 4; or
to add unity to 2 and substract it from 4.

To make the relation of 8 to 2, equal to the relation of 6 to 3, we must not
add 3 to 2, nor substract 3 from 8; so that the excess of one number to the
other may be equal to 3, which is the excess of 6 above 3; that would be only
an Addition and equalling simple Magnitudes: We must first see what is the
Magnitude of the Ratio of 8 to 2, or which is all one 8/2; and we find by
dividing 8 by 2, that the Quote of this Ratio is 4; or that 8/2 is equal to 4;
we must also examine what the Magnitude of the Relation of 6 to 3 is, and fin
that it is equal to 2. Thus we discover that these twe Ratio's 8/2 is equal to
4, and 6/3 equal to 2, differ only by 2; so that to equal them, we may either
add 6/3 (equal to 2) to 6/3 which makes 12/3 which is a relation equal to 8/2,
or else substract 4/2 equal to 2 from 8/2, and there remains 4/2, which will be
a Ratio equal to 6/3; or in fine, add unity to 6/3, and substract it from 8/2,
and we shall have 9/3 and 6/2 which are equal Ratio's, for 9 is to 3 as 6 to 2.

Lastly, To find the Magnitude of the Inequality between Relations which result
the one from a compounded Ratio, or from the relation of the relation of 12 to
3, and of 3 to 1; and the other of the compounded Ratio, or of the relation of
the relation of 8 to 2, and of 2 to 1, the same method must be taken. First,
The Magnitude of the Ratio of 12 to 3 is designed by 4, or 4 is the Quote of
the Ratio of 12 to 3, and 3 is the Quote of that of 3 to 1; and the Quote of
the Ratio of the Quotes of 4 and 3 is 4/3. Secondly, The Quote of 8 to 2 is 4,
and that of 2 to 1 is 2; and the Quote of the Quotes 4 and 2 is 2. In fine, The
Inequality between the relations which result from the relations of the
relations, is the difference between 4/2 and 2, viz. 2/3. Therefore 2/3 added
to the relation of the Ratio's of 12 to 3, and 3 to 1, or subtracted from the
relation of the other Ratio's 8 to 2, and 2 to 1, equals these relations of
relations, and produces a compounded Proportion. Thus we may make use of
Addition and Substraction, to equal both Magnitudes and their relations as well
Compound as Simple, and so have an exact Idea of the Magnitude of their
Inequality.

It is true we make use of Multiplications and Divisions as well simple as
compounded, but they are only compounded Additions and Substractions. Multiply
4 by 3, it makes as many Additions of 4 as 3, contains the Additions of unity,
or finds a number which has the same relation to 4, as the 3 has to unity: And
to divide 12 by 4, is to substract 4 from 12 as many times as we can; that is,
to find a relation to unity equal to that of 12 to 4; for 3 which will be the
Quote of it, has the same relation to unity as 12 to 4. The Extractions of
square and cubick Roots, etc. are only Divisions, whereby we seek one, two, or
three Mean Proportionals.

It is evident that the Mind of Man is so narrow, his Memory so treacherous,
and his Imagination so confined, that without the use of Figures and Writing,
and the artificial way we have of using them in Arithmetic, it would be
impossible to make such Operations as are necessary to discover the Inequality
of Magnitudes and their relations: If we had many numbers to add or to
substract, or which is the same thing, when these Numbers are great, and that
we could only add them by parts, we should always forget some of them. There
being no Imagination extensive enough to add Fractions together which consist
of many places, as ^, or to substract the one from the other.

Multiplications, Divisions and Extractions of Roots in whole numbers are
infinitely more perplexing, than pure Additions or Substractions: Without the
help of Arithmetic, the Mind is too confined and too weak to make them; and it
is so plain, that it would be unnecessary for me to stop here to prove it.

Yet Algebra is a thing quite different from Arithmetic: It much less divides
the Capacity of the Mind; it abridges our Idea's after the most simple and
easy Method that can be conceived: What requires quires much time to be
performed in Arithmetic, is done by Algebra in a moment, without perplexing
the Mind by changing of Figures, or long Operations. In short, There are many
things, that may and are necessary to be known, which yet we cannot have an
exact knowledge of by Arithmetic only: But I believe there is nothing useful,
and that Men can know exactly, but it may be discovered by Arithmetic and
Algebra together. So that these two Sciences are the Foundation of all others,
and give us the true way of acquiring all Sciences exactly; because by their
assistance we may better manage the Capacity of the Mind.

PART II. Of Method.
CHAP. I. Of the Rules that must be observed in the Enquiry after Truth.
AFter having explained the Method that is proper to render the Mind more
attentive and capacious, which is the only Way we have to make it more perfect,
that is, more clear and penetrating: It is time to proceed to the Rules that
it is absolutely necessary to observe, in the Resolution of all Questions. This
I shall speak pretty fully to, and endeavor to explain it by many Instances,
that its Necessity may the better appear, and how the Mind ought to be
accustomed to put it in use; because it is not so difficult or necessary to
know, as to practice well.

Something very extraordinary and surprising must not be expected here, but on
the contrary, to have these Rules good, they must be simple, natural, few in
Number, very intelligible, and dependant one upon another. In a Word, they
ought only to conduct our Minds, and regulate our Attention without dividing
it. For Experience sufficiently shows us, that the Logic of Aristotle is of no
great use, because it imploys the Mind too much, and diverts it from the
Attention it ought to give to those Subjects it examines. Let those then, who
only love Mysteries, and extraordinary Inventions, for some time quit this
Fantastical Humor: And give all the Attention they are capable of, that they
may examine whether the Rules that we lay down, are sufficient always to
preserve Evidence in the Perceptions of the Mind, and to discover the most
hidden Truths. If they do not unjustly prejudice themselves against the
Simplicity and Easiness of them, I believe they will acknowledge, from the Use
we shall hereafter make of them, that the most clear and simple Principles are
the most fruitful, and that extraordinary and difficult things are not always
so useful as our vain Curiosity would dictate to us.

The chief of these Rules is, That we must always preserve Evidence in our
Reasonings, to be able to discover the Truth without deceiving our selves. On
this Princip^e depends this general Rule which regards the Subject of our
Studies, viz. That we ought only to reason upon such things as we have a clear
Idea of. And by a necessary Consequence, That we must always begin with the
most simple and easy things, and continue some Time upon them, before we
undertake to enquire into the more compounded and difficult ones.

The Rules which respect the manner of resolving Questions, depend likewise
upon this first Principle; and the first of these Rules is, That we must have a
distinct conception of the Condition of the Question that is proposed to be
resolved, and have Idea's of these Terms clear enough to be able to compare
them, and so to discover the Relations which we enquire after.

But when we cannot discover the Relations that things have amongst themselves,
by immediately comparing them: The second Rule is, One or many intermediate
Idea's must be found by the Effort of the Mind, which may serve as a common
Measure; whereby to discover the Relations that are between them. It must be
inviolably observed, that these Idea's are so much the more clear and distinct,
as the Relations we endeavor to discover, are more accurate and in greater
Number.

But when Questions are difficult, and of long Discussion, the third Rule is,
That we must carefully separate from the Sbject that we would consider, all
things that are not necessary to be examined to discover the Truth we seek: For
we must not fruitlesly divide the Capacity of the Mind: All its Power ought to
be employed in such things only as can illuminate it. Things that may be thus
separated, are all those that do not concern the Question, and which being
taken away, the Question remains entire.

The Question being thus reduced to its least Terms, the fourth Rule is; To
divide the Subject of our Meditation into Parts, and consider them one after
another, according to their Natural Order, beginning with the most simple, viz.
those that include the fewest Relations, and never to pass to the most
compounded, before we have distinctly discovered the most simple, and made them
familiar to us.

When these things are become easy to us, by Meditation; the fifth Rule is, To
abridge our Idea's, and afterward dispose them in our Imagination, or write
them upon Paper, that by that means they may no longer fill the Capacity of the
Mind. Although this Rule is always useful, it is not absolutely necessary,
except in the most difficult Questions, which require a great Capacity of Mind,
because we enlarge the Mind only by abridging our Idea's. The Use of this Rule,
and of those which follow, cannot be discovered by any other Method than Algebra

The Idea's of all things which are absolutely necessary to be considered,
being clear, familiar, short, and put in order by the Imagination, or expressed
upon Paper: The sixth Rule is, They must all be compared according to the Rules
of Combination, Alternately one with the other, either by a simple View of the
Mind, or by the Motion of the Imagination, accompanied with this Prospect of
the Mind, or else by the Calculation of the Pen joined to the Attention of the
Mind and Imagination.

If of all the Relations which result from all these Comparisons, there should
not be found that which we seek: We must, anew, separate from all these
Relations, those that are not useful in the Resolving the Question, and make
the rest easy, short, and dispose in the Imagination, or express them upon
Paper, Compare them together according to the Rules of Combinations, and
examine whether the compounded Relation that we seek, is any one of all those
compounded Relations which result from these new Comparisons.

If none of these Relations which we have discovered include the Resolution of
the Question: Then all these Relations must be thrown by as useless, and we
must make others familiar, etc. And in continuing after this manner, we shall
discover the true Relation that we seek how compounded soever it be; provided
we can sufficiently extend the Capacity of the Mind, by abridging its Idea's,
and through all these Operations bear in Mind the Term we look for, it is a
continual View of the Question that must regulate all the Advances of the Mind,
since it is necessary to know what we enquire after.

Above all, we must take care that we do not rest satisfied with any false
Appearance or Probability, but so often begin the Comparisons we make use of to
discover the Truth till we cannot refrain our assent to it, without perceiving
the secret Reproaches of the Master, who answers to our Request. I mean our
Endeavors, the Application of our Mind, and our Desires; and then this Truth
may serve us for an infallible Principle to advance us in the Sciences.

All these Rules that we have given, are not generally necessary in all Sorts
of Questions; for when Questions are very easy, the first Rule is sufficient;
and in many we need only the first and second. In a Word, since we must make
use of these Rules, until we have discovered the Truth that we seek, it is
necessary to practice them so much the more as the Questions are more difficult.

These Rules are not very numerous. They depend all upon one another. They are
natural, and may be rendered so familiar, that it will not be necessary to think
much upon them when we have Occasion to use them. In short, they can so
regulate the Attention of the Mind as not to divided it, which is a great Part
of what we desire. But they appear, so inconsiderable of themselves that to
recommend them, it is necessary to show that Philosophers are fallen into a
great many Errors and Extravagances, because they have not so much as observed
the two first which are the easiest and chiefest; and that it is also by the Use
that Mr. Descartes has made of them, that he has discovered so many great and
beneficial Truths in his Works.

CHAP. II. Of the general Rule which concerns the Subject of our Studies. That
the Philosophers have not observed it, which has caused many Errors in Physics.
THE first of these Rules, and that which concers the Subject of our Studies,
teaches us that we ought only to reason upon clear Idea's; from whence this
Consequence may be drawn, that to preserve a good Order in our Studies, we must
begin with things that are most simple, and easy to be apprehended, and
continue a great while upon them before we undertake the Disquisition of the
most compound and difficult.

Every one will agree about the Necessity of this general Rule, for it is plain
enough, that to reason upon obscure Idea's, and uncertain Principles, is to
walk in the Dark; but it may be wondered at, if I said it is obobserved but very
seldom, and that most of the Sciences which are still the Subject of the Pride
of some falsely learned Men, are only grounded upon either too confused or too
general Idea's, to be useful in the Disquisition of Truth.

Aristotle, who justly deserves the Title of the Prince of these Philosophers,
which I speak of, because he is the Father of that Philosophy which they
cultivate with so much Care, seldom reasons but upon confused Idea's which are
received by the Senses, and upon some other general and indeterminate Idea's,
which represent nothing that is particular to the Mind; for the Terms common to
this Philosopher, can only serve confusedly to express to the Senses and
Imagination, the imperfect Sensations we have of sensible things, or to make
Men speak after so general and indeterminate a Manner that they express nothing
distinctly. Almost all his Works, but especially his eight Books of Physics,
of which there are as different Commentators, as there are Professors in
Philosophy, are nothing but a mere Logic, there are long Discourses in it,
without any thing at the Bottom: It Is not that he is prolix, but because he has
the Secret of being concise, and of affording nothing but Words: He does not
make such a frequent Use of his general Terms in his other Works, but those he
uses only serve to stir up the confused Idea's of the Senses; It Is by those
Idea's that he pretends, in his Problems and elsewhere, in two Words, to
resolve an infinite Number of Questions, of which a Demonstration may be given,
that it is impossible to resolve them.

But that my Meaning may the better be comprehended, what I have proved
elsewhere must be remembered, viz, That all Terms which only stir up sensible
Idea's are equivocal, but what is to be considered is, they are equivocal
through Error and Ignorance; and consequently cause an infinite Number of
Errors.

The Word Ram is equivocal; it signifies both an Animal and a Constellation, in
which the Sun enters at the Spring; but it is rare that we are deceived by it.
For he must be a mighty Astrologer who should imagine any Relation between
these two things: And believe, for instance, that we are apt to vomit at that
Time, if we take Medicines, because the Ram chews the Cud. But for the Terms of
sensible Idea's, there is hardly any body who discovers that they are
equivocal. Aristotle, and the ancient Philosophers, have not so much as thought
of it, as will easily be granted, if we read any thing of their Works, and
distinctly know the Cause why these Terms are equivocal. For there is nothing
more evident, than that the Philosophers have received the contrary to what
ought to be believed upon this Subject.

For instance, when they say Fire is hot, Grass green, Sugar sweet, etc. they
think with Children and the Vulgar, that the Fire contains what they feel when
they Warm themselves; that Herbs have the same Colors upon them, as they
believe they see; and that Sugar includes the Sweetness in it that we taste in
eating; and so of all things which we see or feel. It is impossible to doubt of
this if we read their Writings: They speak of sensible Qualities as of
Sensations: They take Heat for Motion, and thus because of the Equivocation of
Terms, they confound the Modifications of Bodies with the Modifications of
Spirits.

It Is only since Descartes, that these confused and indetermined Questions,
whether Fire is hot, Herbs green, Sugar sweet, etc. have been answered by
distinguishing the Equivocations of sensible Terms which express them. If by
Heat, Color, Taste, you mean such or such a Motion of insensible Parts; Fire
is hot, Herbs green, Sugar sweet, etc. But if by Heat and the other Qualities,
you mean, what I feel near the Fire, what I see when I look upon Herbs, etc.
Fire is not hot, nor Herbs green, etc. for the Heat that we feel, and Colors
which we see, are only in the Soul, as I have proved in the first Part of this
Book. Now, as Men think what they feel, is the same thing as what is really in
the Object: They think they have a Right to judge of the Qualities of Objects,
by the Sensations they have of them. So they speak not two Words without saying
something false, nor ever speak any thing upon this matter which is not obscure
and confused; as many following Reasons will evince.

The first, because all Men have not the same Sensations, nor one Man at
different Times, or when he feels the same Objects by different Parts of his
Body. What seems sweet to this Man, is bitter to another; what is cold to this,
the same is hot to another; what seems hot to one that is cold, seems cold to
the same Person when he has warmed himself, or if he feels it in different
Parts of his Body. If Water seems hot to one Hand, it often seems cold to the
other, or to some Part near the Heat, if washed therewith. Salt seems savoury
to the Tongue, and sharp to a Wound, Sugar seems sweet to the Mouth, and Aloes
extremely bitter, but nothing is either sweet or bitter to the rest of the of
the Senses. So that when we say such a thing is cold, sweet, bitter, it
determines nothing certainly.

The second, because different Objects may produce the same Sensation.
Plaster, Bread, Snow, Sugar, Salt, etc. produce the same Sensation of Color:
Yet their Whiteness is different, if we judge otherwise of them than by the
Senses. So when we say Flower is white, we say nothing distinctly.

The third, because the Qualities of Bodies, which cause in us Sensations
perfectly different, are almost the same; and on the contrary, those of which
we have almost the same Sensations, are often very different. There is scarcely
any Difference in the Qualities of Sweetness and Bitterness that is in Objects,
and yet the Sensations of them are essentially different. The Motions which
cause Pain or Titilation, differ only as to the more or less; and yet the
Sensations of Titilation and Pain are essentially different. On the contrary,
the Sharpness of Fruit differs not so much from Bitterness as Sweetness does,
and yet this Quality is the most distant from Bitterness that can be. Since it
is requisite that a Fruit which is sharp, because it is too green, must receive
a great Number of Changes before it grows bitter for being too much ripe or
rotten. When Fruits are too ripe, they seem sweet, and when they are a little
too ripe they seem Bitter: Bitterness and Sweetness in Fruits differ then only
as to the more or less; and that is the reason that some Persons think them
sweet, when others think them bitter. For some there are who think Aloes as
sweet as Honey. It is the same with all Sensible Idea's. The Terms of sweet,
bitter, salt, sharp, sower, etc. of red, green, yellow, etc. of such and such
Smells, Tastes, Colors, etc. are therefore all equivocal, and stir up no clear
and distinct Idea in the Mind: Yet School Philosophers, and the vulgar, judge
of all the Sensible Qualities of bodies, only by the Sensations they receive
from them.

These Philosophers, not only judge of Sensible Qualities, by the Sensations
they receive of them; but of things by a Consequence of the Judgments they have
made concerning Sensible Qualities. For what Sensations they have essentially
different from certain Qualities, they believe is owing to a Generation of new
Forms which produce these Imaginary Differences of Qualities, Corn appears
yellow, hard, etc. Flower white, soft, etc. And from thence they conclude from
the Relation of their Eyes and Hands, that these are Bodies essentially
different, not considering of the manner whereby Corn is changed into Flower;
yet Flower is only Corn broken and ground; as Fire is only Wood divided and
agitated; and Ashes, the grossest Part of the Wood, separated without
Agitation; and Glass only Ashes whereof each Part is polished, and made a
little round by the Attrition caused by Fire; and so of other Transmutations of
Bodies.

It is then evident, that Sensible Terms and Idea's are wholly useless for a
just proposing, and clear resolving of Questions, or the Discovery of Truth.
Yet is there no Question, however perplexed by the Equivocal Terms of the
Senses, but Aristotle, and the greatest Part of the Philosophers, pretend in
their Books, to resolve it without these Distinctions that we have given; not
considering they are Equivocal through Ignorance and Error.

For instance, if we demand of those who have passed their whole Lives in
reading the ancient Philosophers or Physicians, and who have entirely espoused
their Sentiments; whether Water is moist, Fire dry, Wine hot, the Blood of
Fishes cold, if Water is more crude than Wine, Gold more perfect than
Quicksilver, whether Plants and Beasts have Souls, and a thousand other
undetermined Questions? They will easily answer, without consulting any thing
but the Impression these Objects have made upon their Senses, or what their
Memories have retained of their reading. They do not perceive that these Terms
are equivocal. They think it strange that they must define them, and are
impatient if we endeavor to discover to them, that they go a little too fast,
and that their Senses are deceived. They Will make Distinctions enough to
confound the most evident things, and in these Questions where it is necessary
to remove the Equivocation, they see nothing to distinguish.

If we consider that the greatest Part of the Questions of Philosophers and
Physicians include some equivocal Terms like those we have spoken of, we cannot
doubt but that these learned Men, who have not been able to define them, have
delivered nothing Solid in all the great Volumes they have composed; and what I
have said may suffice to overthrow almost all the Opinions of the Ancients. But
for Descartes, he perfectly knew how to distinguish these things. He resolved
no Question by Sensible Idea's; and if we take the Pains to read him, we shall
see he explained every thing after a more clear and evident Manner, and almost
always demonstrated them only by the distinct Idea's of Extension, Figure, and
Motion.

The other kind of equivocal Terms which Philosophers make use of, comprehend
all these general Terms of Logic, by which it is easy to explain things
without having any Knowledge of them. Aristotle has made the most use of them,
all his Books are full of them, and some are a mere Logic. He proposes and
resolves all things by these Specious Words, Genus, Species, Power, Nature,
Form, Faculty, Quality, Causa per se, Causa per accidens: His Followers have
had no small Trouble to apprehend the meaning of these Words which signify
nothing at all, nor are they more learned than before, when they have heard say
that Fire dissolves Metals, because it has a Faculty of dissolving them; and
that a Man digests not because he has a weak Stomach, or that his Faculty of
Concocting does not perform its Functions well.

It is true, those who have made use of these Terms, and general Idea's, to
explain all things by, do not commonly fall into so great a Number of Errors,
as those who only make use of them to stir up the confused Ideas of the Senses.
The Philosophers of the Schools are, not so subject to Error as certain]
Dogmatical decisive Physicians, who form Systems upon some Experiments, which
they know not the reason of; because they speak so generally that they run no
great Hazard.

The Fire warms, dries, hardens, and softens, because it has such Faculties as
produce these Effects: Senna purges by its Purgative Quality, Bread nourishes
by its Nutritive Quality: These Proportions are not subject to Error, for a
Quality is that which denotes a thing by such a Name; and we cannot deny it to
Aristotle, for indeed this Definition is indisputable. Such, or the like manner
of speaking are not false, but only in Effect they signify nothing. These
indetermined Idea's engage us not in Error, but they are wholly useless in the
Discovery of Truth.

For although we know there is a substantial Form in Fire, accompanied with a
thousand Faculties, like to those of heating, dilating, melting Gold, Silver,
and all Metals; of clearing, burning, and baking: If this Difficulty be
proposed to me to be resolved, viz. whether Fire can harden Dirt and soften
Wax? The Idea's of Substantial Form, and of those Faculties that produce Heat,
Ratification, Fluidity, etc. would be of no use to me in resolving the
Question; for there being no Connection between the Idea's, of the Hardness of
Dirt, and Softness of Wax, and those of the Substantial Form of Fire, and the
Qualities of producing Rarification, Fluidity, etc. It is the same with all
general Idea's, so they are wholly useless for the Ends designed.

But if we know that Fire is nothing else but the Parts of Wood put into
continal Motion, and that it is only by this Agitation, that it excites the
Sensation of Heat in us: If we knew at the same Time that the Softness of Dirt
consists only in a Mixture of Earth and Water, as these Idea's are not confused
and general, but distinct and particular: It would not be difficult to see that
the Heat of Fire must harden Dirt, because one Body can move another, being it
self in Motion. We likewise easily discover, that since Heat, which is felt
near the Fire, is caused by the Motion of the invisible Parts of the Wood,
which, strike against the Hands, if we expose Dirt to the Heat of the Fire, the
Watery Parts, which are joined to the Earth, being more lose, and consequently,
sooner agitated by the Shock of the little Bodies which go out from the Fire,
than the gross Particles of the Earth; they must separate and leave it dry and
hard. It would also evidently apppear, that Fire cannot harden Wax, if we knew
that the Particles which compose it, are branched and very near of the same
Bigness. Thus particular Idea's are very useful in an Enquiry after Truth: And
indeterminate. Idea's are hot only useless, but on the contrary, insensibly
lead us into Error.

These Philosophers content not themselves with making use of general Terms,
and indetermined Idea's that answer nothing: But they will have those Terms
signify certain particular Beings. They pretend that there is some Substance
distinct from Matter, which is the Form of Matter, and an infinite Company of
little Beings really distinct from Matter and Form; of which they suppose as
many of them as they have different Sensations of Bodies, and they think these
Bodies produce different Effects.

Yet it is plain to any Man that is capable of Attention, that all these little
Beings, distinct from Fire; for instance, and which we suppose to be contained
therein, for the Production of Heat, Light, Hardness, Fluidity, etc, are only
Fictions of the Imagination, which are contrary to Reason: For Reason has no
particular Idea which represents these little Beings. If we ask the
Philosophers, what Sort of Entity that Faculty in the Fire is which gives
Light, they will only answer that it is a Being which is the Cause why Fire is
capable of producing Light: So that the Idea they have of the Faculty of Light,
is not different from the general Idea of the Cause, and confused Idea of the
Effect which we see. They have therefore no clear Idea of what they say, when
they admit these particular Beings. Thus they say what they conceive not, and
what indeed is impossible to be conceived.

CHAP. III. Of the most dangerous Error in Philosophy. Of the Ancients.
PHilosophers have not only spoke what they did not conceive, when they
explained the Effects of Nature, by certain Beings which they have no
particular Idea of, but even establish a Principle from whence may directly be
drawn most false and dangerous Consequences.

For if, according to their Opinion, we suppose, that in Bodies there are some
Beings distinct from Matter; and not having any distinct Idea of these
Entities, we might easily imagine, that they are the true, or principal Causes
of the Effects which we see produced. It Is even the common Sentiment of most
Philosophers: For it is chiefly to explain these Effects, that they make use of
Substantial Forms, Real Qualities, and other the like Entities. But when we
come to consider attentively, the Idea we have of Cause or Power of acting, we
cannot doubt but that it represents something Divine: For the Idea of a
Sovereign Power, is the Idea of Sovereign Divinity; and the Idea of a
Subordinate Power, is the Idea of an inferior; but a true Divinity at least,
according to the Opinion of the Heathens, if it be the Idea of a Power or true
Cause. We admit therefore something Divine in all Bodies which encompass us,
when we admit Forms, Faculties, Qualities, Virtues, and real Beings, capable of
producing certain Effects, by the Power of their own Nature: And thus, they
insensibly enter into the Opinions of the Heathens, by the Respect they have
for their Philosophy. Faith indeed works it, but it may perhaps be said, that
if we are Christians in our Hearts, we are Heathens in our Minds.

Moreover, it is difficult to persuade our selves, that we ought neither to
love or fear, true Powers and Beings, who can act upon us, punish us with Pain,
or recompense us with Pleasure. And as Love and Fear are a true Adoration, it is
also difficult to persuade our selves that we ought not to adore them. For
whatever can act upon us, as a real and true Cause, is necessarily above us,
according to St. Austin and right Reason: The same Father, and the same Reason
tells us, it is an immutable Law that Inferior things should submit to
superior. And from hence, Ego enim ab anima hoc corpus animari non puto, nifi
intention facientis: Nec ab isto quicquam illam pati Arbitror, sed facere de
illo and in illo, tanquam subjecto divinitus dominationi suae. l. 6. mus. c. 5.
* this great Father concludes, that the Body cannot act upon the Soul, and
that nothing can be above the Soul but God.

In the Holy Scriptures, when God proves to the Israelites, that they ought to
adore him, that is, that they ought to fear and love him, the chief Reasons he
brings, are taken from his Power, to recompense and punish them. He represents
to them the Benefits they have received from him, the Evils wherewith he has
chastised them, and that he has still the same Power. He forbids them to adore
the Gods of the Heathens, because they have no Power over them, and can do them
neither Good nor Hurt. He requires them to honor him only, because he only is
the true Cause of Good and Evil, and that there happens none in their City,
according to the Prophet, which he has not done; for Natural Causes are not the
true Causes of the Evil that appears to be done to us. It Is God alone that acts
in them, and it is he only that we must fear and love: Soli Deo Honor and Gloria.

In short, this Opinion, that we ought to fear and love, whatsoever is the true
Cause of Good and Evil, appears so natural and just, that it is impossible to
destroy it; so that if we suppose this false Opinion of the Philosophers (which
we endeavor here to confute) that Bodies which encompass us are the true
Causes of the Pleasures and Evils which we feel: Reason seems to justify a
Religion like to that of the Heathens, and approves of the universal
Irregularity of Manners.

It is true, that Reason does not tell us that we must adore Onyons and Leeks,
as the Sovereign Divinity; because they cannot make us entirely happy when we
have of them, or entirely unhappy when we want them. Nor have the Heathens ever
done to them so much Honor as to the great Jupiter, upon whom all their
Divinities depend, or as to the Sun, which our Senses represent to us, as the
universal Cause, which gives Life and Motion to all things, and, which we
cannot hinder our selves from regarding as a Sovereign Divinity; if with the
Heathen Philosophers, we suppose it includes in its being the true Causes of
whatever it seems to produce, not only in our Bodies and Minds, but likewise in
all Beings which encompass us.

But if we must not pay a Sovereign Honor to Leeks and Onyons, yet we may
always render them some particular Adoration: I mean, we may think of and love
them in some manner; if it is true, that in some sort they can make us happy,
we must honor them in Proportion to the Good they can do us. And certainly,
Men who give Ear to the Reports of their Senses, think that Pulse is capable of
doing them good; for else the Israelites, for instance, would not have
regretted their Absence in the Defect, nor considered it as a Misfortune to be
deprived of them, if they did not, in some manner, look upon themselves happy
in the Enjoyment of them. These are the Irregularities which our Reason engages
us in, when it is joined to the Principles of the Heathen Philosophy, and
follows the Impressons of the Senses.

That we may longer doubt of the Falseness of this Miserable Philosphy, and the
Certainty of our Principles, and Clearness of the Idea's we make use of: It is
necessary, clearly to establish those Truths which are opposite to the Errors
of the ancient Philosophy, and to prove, in short, that there is only one true
Cause, because there is only one true God: That Nature, or the Power of every
thing, proceeds only from the Will of God: That all Natural things are not true
Causes, but only occasional ones; and some other Truths which will be the
Consequences of these.

It is evident that all Bodies, both great and small, have no power of removing
themselves: A Mountain, an House, a Stone, a grain of Sand; and in short, the
least or biggest Bodies we can conceive, have no power of removing themselves.
We have only two sorts of Idea's, that of Bodies, and that of Spirits; whereas
we ought to speak only of those things which we conceive we should reason
according to these two Idea's. Since therefore the Idea we have of all Bodies,
shows us that they cannot move themselves, it must be concluded that they are
moved by Spirits only. But when we examine the Idea we have of all finite
Minds, we do not see the necessary Connection between their Wills and the Motion
of any Body whatsoever it be: On the contrary, we see that there is none, nor
can be any; whence we ought to conclude, if we will argue according to our
Knowledge, that as no body can be able to move it self, so there is no created
Spirit can be the true or principal cause of the Motion of any body whatever.

But when we think of the Idea of God, viz. of a Being infinitely Perfect, and
consequently Almighty, we know that there is such a Connection between his Will,
and the Motion of all Bodies, that it is impossible to conceive he should Will
the Motion of a Body, that should not be moved: We must then say, that his Will
only can move Bodies, if we will speak things as we conceive them, and not as
we feel them. The moving force of Bodies therefore, is not in the Bodies which
move, since this power of Motion is nothing else but the Will of God. Thus
Bodies have no Action, and when a Bowl which is moved, by meeting it moves
another, yet it communicates nothing of its own; for in it self it has not the
Impression that it communicates to the other: Yet a Bowl is the Natural Cause
of the motion which it communicates. A Natural Cause then is not a real and
true Cause, but only an occasional one, and which determined the Author of
Nature to act after such and such a manner, in such and such an Occurrence.

It is certain, that it is by the Motion of visible or invisible. Bodies that
all things are produced: For Experience teaches us, that Bodies, whose parts
are in greatest Motion, always act more than others, and produce the greatest
Change in the World. All the Powers of Nature then proceed from the Will of
God: He has created the World because he willed it: Dixit and facta sunt: He
moves all things, and so produces all the Effects that we see happen; because
he has also willed certain Laws, according to which Bodies communicate their
Motions in their Rencounter; and because these Laws are Efficacious they act,
and Bodies cannot act. There is therefore no Force, Power, or true Cause, in
the Material and Sensible World, nor must we admit of Forms, Facilities, and
real Qualities, to produce Effects that Bodies cannot; and to divide, with God,
the Force and Power which is Essential to him. Not only Bodies cannot be the
true Causes of any thing, the most noble Spirits also are under a like
Impotence. They can know nothing it God does not enlighten them; nor can they
have any Sensation if he does not modifie them. They are capable of willing
nothing if God moves them not toward him. I confess they can determine the
Impression that God gives them toward him, to other Objects; but I know not
whether that can called a Power. If the Capability of Sinning is a Power, it
would be a Power which the Almighty has not. St. Austin says in some of his
Works, It Men had in themselves the Power of loving Good, we might say they had
some Power: But can only Love, because God Wills they should Love, and because
his Will is Efficacious. They Love only, because God continually inclines them
to Good in General; that is, toward himself: For God has created them only for
himself, he never preserves them without turning them toward and inclining
them to himself. They have no Motion toward Good in general, it is God who
moves them; they only follow by an entire free Choice, this Impression
according to the Law of God, or determine it toward a false Good after the Law
of the Flesh: They can only be determined by a Prospect of Good: For being able
to do only what God makes them, they can love nothing but Good.

But if we should suppose what is true in one Sense, that Spirits have in
themselves the Power of knowing Truth and loving Good, if their Thoughts and
Wills produced nothing External, we might always say they were able to do
nothing. Now it appears most certain to me, that the Will of Spirits is not
capable of moving the least Body in the World: For it is evident there is no
necessary Connection between the Will we have of moving our Arms, and the Motion
of them. It is true, they are moved when we please, and by that means we are
the Natural Cause of their Motion: But Natural Causes are not true Causes, they
are only Occasional ones, which act merely through the Power and Efficacy of
God, as I have already explained.

For how can we move our Arms? To move them we must have Animal Spirits, and
convey them by certain Nerves, into such and such Muscles to swell and contract
them. For by this means the Arms move; or according to the Opinion of some, we
know not yet how it is performed: And we see, that Men who do not so much as
know they have Spirits, Nerves, and Muscles to move their Arms, yet move them
with as much Art and Facility, as those that understand Anatomy best. It Is then
granted, that Men Will the Motion of their Arms, but it is only God that can and
knows how to remove them. If a Man cannot throw down a Tower, at least he knows
well what must be done in order to it: But there is no Man that knows so much,
as what he must do to move one of his Fingers by the help of his Animal
Spirits. How then can Men move their Arms? These things appear evident to me,
and to all those that will think of them, though perhaps they may be
incomprehensible to such as will not consider them.

But Men only are not the True Causes of the Motions produced in their Bodies,
it seems even a Contradiction that they should be so. A True Cause is such an
one as the Mind perceives a necessary Connection between it and its Effect; it is
that I mean. Now there is only the Infinitely Perfect Being, whose Mind can
perceive a necessary Connection between his Will and the Effects of it. It Is
only God then, who is the True Cause, and who has really the Power of moving
Bodies. I say moreover, it is not probable that God should communicate, either
to Men or Angels, this Power he has of moving Bodies; and those who pretend the
Power we have of moving our Arms is a true Power, must confess that God can
also give to Spirits the Power of creating, annihilating, and performing all
possible things: In a word, That he can make them Almighty, as I shall further
show.

God has no need of any Instrument to act, it is sufficient if he Wills a thing
for it to be, because it is a Contradiction to suppose he Wills it, and that it
should not be. His Power then is his Will, and the communicating of his Power
is a Communication of his Will. But to communicate his Will to a Man or an
Angel, can signify nothing else but Willing; some body, for instance, should
be effectively moved when it is Willed by a Man or an Angel. Now in this case I
see two Wills which concur when an Angel would move a Body, that of God, and
that of the Angel; and to know which of the two will be the true Cause of the
Motion of this Body, we must know which it is that is Efficacious. There is a
necessary Connection between the Will of God, and what he Wills. God Wills in
this case, that a Body should move when it is willed by an Angel: There is a
necessary Connection therefore, between the. Will of God and the Motion of this
Body; and consequently it is God who is the true cause of the Motion of the
Body, and the Will of the Angel only an occasional one.

But to show it yet more clearly, let us suppose that God Wills it should
happen quite contrary to what some Spirits desire; as we may think of Devils,
or some other Spirits, who merit this Punishment; we cannot say in this case,
that God communicates his Power to them, since they can do nothing that they
would do. Yet the Wills of these Spirits would be the Natural Causes of
whatever Effects should be produced; as such Bodies should be moved to the
Right Hand, because these Spirits would have them moved to the Left; and the
desire of these Spirits would determine the Will of God to act, as our Wills to
move the parts of our Bodies, determine the first Cause to move them: So that
the Wills of Spirits are only occasional Causes.

Yet if after all these Reasons, we will still maintain, that the Will of an
Angel, which moves any body, should be a true Cause, and not an occasional one;
it is plain that this same Angel might be the true Cause of the Creation and
Annihilation of all things: For God could as well communicate to him his Prower
of Creating and Destroying Bodies, as that of moving them, if he willed that
things should be created and annihilated: In a word, If he willed that all
things should happen as the Angel wishes them, even as he Wills Bodies should
move, as the Angel pleases. If it be said, that an Angel or a Man would be the
true movers, because God moves Bodies when they wish it; it may also be said,
that a Man and an Angel may be true Creators, since God can create Beings when
they will it: Nay, perhaps it might be said, that the molt Vile Animals, or
Matter of it self, should be the effective Cause of the Creation of any
Substance; if we supposed as the Philosophers do, that God produces substantial
Forms whenever the Disposition of Matter requires it. In fine, Because God has
resolved from all Eternity in certain times to create such or such things, we
might also say, that these times should be the Causes of the Creation of these
Beings, as reasonably as to pretend, that a Bowl which meets another, is the
true cause of the motion it communicates to it: Because God has determined by
his general Will, which constituted the Order of Nature, that when two Bodies
should meet there should be such and such a Communication of Motion.

There is then but one only true God, and he the one only true Cause: And we
must not imagine, that which precedes an Effect, to be the true Cause of it.
God cannot even communicate his Power to the Creatures, if we follow the Light
of Reason; he cannot make them true Causes, because he cannot make them Gods.
Bodies, Spirits, pure Intelligences, can all do nothing. It Is he who has made
these Spirits that illuminates and acts them. It Is he who has created the
Heavens and the Earth, which regulates the Motions thereof. In short, it is the
Author of our Being that executes our Wills, semel jussit, semper paret. He
even moves our Arms when we make use of them against his Orders, for he
complains by his Prophets* that we make him serve our unjust and criminal
Desires.

All these little Heathen Divinities, and all these particular Causes of the
Philosophers, are only Chymera's that the wicked Spirit endeavors to establish
to ruin the Worship of the true God. It is not the Philosophy they have
received from Adam, which teaches these things; it is that they have received
from the Serpent; for since the Fall, the Mind of Man is perfectly Heathenish.
It Is this Philosophy which joined to the Errors of the Senses, has made them
adore the Sun, and which is fall at this Day, the universal Cause of the
Irregularity of the Mind, and Corruption of the Heart of Man. By their Actions,
and sometimes by their Words; why say they, should we not love the Body, since
the Body is capable of affording us all Pleasures? And why do we laugh at the
Israelites, which regretted the Loss of the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt; since,
in Effect, they were unhappy, by being deprived of what, in some Measure, could
make them happy? But the new Philosophy, which they represent as a dismal
thing, to affrighten weak Minds, that is despised and condemned without being
understood. The new Philosophy, I say, since they are pleased to call it so,
destroys all the Arguments of the Libertines, by the Establishment of the
chiefest of its Principles, which perfectly agrees with the Haec est Religio
Christiana, fratres mei, quae praedicatur per universum mundum horrentibus
inimieis, and ubi vincuntur murmurantibus, ubi praevalent saevientibus, haec
est Religie Christiana ut, Colatur unus Deus non Dii, qui facit Animam Beatum
nisi unus Deus. Aug. tr. 23. in Joan.
first Principle of the Christian Religion, that we must love and fear but one
God, since there is only one God who can make us happy.

For if Religion teaches us, that there is but one true God, this Philosophy
shows us there is but one true Cause. If Religion informs us, that all the
Divinities of the Heathens are only Stones and Metals without Life and Motion:
This Philosophy discovers to us also, that all second Causes, or all the
Divinities of their Philosophy, are only Matter and inefficacious Wills. In
short, if Religion teaches us, that we must not bow our Knees to false Gods.
This Philosophy also tells us, that our Imaginations and Minds ought not to be
prostituted to the Imaginary Greatness and Power of Causes, which are not true
Causes: That we must neither love nor fear them, nor busy our selves about
them; but think upon God only, see him, adore him, fear and love him in all
things.

But this agrees not with the Inclination of some Philosophers: They will
neither see nor think upon God: For since the Fall, there is a secret
Opposition between God and Man: Men take Pleasure in erecting Gods after their
own Fancy, they voluntarily love and fear the Fictions of their own
Imagination, as they Heathens did the Works of their own Hands. They are like
Children who tremble at their Companions, after they have daubed their Faces:
Or if they will have a more Noble Comparison, although perhaps it be not so
just, they resemble those famous Romans, who had some Fear and Respect for the
Fictions of their own Minds, and foolishly adored their Emperors after they had
let loose the Eagle when they deified them.

CHAP. IV. An Explanation of the Second Part of the general Rule. That
Philosophers neglect it, but Mr. Descartes has very exactly observed it.
WE have already showed unto what Errors we are subject, when we reason upon
the false and confused Idea's of the Senses; and upon the rambling and
indeterminate Idea's of pure Logic. We have sufficiently discovered, that to
preserve Evidence in our Perceptions, it is absolutely necessary exactly to
observe the Rule that we have prescribed, if our Idea's are clear and distinct,
and then to reason according to these Idea's.

In this same general Rule, which respects the Subject of our Studies, there is
yet this Circumstance to be well considered: Namely, that we must always begin
with the most simple and easy things, and continue a long Time upon them,
before we undertake more compounded and difficult ones. For if we must only
reason upon distinct Idea's always to preserve Evidence in our Perceptions; it
is plain, that we must never proceed to an Enquiry after compounded things,
before we have very carefully examined, and made those simple ones, on which
they depend, familiar to us. Since the Idea's of compounded things, neither are
nor can be clear, when we have only a confused and imperfect Knowledge of the
more simple which compose them.

We know things imperfectly, when we are not assured that we have considered
all their Parts: And we have a confused Knowledge of them, when they are not
familiar to the Mind, although we are certain we have examined them in all
their Parts, When we know them but imperfectly, we only reason upon
Probabilities; when we perceive them confusedly, there is neither Order nor
Understanding in out Deductions: We often know neither where we are, nor where
we go. But when we know them imperfectly and confusedly together, which happens
most commonly; we have neither a clear Knowledge of what we enquire after, nor
the means of attaining it. So that it is absolutely necessary to keep strictly
to this Order in our Studies. To begin always with the most simple things,
examine all their Parts, and make them familiar to us, before we pass to the
more compounded on which they depend.

But this Rule agrees not with Men's Inclinations, they naturally have a
Contempt for whatever appears easy; and their Mind which was not made for a
limited Object that may be easily comprehend, cannot stop long in considering
these simple Idea's, which have no Character of Infinity for which they are
made. On the contrary, and for the same Reason, they have much Respect and
Inclination for great things which include something of Infinity, and such
things as are obscure and mysterious. It Is not because they love Darkness, but
it is that in this Darkness they hope to find a Good and a Truth capable of
satisfying them.

Vanity also inclines the Mind immediately to employ it self about great and
extraordinary things; and gives it a Foolish Hope of accomplishing whatever it
undertakes. Experience shows us, That the most exact Knowledge of common things
gives no Reputation in the World, and that the Knowledge of such things as are
uncommon, how confused and imperfect soever it may be, always gains Esteem and
Respect to those, who freely express some high Idea of what they understand
not. And this Experience determines all those, who are more sensibly touched
with Vanity than Truth (who are certainly in the greatest Number) to make a
blind Enquiry after a specious and imaginary Knowledge of whatever is great,
rare, and obscure.

How many Men reject the Philosophy of Descartes, for this pleasant Reason,
that his Principles are too simple and easy, There are no obscure and
mysterious Terms in this Philosophy: Women, and Persons who know neither Greek
nor Latin, are capable of apprehending it: It must therefore be of very small
Consequence, and it would not be reasonable for great Genii to apply themselves
to it. They imagine Principles so clear and simple, are not extensive enough to
explain the Effects of Nature, which they suppose obscure and perplexed. They
do not immediately see the Benefit of these Principles, which are too easy and
simple to stop their Attention, so long as it is necessary to discover the Use
and Extent of them. They rather choose to explain those Effects, whose Causes
they do not comprehend, by Principles they conceive not; and which it is
absolutely impossible to conceive, than by such as are both simple and
intelligible. For these Philosophers explain obscure things, by Principles
which are not only obscure, but also entirely incomprehensible.

When any Persons undertake to explain things extremely perplexed, by clear and
known Principles, it is easy to see whether or no they accomplish it, because
if we conceive well what they say, we can discover whether or no they speak
true. So the fasly Learned would not find their Expectation, nor make
themselves admired as they wish to be, if they made use of intelligible
Principles; because it would evidently be discovered, that they say nothing.
But when they make use of unknown Principles, and speak of very compounded
things, as if they exactly knew all their Relations, they are admired, because
what they say is not conceived, and we naturally have a Respect for what passes
our Understandings.

Now, as obscure and incomprehensible things seem to be better connected, than
such as are clear and intelligible: Incomprehensible Principles are of a
greater Use than intelligible ones, in the most compounded Questions. There is
nothing so difficult but Philosophers and Physicians give some brief Reason of
it from their Principles: For their Principles being yet more incomprehensible,
than all the Questions that can be put to them, if they be once taken for
granted, there is no Difficulty but will soon be solved.

For instance, they boldly, and without any Hesitation, answer these obscure
and indetermined Questions: Why is it that the Sun attracts. Vapors? That the
Jesuits Powder cures the Quartan Fever? That Ruburb purges Choler? Chemical
Salt, Phlegm? And other like Questions. And the Generality of Mankind are
satisfied with their Answers, because obscure and incomprehensible agrees with
both. But unintelligible Principles do not well agree with Questions that are
clearly proposed, and easily resolved; because it is evidently discovered, that
they signify nothing. These Philosophers cannot, by their Principles, explain,
how Horses draw a Chariot; how Dust stops a Watch; how Trepoly cleanses Metals,
and a Brush out Clothes. For they would make themselves ridiculous to all the
World, if they supposed a Notion of Attraction, and attractive Faculties to
explain the Reason why Chariots follow the Horses which are fastened to them,
and a detersive Faculty in Brushes for cleaning Clothes, and so of other
Questions. Therefore their great Principles are useless, except in, obscure
Questions, because they are incomprehensible.

We must not therefore stop at any of all these Principles, which we have not
an evident and clear Knowledge of, and which we may think some Nations receive
not. We must attentively consider the Idea's we have of Extension, Figure,
Local Motion, and the Relation these things have amongst themselves. If we
conceive these Idea's distinctly, and find them so clear, that we are
persuaded, that all Nations have always received them, we must rest here, and
examine all their Relations: But if we find them obscure, we must seek after
others. For if to reason without Fear of deceiving our selves, it is always
necessary to preserve Evidence in our Perceptions, we must only reason upon
clear Idea's, and their Relations distinctly known.

In order to consider the Properties of Extension, we must with M. Descartes,
begin with the most simple Relations; and pass from the more simple to the more
compounded; not only because this Method is Natural, and assists the Mind in
these Operations, but because God always acts in this Order, and by the most
simple Way; this Manner of examining our Idea's, and their Relations, will the
better discover his Works to us. And if we consider that the most simple
Relations are always those which are first represented to the Imagination, when
it is not determined rather to think of one thing than on another: We shall
discover, that it will be enough to consider things attentively and without
Prejudice, to enter into this Order that we prescribe, and to discover the most
compounded Truths, provided we do not run too fast from one Subject to another.

If then we attentively consider Extension; without much Difficulty we perceive
that one Part may be separated from another, we easily conceive Local Motion,
and that this Local Motion produces a Figure in both Bodies which are moved. Of
all Motions, the most simple, and first, which presents it self to the
Imagination, the Motion of a right Line: Let us suppose then, that there is
some Part of Extension moved in a right Line, it will necessarily displace some
other Portion of Matter which it finds in its Way, and this last shall move
Circularly to take the Place that the other leaves, and by that means make a
Circular Motion. But if we conceive an infinite Number of Motions in a right
Line, in an infinite Number of the like Parts of this immense Extension which
we would confider; It is yet necessary, that all these Bodies hinder one
another, conspiring all by their mutual Action and Reaction; I mean by the
mutual Communication of all their particular Motions, to produce one that is
Circular.

This first Consideration of the most simple Relations of our Idea's, already
discover to us, the Necessity of Mr. Descartes Vortices: And their Number will
be so much the greater, as the Motions of all the Parts of Extension in a right
Line, having been the more contrary one to the other, they shall have had more
Difficulty to agree in the same Motion; and that of all these Vortices, those
will be the greatest, which have had more Parts conspire to the same Motion, or
whose Parts should have had more Power to continue their Motion in a right Line.

But Care must be taken that the Mind is neither fatigued nor dissipated, by
fruitlesly applying it to an infinite Number, and immense Magnitudes of
Vortices: We must first apply our selves some Time upon one of these Vortices,
and enquire orderly and attentively into all the Motions of the Matter it
includes, and all the Figures wherewith all the Parts of that Matter ought to
be endued.

As there is no simple Motion bur that in a right Line, we must first confider
this Motion, as that according to which all Bodies incessantly tend to move in,
since God always acts according to the most simple Ways, and that in Effect
Bodies are circularly moved, because they find continual Opposition in their
direct Motions. So all Bodies, not being of an equal Magnitude, and those which
are the greatest, having more Power to continue their Motion in a right Line
than others; we easily conceive, that the least Bodies must be near the Center
of the Vortex, and the greatest toward the Circumference: Since the Lines
which we conceive to be described by the Motion of Bodies, which are at the
Circumference, approach more to a right Line, than those the Bodies describe,
which are nearer the Center.

If we again think, that each Part of this Matter could not be moved at first,
and in its Motion endure a perpetual Opposition, but be made round, and have
its Corners broke; we should easily discover, that all this Extension would be
only composed of two Sorts of Bodies: Round Balls which incessantly turn upon
their Center, after many different Manners, and which, besides their particular
Motion, are also hurried on by the common Motion of thc Vortex; and with a more
fluid and more agitated Matter, which is produced by the rubbing of the Balls
before mentioned: Besides, the Circular Motion, common to all Parts of the
Vortix, this subtle Matter will still have a particular Motion, almost in a
right Line from the Center of the Vortex, to the Circumference, by the
Intervals of the Balls which leave it a free Passage: So that the Motion
compounded of these Motions, will be in a Spiral Line. This fluid Matter that
M. Descartes calls the First Element, being divided into little Parts, which
have much less Power to continue their Motion in a right Line, than the Balls
or Second Element: It is evident, that the first Element must be in the Center
of the Vortex, and fill the empty Spaces which are between the Parts of the
second, and that the Parts of the second must fill the rest of the Vortex, and
approach to its Circumference in Proportion to the Magnitude or Power they have
to continue their Motion in a right Line. As to the Figure of the whole Vortex,
we cannot doubt from what has been said, that the Distance of one Pole to the
other, will be shorter than the Lines which go cross the By Equator, I mean the
greatest curve Line that the Matter of the Vortex describes.
Equator. And if we consider that the Vortices surrround and compress each
other unequally, we shall also clearly see, that their Equator is an irregular
curve Line very much like an Elipsis.

These things Naturally present themselves to the Mind, when we attentively
consider what must happen to the Parts of Extension, which continually incline
to move in a right Line; that is in the most simple of all Motions. If we would
now suppose a thing which seems most worthy the Wisdom and Power of God, viz.
That he has, in an instant, formed the Universe in the same Condition that its
Parts would in Time, have been disposed in by the most simple Ways, and that he
also preserves them by the same Natural Laws: In short, if we would apply our
Thoughts to the Objects we see; we might judge the Sun to be the Center of the
Vortex: That the Corporeal Light it diffuses on all sides, is nothing else but
the continual Effort of little Globules, which incline to separate themselves
from the Center of the Vortex; and that this Light must be communicated by
immense Spaces in an instant, because the whole being full of these Globules
one of them cannot be pressed, without the Motion of all the rest that are
opposite to it.

We may still deduce many other Consequences from what I have said: For the
most simple Principles are the most proper to explain his Works, who always
acts according to the most simple Ways: But we have occasion yet to consider
certain things which must happen to Matter. We ought then to think that there
is more Vortices like to that we have given a short Description of; that the*
Centers of these Vortices are Stars, which are as so many Suns: That the
Vortices encompass one another, and are disposed after such a manner as to
prejudice each others Motion as little as can be: But things have not been able
to come to that pass, but the weakest Vortices have been drawn along, and
almost swallowed up by the strongest.

To apprehend which, we need only reflect, that the first Element, which is in
the Center of a Vortix, may, and continually does, get out by the Spaces of the
Balls toward the Circumference of the same Vortix, and that at the Time that
this Center or Star empties it self through its Equator, the other first
Element must re-enter by its Poles. For neither the Star nor its Poles can be
emptied on one side without being filled on the other; since there is no Void
in Extension. But because an infinite Number of Causes can hinder much of the
first Element, from entering into this Star which we speak of: It is requisite
that the Parts of the first Element, which are obliged to remain in it, should
be so disposed as to move the same Way. It Is that which makes them unite and
join one with another, and form Spots, which condense into Crusts, and by
little and little cover the Center, and make a solid and gross Matter, of the
most subtle and agitated of all Bodies. It Is this gross Matter that Mr.
Descartes calls the third Element; and it must be observed, that as it proceeds
from the first, whose Figures are infinite, it ought to be invested with an
infinite Number of different Forms.

This Star, thus covered with Spots and Crusts, and become like the other
Planets, is no longer able to maintain and defend its Vortex against the
continual Effort of those that environ it. This Vortex therefore diminishes by
little and little. The Matter which composes it, is dispersed on all sides; and
the strongest Vortex about it, draws the greatest Part of it, and at last
swallows up the Planet which was the Center of it. This Planet being
encompassed with the Matter of the great Vortex, it swims there to preserve it
self with some little Matter of its own Vortex, keeping the Circular Motion it
had before: And at last it takes a Situation there, which puts it in Equilibrio
with an equal Quantity of Matter in which it swims. If it has but a little
Solidity and Magnitude left, it descends very near to the Center of the Vortex
which swallowed it up; because, having some Power to continue its Motion in a
right Line, it must place it self in this Vortex, in which an equal Quantity of
the second Element, has as much Power as it has to remove it self from the
Center, for it can be in Equilibrio only in this Place. If this Planet is
greater or more solid, it will be in Equilibrio with a Place more distant from
the Center of the Vortex. And in short, if in this Vortex there is any Place,
or equal Quantity of Matter that has as much Solidity as this Planet, and
consequently, as much Power to continue its Motion in a right Line, because
this Planet will, perhaps, be very great, and covered with very solid and thick
Crusts; it cannot stop in this Vortex, since it cannot be put in Equilibrio
with the Matter which composes it. This Planet will pass then into some other
Vortex, and if it cannot be in Equilibrio, it will not stay there neither. So
that we shall see it sometimes pass like Comets, when they happen to be in our
Vortex, and near enough for us to discern them: And we shall not see it again
till a long time after, when it is in other Vortices, or in the Extremity of
ours.

If we how think that one Vortix alone, by its Magnitude, Force, and
Advantageous Situation, can by little and little undermine, attract, and
swallow up many Vortices, and such Vortices which before had swallowed some
others; it would be necessary that the Planets which are in the Centers of
these Vortices, being entered into the great Vortex which has swallowed them
up, should be there put in Equilibrio with an equal Quantity of Matter in which
they swim. So that if these Planets are unequal in Solidity, they will be in an
unequal Distance from the Center or the Vortex in which they swim. And if it be
found, that two Planets have near the same Power to continue their Motion in a
right Line, or that one Planet draws into its little Vortex, one, or many other
less Planets, which, according to our Manner of conceiving the Formation of
things it has swallowed up, then this little Planet shall turn about the great
one while that turns upon its Center; and all these Planets shall be carried
along by the Motion of the great Vortex, in almost an equal Distance from its
Center.

We are obliged, by the Light of Reason, so to dispose the Parts which compose
the World, that we imagine to have been formed by the most simple Ways. For all
that we have said is grounded only upon the Idea we have of Extension, the
Parts of which we suppose to incline to the most simple Motion, which is that
of a right Line. And when we examine by the Effects, whether we are not
deceived, by endeavoring to explain things by their Causes, we areas much
surprised to see the Phenomena of Celestial Bodies so perfectly agree with what
we have said: For we see that all the Planets that are in the Middle of a
little Vortex, turn upon their own Center, like the Sun; that they swim all in
the Vortex of the Sun, and about the Sun; that the smallest, or least solid,
are nearest the Sun; and the more solid are at the greatest Distance from it;
and that there is also some amongst them like Comets, which cannot remain in
the Vortex of the Sun: In short, there are many Planets, which yet have many
little ones that turn about them, as the Moon does about the Earth. Jupiter has
four of them, and Saturn three. It may be also, that Saturn has so great a
Number of small ones, that they form a continued Circle, which seems to have no
Thickness, because of its great Distance. These Planets being the greatest that
we see, we may consider them as having been engendered of Vortices large enough
to have swallowed up others before they were involved in the Vortices we are in.

All these Planets turn upon their Center, the. Earth in Twenty Four Hours,
Mars in Twenty Five, or near, Jupiter in Ten Hours, or thereabouts, etc. They
turn about the Sun, Mercury, which is the nearest, in about Four Months:
Saturn, which is the farthest off, in Thirty Years near; and those which are
between both, in more or less Time, but not perfectly in the Proportion of
their Distance. For all the Matter in which they swim, turns swifter when it is
nearest the Sun, because the Line of its Motion is then shorter. When Mars is
opposite to the Sun, he is very near the Earth, and very distant when he is
joined to the Sun: It is the same with the Superior Planets, Jupiter and
Saturn; as for the Inferiout ones, such as Mercury and Venus, to speak
properly, they are never opposite to the Sun. The Lines that all Planets seem
to describe about the Earth, are not Circles; but they approach very near to
Elipses, and all these Elipses appear very different, because of the different
Situation of the Planets, in respect to us: In short, all that we observe in
the Heavens, with any Certainty concerning the Motion of the Planets, agrees
perfectly well with what we have said of their Formation, according to the most
simple Ways.

As for the fixed Stars, Experience tells us, some of them diminish and
entirely disappear, and some of them also there are, which appear anew, whose
Brightness and Magnitude much augments. They increase or diminish as the
Vortices do, of which they are the Centers, and receive more or less of the
first Element. We cease to see them, when they are made up of Spots and
Crusts', and begin again to discover them, when these Spots which hindered
their shining, are wholly dissipated. All these Stars keep near the same
Distance amongst themselves, since they are the Centers of Vortexes, and are
not drawn so much as they resist other Vortexes, or as the Stars are. They all
shine like Suns, because like the Sun, they are the Centers of some Vortexes,
which are not yet swallowed up. They are all equally distant from the Earth,
although they appear to the Eye as fastened to a concave Surface: For if we have
not yet compared the Parallax of the nearest, with that of the most distant, by
the different Situation of the Earth from six Months to six Months, it is
because this Difference of Situation is not great enough to render this
Parallax sensible, because of the Distance we are from the Stars. It may be by
the means of Telescopes some small matter might be observed. In fine, all that
we can discover in the Stars by our Senses, and Experience, is not different
from what we have discovered by the Mind, by examining the most Natural
Relations which is between the Parts and Motions of Extension.

If we would examine the Nature of Bodies here below, we must first consider,
that whereas the first Element being compounded of an infinite Number of
different Figures, the Bodies which have been formed out of the Congeries of
the Parts of this Element would be manifold. Some of their Parts would be
branched, others long, and others round, but irregular in every respect. If
their branched Parts are gross enough, they would be hard, but flexible, and
inelastick, like Gold: If their Parts are less gross, they would be soft and
fluid, like Gums, Fat, or Oils: But if their branched Parts are extremely
delicate, they will be like Air. If the long Parts of Bodies are gross and
inflexible, they will be sharp, incorruptible, easy to dissolve like Salt: If
these same long Parts are flexible, they will be insipid like Water: If they
have gross and irregular Parts in every respect, they will be like Earth and
Stones. In short, we shall have Bodies of many different Natures, and not two
of them that will entirely be alike; because the first Element is capable of an
infinite Number of Figures, and all these Figures never combine after the same
manner in two different Bodies. Whatever Figures these Bodies have, if they
have Pores great enough to permit the second Element to pass through, they will
be transparent, like Air, Water, and Glass, etc. whatever Figures these Bodies
are endued with, if the first Element entirely surrounds some Parts of them,
and agitates them strongly, and swift enough to repulse the second Element on
all Sides, they will be Luminous like Flame. If these Bodies repulse all the
second Element which shocks them, they will be very white; if they receive it
without Opposition, they will be very black: In short, if they repulse it by
diverse Shocks or Vibrations, they will appear of different Colors.

As to their different Situation, the heaviest that is, those that have the
least Power to continue their Motion in a right Line, will be nearest the
Center, as Metals; Earth, Air, Water, will be more distant from it, and all
Bodies would keep the Situation we see them in, because they ought to be placed
so much the more distant from the Center of the Earth, as their Motion is
greater

And we must not be surprised, if I now say, that Metals have less tower to
continue their Motion in a right tine than the Earth, Water, and other Bodies
less solid; although I have before said, that the most solid Bodies have more
Power to continue their Motion in a right Line than others. For the Reason why
Metals have less Power to continue to move, than the Earth or Stones, is
because they have much less Motion: Since it is always true, that two Bodies,
unequal in Solidity, being moved with an equal Swiftness, the most solid has
the most Power to keep in a right Line, because then the most solid has the
most Motion, and it is the Motion that gives the Power.

If, we would know the Reason why near the Center of the Vortices, gross Bodies
are heavy, and yet are light when they are more distant from it; we must
consider, that great Bodies receive their Motion from the subtle Matter which
environs them, and in which they swim. Now, this subtle Matter actually moves
in a Circular Line, and only inclinesto move in a right Line, and communicates
this Circular Motion to the gross Bodies which it carries along with it,
without communicating to them its Efforts to remove from the Center by a right
Line, only so much as this Effort is followed by the Motion it communicates to
them: For we must observe, that the Parts of the subtle Matter, making an
Effort toward different Sides, can only compress the gross Bodies they carry
along with them: For this Body cannot go to different Sides at the same Time.
But because the subtle Matter which is near the Center of the Vortex, has much
more Motion than it imployes in the Circulation, and communicates to the gross
Bodies it draws after it, only its Circular Motion, which is common to all its
Parts: And if gross Bodies should chance to have more Motion than that which is
common to the Vortix, they would soon lose it, by communicating it to the
little Bodies they meet: From when it is plain, that gross Bodies, near the
Center of the Vortex, have not so much Motion as the Matter in which they swim;
each Part of which is moved after many different Ways, besides their circular
or common Motion. Now if gross Bodies have less Motion, they certainly make a
weaker Effort to pass into a right Line; and if they make less Efforts, they
are obliged to give way to those that make more, and consequently, to approach
nearer to the Center of the Vortex, that is, they are so much the more weighty
as they are the more solid.

But where gross Bodies are far distant from the Center of the Vortix, the
Circular Motion of the subtle Matter is then very great, because it imploys
almost all its Motion in turning about the Center of the Vortix; as Bodies have
so much the more Motion as they have more Solidity, since they go with the same
Swiftness as the subtle Matter they swim in, and have more Power to continue
their Motion in a right Line; so that gross Bodies, in a Distance from the
Center of the Vortex, are so much the lighter as they are more solid.

This agreed, we may consider that the Earth is more Metallic toward the
Center; that it is not very Solid hear its Circumference: That Water and Air
must continue in the same Situation we see them in: But that all these Bodies
are heavy That is, they are impelled toward the Center of the Earth.
, the Air is heavy as well as Gold and Quicksilver, because they are more
Solid and more Gross than the first and second Element. This granted, the Moon
being a little too distant from the Center of the Vortex of the Earth is not
heavy although it be solid: That Mercury Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, cannot fall into the Sun, and that they are not solid enough to go out
of this Vortex like Comets, that they are in Equilibrio, with the Matter they
swim in, and that if we could shoot a Musket or Cannon-bullet high enough,
these two Bodies would become little Planets, or like little Comets which could
no longer continue in Vortices, having a complete Solidity.

I do not pretend to have sufficiently explained whatever I have said, or to
have deduced from the Simple Principles of Extension, Figure, and Motion, all
that might be inferred; I would only show the manner Descartes has taken to
discover Natural things, that we may compare his Idea's and Method with that of
other Philosophers. I had here no other design: But I am not afraid to affirm,
that if we would cease to admire the Virtue of the Loadstone, the regulated
Motions of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, the Noise of Thunder, and Generation
of Meteors, In short, If we would instruct our selves in the Foundation of
Physics, there is no better way to do it, than by Reading and Meditating on
his Works; so we can make nothing of it if we follow not his Method, I mean, if
we do not, like him, argue from clear Idea's, beginning always with the most
Simple.

It Is not that this Author is Infallible, nay, I believe my self able to
demonstrate that he is mistaken in many places of his Works: But it is more
Advantageous to those that read him, to believe that he is sometimes deceived,
than if they were persuaded whatever he says was true. If we believed him
Infallible, we should read him without examining, we should believe what he
said without knowing it, we should learn his Sentiments as we do Histories, and
should not inform our Minds by it. He himself tells us, that when we read his
Works, we ought to enquire if he is not deceived, and must believe nothing he
says, except Evidence compels us to it. For he is not like to those falsely
Learned Men, who usurp an unjust Dominion over the Minds of others, requiring
to be believed upon their word; and who instead of making Men Disciples of
Internal Truth, by proposing only clear Idea's to them, endeavor to submit
them to the Authority of the Heathens, and by Arguments they understand not,
make them receive Opinions they cannot comprehend.

The chief thing we have to say against Descartes's manner of producing the
Sun, Stars, and the Earth, and all Bodies which are about us, is because it
appears contrary to what the Holy Scripture tells us of the Creation of the
World: And if we believe this Author, it seems that the Universe was formed
from it self, such as we see it at this day: To which many Answers may be given.

First, Those who say Descartes is contrary to Moses, it may be have not so
much examined both the Holy Bible and Descartes, as those who have shown by
their public Writings, that the Creation of the World perfectly agrees with
the Opinions of this Philosopher.

But the best Answer is, Descartes never pretended things were made just as he
described them; for in the first Article of the fourth Part of his Principles,
which is, That to find the true Causes of whatever is upon Earth, we must keep
the Hypothesis already received, notwithstanding it should be false. He
positivesy says the contrary in these Terms.

Although I require not a Belief, that Bodies which compose this visible World,
were ever produced in the same manner I have described them, (as I before
intimated) I am nevertheless oblige^d to keep here the same Hypothesis to
explain whatever is upon the Earth; for if I evidently show, as I hope to do,
by this means, the most intelligible and certain reasons for whatever we
observe in it; and that it cannot he done by any other Method: I may thence
reasonably conclude, That although the World was not made after this manner in
the Beginning, but immediately created by God, all things that it contains,
cease not to be now of the same Nature, as if they had been so produced.

Descartes knew, that to apprehend things well, they must be considered in
their Original: That we must always begin with the most Simple things: That we
must not perplex our selves whether God had formed his Works by degrees, or
after the most simple ways, or if he had produced them all at once: But however
God had made them, to know them well, we must first consider them in their
Principles, and only take care of the Consequence, and then see how our Thought
might agree with what God has done. He knew that the Laws of Nature, by which
God preserved all his Works in the Order and Situation they now are, are the
same Laws as those by which he formed and disposed them: For it is plain to all
that consider things attentively, that if God had made his whole Work all at
once, in the same Disposition he has placed it in time; the whole Order of
Nature would have been overturned, since the Laws of Preservation would have
been contrary to those of Creation. If all the Universe continues in the order
we see it, it is because the Laws of Motion which preserve it in this order,
were capable of producing it. And if God had placed it in a different order
from that it was put in by the Laws of Motion, all things would be overturned,
and by the Force of those Laws be placed in the same order we see them now.

If a Man would discover the Nature of a Chicken, he ought every day to open
some of the Eggs that the Hen sits on, and examine what grows and moves first:
He soon would discover that the Heart begins to beat, and on all sides to force
out little Channels of Blood which are Arteries; that this Blood returns to the
Heart by Veins, that the Brain also soon appears, and that the Bones are the
last parts which are formed. By this means he delivers himself from many
Errors, and from these Observations draws many Consequences of great use in
discovering the Nature of Animals. Who can say any thing against the Conduct of
this Man? Can it be said, that he pretends that God made the first Chicken
immediately from an Egg, and by giving it a certain degree of Heat caused it to
be hatched; because he endeavors to discover the Nature of Chickens in their
Formation?

Why then is Descartes accused of speaking contrary to the Scripture, because
intending to examine the Nature of visible things, he examines the Formation of
them by the Laws of Motion in all their Occurrences? He never doubted, Art. 45.
of the third Part of his Principles.
But the World was in the Beginning created in its utmost Perfection, so that
the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, were from the Beginning; and that the Earth had
not only in it self the Seeds of Plants, but that even Plants themselves
covered a part of it: That Adam and Eve were not created in Infancy, but at
perfect Age. The Christian Religion, says he, will have us believe this, and
Natural Reason absolutely persuades us of this Truth, because considering the
Almighty Power of God, we must judge, that whatever he has made, has its utmost
Perfection in it. But as we should much better discover the Nature of Adam, and
that of the Trees of Paradise, if we examined how Children were by degrees
formed, in the Womb, and how Plants sprung up from their Seeds; then if we only
considered them as they were after God had created them, so we should better
understand what is generally the Nature of all things in the World, if we could
imagine some Principles which are very Intelligible and Simple; from which we
might clearly see, that the Stars, the Earth, and in short, all the visible
World, might have been thus produced as from some Seeds, although we know they
were not produced in this manner; than if we describe it only as it is, or as
we believe it was created: And because I think I have found such Principles, I
will endeavor to explain them.

M. Descartes thought that God made the World in an instant, but also believed
he had created it in the same Order and Disposition of parts as it would have
been in, if he had formed it by little and little after the most simple way.
And this Thought is worthy the Power and Wisdom of God: His Power, since in a
Moment he has created all his Works in their greatest Perfection: Of his
Wisdom, since by that he has discovered he perfectly foresaw all that would
necessarily happen in Matter, if it was acted by the most simple ways: And also
because the Order of Nature could not subsist, if the World had been made
contrary to the Laws of Motion by which it is preserved.

It is Ridiculous to say M. Descartes believed the World was formed of it self,
since he acknowledges, as all those do who follow the Light of Reason, that no
Body can move it self; and that all the immutable Laws of the Communication of
Motion, are only the Consequences of the unchangeable Will of God, who
continually acts after the same manner. Having proved there is but one God who
gives Motion to Matter, and that Motion produces in all Bodies, all the
different Forms we see them clothed with, it was sufficient to take away from
Libertines all their pretext of drawing any Advantage from his System. On the
contrary, If the Atheists made any Reflection upon the Principles of this
Philosophy, they would soon find themselves constrained to acknowledge their
Errors. For if, like the Heathens, they would affirm, that Matter was
uncreated, they could not also, maintain, that it would ever have been able to
have moved of it self. So that the Atheists would at least be obliged to
confess the true Mover, if they denied the true Creator. But common Philosophy
furnishes them with Methods to blind themselves and maintain their Errors; for
it tells them of certain impressed Virtues, and moving Faculties. In short, of
a certain Nature which is the Principle of Motion in every thing, and although
they have no distinct Idea of it, they are very glad, because of the Corruption
of their Hearts, to put it in the place of the true God, by concluding it is
that which produces all the Wonders we see.

CHAP. V. An Explanation of the Principles of the Aristotelian Philosophy,
wherein it appears he never observed the Second Part of the General Rule. With
an Examination of his Elementary Qualities.
THAT we may make some Comparison between the Philosophy of Descartes and
Aristotle, it will be proper to give a little Abridgment of what he thought of
his Elements, and of the Nature of Bodies in General, which the most Learned
believe he has shown in his four Books de Caelo; for his eight Books of
Physics belongs rather to Logic, or if you will, to Metaphysics than to
Physics, since they are only composed of rambling and general words, which
represent nothing distinct and particular to the Mind. These four Books are
entitled de Caelo, because the Heavens are the chief amongst the simple Bodies
he treats of.

This Philosopher begins his Work with proving the World is perfect, and this
is his Argument for it. All Bodies have three Dimensions, they cannot have
more, for according to the Pythagoreans, the number Three comprehends every
thing: Now the World is a Collection of all Bodies, therefore the World is
perfect: By this pleasant proof we might also demonstrate, that the World
cannot be more Imperfect than it is, since it cannot be composed of parts which
have less than three Dimensions.

In the second Chapter he immediately supposes certain Peripatetical Truths: 1.
That all Natural Bodies have the power of Motion in themselves, which he
neither proves here nor elsewhere. On the contrary, in the first Chapter of his
second Book of Physics he affirms, That it is Ridiculous to endeavor to prove
it: Because, says he, it is self-evident, and it is only such as cannot discern
what is known of it self, or what is not so, who endeavor to prove that which
is evident, by that which is obscure. But we have already shown that it is
absolutely false, that Natural Bodies have in themselves the power of moving;
and that it appears evident only to such Persons, who with Aristotle follow the
Impression of their, Senses, and make no use of their Reason.

He says in the second place, That all Local Motion is made in a right or
circular Line, or composed of both: But if he would not consider of what he so
boldly advances, he ought at least to open his Eyes, and then he would soon
have seen an infinite number of Motions, which are neither compounded of a
right nor circular Line. Or rather he should have thought, that the Motions
compounded of Motions in a right Line, might have been infinitely different, if
we suppose that compounded Motions increase or diminish their Swiftness in an
infinite number of different ways, as is evident from what has been said
before. There are, says he, only these two simple Motions, the Right, and the
Circular, of which all Motions are composed. But he is deceived, the Circular
Motion is not Simple we cannot conceive it without thinking of one point to
which it relates; and whatever includes a Relation, is Relative and not Simple.
It is true, we can conceive the Circular Motion, as produced by two Motions in
a right Line, the Swiftness of which are unequal according to a certain
Proportion; for a Motion compounded of two others which are made in a right
Line, and which diversely increase or diminish their Swiftness, cannot be Simple.

In the third place he says, all simple Motions are of three sorts, one from
the Center, another to the Center, and the third about the Center. But it is
false, the last is Simple, as I have already said: It Is also false that there
is no simple Motions but those that ascend and descend; for all Motions in a
right Line are Simple, whether they approach to or remove from the Center, the
Poles, or any other Point. All Bodies, says he, are composed of three
Dimensions. Therefore all Bodies ought to have three Simple Motions. What
relation is there between these, Simple Motions and Dimensions? Nay more, all
Bodies have three Dimensions, but no Bodies three Simple Motions.

In the fourth place, he supposes that Bodies are either Simple or Compounded;
and he says, Simple Bodies are such as have in themselves some Power of Motion,
as Fire, Earth, etc. and that the compounded ones receive their Motion from
those which compose them. But in this Sense there is no Simple Bodies at all,
for there are none which have in themselves any Principle of their Motion. Nor
is there any compounded Bodies, since Compounded suppose Simple, which are not;
thus we should have no Bodies at all. What Imagination can we have of defining
the Simplicity of Bodies by a Power of moving themselves? What distinct Idea's
are united to these words of Simple and Compound Bodies, if Simple Bodies are
only defined by their relation to an Imaginary Power of moving themselves? But
let us examine the Consequences he draws from these Principles. Circular Motion
is a Simple Motion: The Heavens move circularly; therefore this Motion is
Simple. Now Simple Motion can proceed only from a Simple Body, that is, from a
Body which moves by its own Power: Therefore the Heavens are a Simple Body
distinct from the four Elements which move by right Lines. It is very evident,
that all this arguing contains only false and absurd Propositions. Let us
examine his other Proofs, for he brings a great many to prove a thing as
useless as it is false.

His second reason to prove that the Heavens are a Simple Body, distinct from
the four Elements, supposes two sorts of Motions, the one Natural, and the
other Violent or against Nature. But it is plain enough to all those who judge
of things by clear Idea's, That Bodies having not in themselves the Nature or
Principle of their Motion, as Aristotle understood, there can be no violent
Motion, or such as is contrary to Nature. It is indifferent to all Bodies,
whether they are moved or not; moved on one side or moved on the other. But
Aristotle who judges of things by the Impression of his Senses, imagines that
Bodies which are always placed by the Laws of the Communication of Motion in
such or such a Situation in respect to others, are placed there of themselves,
because they like it best, and that it is more conformable to their Nature.
This is Aristotle's way of arguing.

The Circular Motion of the Heavens is Natural, or else contrary to Nature: If
it is Natural, as we have said, it is a Simple Body distinct from the Elements,
since the Elements move not circularly by their Natural Motion. If the Circular
Motion is against the Nature of the Heavens, the Heavens would be composed of
some one of the Elements, as Fire, or some other thing. But the Heavens cannot
be composed of any of the Elements, for, if for instance it was Fire, the
natural Motion of Fire being to ascend, the Firmament would have two contrary
Motions, the Circular, and the ascending one; which could not be, since a Body
cannot have two contrary Motions. If the Firmament was composed of some other
Body, which by its Nature did not move circularly, it would have some other
Natural Motion which cannot be; for if naturally it ascended, it must be either
Fire or Air; if it descended, it would be Earth or Water: Therefore, etc. I
shall not stop here, to make particular Remarks of the Absurdity of these
Arguments: I only say in general, that what Aristotle here says signifies
nothing distinct, and that there is nothing of Truth or Conclusion in it. His
third Reason is as follows.

The first and most perfect of all Simple Motions, must be the Motion of a
Simple Body, and even of the first and most perfect of Simple Bodies. But the
Circular Motion is the first and most perfect of all Simple Motions, because
all Circular Lines are perfect, and no right Line is so. For if it is Finite,
we may add something to it; if Infinite, it is not yet perfect, since it has no
(...) and (...) make the same Equivocation as Finished and End. This
Philosopher proves thus that an infinite Line is not perfect, because it is not
finished.
End, and things are perfect only when they are finished; therefore Circular
Motion is the first and most perfect of all Motion: Therefore Bodies which more
circularly are Simple, and the first and most Divine of Simple Bodies. His
fourth Argument.

All Motion is either Natural or not so, and all Motion that is Unnatural to
one Body, is Natural to some other: We see that Motions that descend and
ascend, which are Unnatural to some Bodies, yet are. Natural to others: For
Fire descends not Naturally, but the Earth does. Now the Circular Motion is not
Natural to any of the four Elements: There must be then a Simple Body to which
this Motion is Natural therefore the Heavens which are moved circularly, are a
Simple Body differing from the four Elements.

In fine, The Circular Motion is Natural or Violent in some Body: If it be
Natural, it is evident that Body must be the most Simple and Perfect: If it is
not Natural, it is very strange that this Motion should continue always, since
we see all unnatural Motions endure but a little time. We must therefore, after
all these Reasons, believe, that there is some other Body separate from all
those which surround us, which is, of a Nature so much the more perfect as it
is more distant from us. Here is Aristotle's Reasons; but I desie the most
Intelligent of his Interpreters to join distinct Idea's to the Terms which he
makes use of; and to prove that this Philosopher began with the most Simple
things, before he spoke of the more compounded; which is absolutely necessary
to reason well, as I have before proved.

If I was not afraid of being tiresome, I would yet translate some Chapters of
Aristotle. But besides, our taking little Pleasure to read them in our own
Tongue (when we clearly understand what he means) I have sufficiently shown by
the little I have related, that his Manner of Philosophizing, is wholly useless
for the Discovery of Truth. For since he says himself, in the Fifth Chapter of
this Book, that those that deceive themselves in any thing at first, deceive
themselves a Thousand times more if they advance far. It is plain; that if he
knew not what he said in the two first Chapters of his Book; we may reasonably
believe, that it is not safe to take things upon his Authority, without
examining his Reasons. But to be better persuaded of it, I will make it appear,
that there is not one Chapter in this Book wherein there is not some Absurdity.

In the third Chapter he says, the Heavens are incorruptible, and not subject
to Alteration, he brings many very foolish Arguments to prove this, because,
for Example, there is the Habitation of the Immortal Gods, and because there
was never any Change observed in them: This last Reason might be admitted, if
Aristotle could have proved that any one had come from thence, or had lived
near enough to these celestial Bodies, to make accurate Observations of them.
But however, I don't know who would believe such an Authority, since Telescopes
do show us the contrary.

He pretends, in the Fourth Chapter, to prove, that there are no contrary
Circular Motions. Yet it is manifest, that the Motion from East to West, is
contrary to that from West to East.

In the Fifth Chapter he improperly proves, that Bodies are not infinite;
drawing his Proofs from the Motion of simple Bodies: For What hinders but that
there may be above his Primum Mobile, some immovable Extension?

In the Sixth he uselesly amuses himself to prove, that the Elements are not
infinite. For who can doubt of it, when we suppose with him, that they are
included in the Heavens which surrounds them? But he makes himself ridiculous,
when he endeavors to prove it by their Weight and Lightness. If the Elements
were infinite, says he, they would have an infinite Weight, and an infinite
Lightness, which cannot be. Therefore, etc. those that would see his Arguments
at large, may read them in his Books: I think it Loss of Time to relate them.

In the Seventh he continues to prove, that Bodies are not infinite, and his
first Proof supposes it necessary for all Bodies to be in Motion; which he does
not prove, nor indeed can it be proved.

He maintains, in the Eighth, that there are not many Worlds of the same Kind,
by this pleasant Argument. If there was another Earth, like this we inhabit,
the Earth being heavy by Nature, it would fall upon ours, because ours is the
Center to which all heavy Bodies ought to tend. From whence has he learned
this, but from his Senses?

In the Ninth he proves, that it is even impossible there should be a Plurality
of Worlds; because, if there was any Body above the Heavens, it would be simple
or compound, in a Natural or Violent State, which cannot be from the Reasons he
has drawn from his three Kinds of Motion, which I have already spoken of.

He affirms, in the Tenth, that the World is Eternal, because he cannot prove
that it had a Beginning, and that it will always endure; since we see
whatsoever is created corrupts in Time. This he has likewise learnt from his
Senses. But who has taught him, that the World shall always endure?

He imploys the Eleventh Chapter in explaining what we mean by incorruptible,
as if the Equivocation was much to be feared, and that a great Use ought to be
made of its Explanation. Yet, this Term Incorruptible is so clear of it self,
that Aristotle does not give himself the Trouble to explain, neither in what
Sense it ought to be taken, nor how he understood it himself: It would have
been more to the Purpose if he had defined an infinite Number of Terms he makes
use of, which stir up only sensible Idea's: For we might then, it may be, have
learned something by reading his Works.

And in the last Chapter of the first Book of the Heavens, he essays to prove,
that the World is incorruptible, and will eternally endure, because he cannot
prove it had a Beginning. All things, says he, subsist for a finite or infinite
Time. But what is infinite only in one Sense, is neither finite nor infinite.
Therefore nothing can subsist after this manner.

This is the way of reasoning, used by the Prince of Philosophers, that Genius
of Nature; who in stead of discovering die true Cause of Natural Effects by
clear and distinct Idea's, has established a Heathen Philosophy upon the false
and confused Idea's of the Senses; or upon such as are too general to be of any
Use in an Enquiry after Truth.

I do not here find Fault with Aristotle, because he did not know that God
created the World in Time, to make known his Power, and the Dependence of his
Creatures; and that he will never destroy it, that we may know also that he is
immutable, and never repents of his Designs. But I believe my self able to
confute his weak Proofs of the Worlds Eternity. Though he sometimes is
excusable in the Opinions he maintains; yet he is hardly ever so in the Reasons
he brings, when he treats on Subjects which include any Difficulty. We are, it
may be, already persuaded of it by what I have said, although I have not
related all the Errors I have met with in the Book I have extracted, and I have
endeavored to make him speak more clearly than he was accustomed to do.

But that we may be fully convinced, that the Genius of Nature has never
discovered either the Secrets or Springs of it: It will be proper for me to
show, that the Principles this Philosopher makes use of to explain Natural
Effects, have no Reason in them.

It is plain, that we can discover nothing in Physics, if we begin not with
the most simple Bodies, the Elements; For the Elements are the Bodies into
which all others resolve, because they are contained in them either actually or
I speak according to the Sentiments of the Peripateticks, c. 3. l. 3. de Coelo.
Potentially, so Aristotle defines them. But we cannot find in the Works of
Aristotle, that he has, by a distinct Idea, explained these simple Bodies, into
which he pretends the others resolve: And consequently, his Elements not being
clearly known, it is impossible to discover the Nature of the Bodies which are
composed of them.

This Philosopher says true, that there are four Elements, Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth. But he does not clearly know the Nature of them: He gives no
distinct Idea of them: Nay, he will not have his Elements to be composed of the
Fire, Air, Water, and Earth that we see; for in short, if it were so, we should
at least have some Knowledge of them by our Senses. It is true, in many Places
of his Works, he endeavors to explain them, by the Qualities of Heat and Cold,
Humidity and Dryness, Weight and Lightness. But this manner of Explication is
so impertinent and ridiculous, that I cannot conceive how so many learned Men
should be satisfied with it. It Is what I am going to prove.

Aristotle, in his Book of the Heavens, pretends that the Earth is the Center
of the World, and that all Bodies, which he pleases to call simple, because he
supposes them to move by their own Nature, must be moved by simple Motions. He
affirms, that besides the Circular Motion, which he maintains to be simple, and
by which he proves, that the Heavens he supposes to move Circularly, are a
simple Body, that there is only two which are simple: The one descending, or
from the Circumference to the Center, the other ascending, or from the Center
to the Circumference: That these simple Motions agree with simple Bodies;
consequently, that the Earth and Fire are simple Bodies, one of which is
absolutely heavy, and the other absolutely light: But because Heaviness and
Lightness may meet in one Body, either absolutely, or in part, he concludes,
that there are also two Elements or simple Bodies, one of which is heavy in
part, and the other light in part, viz. Water and Air. This is the Method he
takes, to prove, that there are four Elements, and no more.

It is evident to such as examine Men's Opinions by their own Reason, that all
these Propositions are false, or at least, they can never pass for clear and
indisputable Principles, of which we have very clear and distinct Idea's, and
which may serve for the Foundations of Physics. It is certain, that there is
nothing more absurd than an Essay to establish the Number of Elements by
Imaginary Qualities of Weight and Lightness: In saying without any Proof, that
there are some Bodies which are heavy, others light, through a Principle in
their own Nature. For if we may speak without proving what we say, we may
affirm, that all Bodies are naturally heavy, and that all endeavor to approach
to the Center of the World, as the Place of their Rest: And we may on the
contrary maintain, that all Bodies are Naturally light, and have a Tendency to
the Heavens, as the Place of their greatest Perfection: For if we object to
him, who says, all Bodies are heavy, that Air and Fire are light, he can only
answer, that Fire and Air are not light, but only less weighty than Earth and
Water, and that is the Reason they seem light. It is so with these Elements, as
if a Piece of Wood, which seems light in Water, not because it is light of it
self, since it falls down when it is in the Air, but because the Water, which
is more heavy, makes it ascend and bears it up.

If, on the contrary, we should object to one who would maintain, that all
Bodies are Naturally light, that Earth and Water are heavy, he would likewise
answer, that these Bodies seem heavy because they are not so light as others
which surround them. That Wood, for instance, seems heavy in the Air, not
because it is heavy, since it swims when it is in the Water, but because it is
not so light as Air.

It is therefore ridiculous to suppose these Principles indisputable, that
Bodies are heavy or light in their own Nature. On the contrary, it is plain,
that all Bodies have not the Power of Motion in themselves; and that it is
indifferent to them whether they are moved upward or downward, East or West,
North or South, or any other Way we can conceive.

But if, according to Aristotle, there are four Elements, such as he wishes
them to be; Two Naturally heavy, and two Naturally light, viz. Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water. What Consequence can we draw from thence, to discover the
Knowledge of the Universe? These Four Elements are not such Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth as we see, they are quite different; we know them not by our Senses,
and still less by Reason, because we have no distinct Idea of them. I mean, we
know all Natural Bodies are composed of them, since Aristotle has said it. But
the Nature of these compounded Bodies is unknown to us, and we cannot discover
them, but by knowing the Four Elements or simple Bodies which compose them, for
we know the compound only by the simple.

Fire, Aristotle says, is Naturally light; the ascending Motion is simple:
Therefore Fire is a simple Body, since Motion must be proportioned to what it
moves. Natural Bodies are compounded of simple Bodies: Therefore there is Fire
in all Natural Bodies. But a Fire which is not like to that we see; for Fire is
often only in Power in Bodies which are compounded of it. What is it these
Periparetick Discourses teach us? That there is Fire in all Bodies either
Actual or Potential; that all Bodies are composed of something which we do not
see, and whose Nature we are unacquainted with. We see then that here is very
much advanced.

But if Aristotle does not discover to us the Nature of Fire, and the other
Elements of which all Bodies are composed, probably we may imagine he has
discovered at least the chief Qualities and Properties of them. We shall
further examine what he says thereof.

He declares to us, there are four principal Qualities which belong to the
Sense of feeling, l. 2. c. 2, 3. de genesis and corrupu.
Heat, Cold, Moist, and dry, of which all others are composed: In this manner
he distributes these first Qualities to the Four Elements. To the Fire he gives
Heat and Dryness; to the Air Heat and Moistness; to the Water Coldness and
Humidity; and to the Earth Coldness and Dryness. Chap. 2.
He affirms Heat and Cold to be active Qualities, and Dryness and Humidity to
be passive ones. He thus defines Heat, That what collects things of the same
kind: Cold, which assembles all things, either of the same or of a different
kind: Moisture, that which is not easily contained in its own Bounds, but in
Foreign Limits: and Dryness, that which is easily contained in its own Bounds,
and not easily in the Limits of the Bodies that are about it.

Thus, according to Aristotle, Fire is a hot and dry Element: It Is therefore an
Element which collects things of the same Nature, which is easily contained
within its own Limits, and difficultly in the Limits of Foreign Bodies. The
Air is an hot and moist Element, and therefore assembles things of the same
kind, and is not easily contained in its own Limits, but in that of others.
Water is a cold and moist Element, which gathers things together, both of the
same and of a different Nature, which is hot easily contained within its own
Bounds, but in that of others. And in fine, the Earth, cold and dry; and
therefore collects things of the same and of a different Nature, which is not
easily contained in its own Bounds, and very difficultly in that of others.

Here the Elements are explained according to the Sentiment of Aristotle, or
according to the Definitions he has given of their chief Qualities; and
because, if we will believe him, the Elements are simple Bodies, whereof all
others are compounded; the Knowledge of these Element and their Qualities must
be most clear and distinct, since all Physics, or the Knowledge of Sensible
Bodies which are composed of them, ought to be deduced from thence.

Let us see then what is defective in these Principles: First, Aristotle joins
no distinct Idea to the Word Quality. We know not whether by Quality he means a
real Being distinct from Matter, or only the Modification of Matter: It seems
sometimes as if he meant it in one Sense, and sometimes in another. It is true,
in the Eighth Chapter of Categories, he defines Quality to be that which causes
a thing to have such or such a Name, but that will not satisfy our Demands.
Secondly, the Definitions he gives of his four first Qualities, Heat, Cold,
Moist, and Dry, are all false or useless. This is his Definition of Heat, Heat
is that which assembles things of a like Nature,

First, we do not see that this Definition perfectly explains the Nature of
Heat, although it should be true, that Heat collects all things of the same
Nature.

But secondly, it is false, for Heat does not collect all things of the same
Nature. Heat does not assemble the Parts of Water, it rather dissipates them
into a Vapor. Nor does it assemble the Particles of Wine, or those of all
other Liquors, or fluid Bodies whatever: Nor even, those of Quicksilver. On the
contrary, it resolves and separates all solid Bodies, and even Fluids, although
of a different Nature. And if there are any whose Parts Fire cannot dissipate,
it is not because they are of the same Nature, but because some are too gross
and too solid to be raised by the Motion of the Parts of Fire.

In the third place, Heat indeed can neither assemble nor dissipate the Parts
of any Body whether Homogeneous or Heterogeneous. For to assemble, to separate,
or dissipate the Parts of any Body, it must move them: Now Heat can move
nothing; or at least, it is not evident that Heat can move Bodies: For although
we consider Heat with all the Attention possible, we can only discover that it
may communicate to Bodies a Motion which it has not in it self. Yet we see that
Fire moves and separates the Parts of Bodies that are exposed to it: It is
true, but it may be, it is not from its Heat, for even it is not evident that
it has any at all. It Is rather by the Action of its Parts, which are visibly in
a continual Motion. It is plain, that the Parts of Fire which strike against
any Body, must communicate a Part of their Motion to it, whether there is Heat
in Fire or not. If the Parts of this Body are but a little solid and gross, the
Fire cannot move them, and make them slip one upon another: In short, if they
are a Mixture of subtle and gross ones, the Fire can only dissipate those that
it can push strong enough to separate entirely from the rest. Thus Fire can
only separate them; and if it assembles them, it is merely by Accident. But
Aristotle pretends quite the contrary. Separation, says he, which some
attribute to Fire, is only a resembling of things of the same kind; De genesis and
corr. l. 2. c. 2.
for it is only by Accident that Fire dissipates things of a different kind.

If Aristotle had at first distinguished the Sentiment of Heat from the Motion
of the Particles, whereof the Bodies we call Heat are composed, and had
afterward defined Heat taken for the Motion of the Parts, by saying, Heat is
that which agitates and separates the invisible Parts whereof visible Bodies
are composed, he would have given a tolerable Definition of Heat.
Nevertheless, it would not perfectly have contented us, because it would not
precisely have discovered to us the Nature of the Motion of hot Bodies.

Aristotle defines Coldness, to be that which assembles Bodies of the same, or
of a different Nature. This Definition is good for nothing: For it is false,
that Cold assembles Bodies. To assemble them, it must move them, but if we
consult Reason, it is evident, Cold can move nothing. In Effect, by Cold he
means, either what we feel when we are cold, or that which causes the Sensation
of Cold. Now it is plain, that the Sensation of Cold can move nothing, since it
can push nothing. What it is that causes Sensation, we cannot doubt when we
examine things by our Reason, for it is only Rest or a Cessation from Motion. So
Cold in Bodies being only a Cessation from this Sort of Motion which
accompanies Heat, it is evident that if Heat separates, yet Cold does not. Thus
Cold assembles neither things that are of a like or different Nature; for what
can push nothing, can assemble nothing: In a Word, as it does nothing, it
collects nothing.

Aristotle, judging of things by the Senses, imagines Cold is also positive as
well as Heat, because the Sensations of Heat and Cold are both real and
positive: And he also thinks that these two Qualities are active. And indeed,
if we follow the Impression of our Senses, we have Reason to believe that Cold
is a very active Quality, since cold Water congeals, reassembles, and in a
Moment hardens melted Gold or Lead, after a little is poured upon them,
although the Heat of these Metals is great enough to separate the Parts of any
Body they touch.

It is evident, by what we have said of the Errors of the Senses in the first
Book, that if we rely only upon the Senses, to judge of the Qualities of
Sensible Bodies, it is impossible to discover any certain and undoubted Truth,
which can serve as a Principle to assist us in the Knowledge of Nature. For by
this Method only we cannot discover what things are hot, and what cold. For of
many Persons who should touch Water that is lukewarm, some of them would think
it hot, and others cold. Those that are of a hot Constitution would think it
cold, and those that are of a cold would think it hot. And if we supposed Fish
capable of Sensation, it is very probable they would think it hot, when all Men
think it cold. It is the same with the Air, it seems hot or cold, according to
the different Dispositions of the Bodies that are exposed to it. Aristotle
pretends it is hot, but I believe those that dwell toward the North are of
another Mind, since many learned Men, whose Climate is not colder than that of
Greece, have maintained it to be cold. But this Question, which has always been
considerable in the Schools, has never been sufficiently resolved to affix any
distinct Idea to the Word Heat.

The Definitions Aristotle gives of the Words Heat and Cold, can fix no Idea to
them. The Air, for instance, and even Water, though never so hot and scalding,
reassembles the Parts of melted Lead, with those of any other Metal whatever.
Air collects all Fatness in Gums and other solid Bodies. And one must be a
Peripatetick indeed to think of exposing Mastich to the Air, to separate the
Ashes from the Pitch, or any other compounded Bodies, to dissolve them again.
The Air then is not hot according to the Definition Aristotle gives of Heat.
Air separates Liquors from Bodies which are imbibed in it, hardens Dirt, and
dries Linen that is extended in it, although Aristotle makes it moist: The Air
therefore is hot and drying, according to this same Definition. We cannot then
determine the Air to be hot or cold by this Definition. We may affirm, it is
hot, in respect to Dirt, since it separates the Water from the Earth that is
mixed with it: But must we try all the diverse Effects of Air upon all Bodies,
to know whether or no there is Heat in the Air we breath. If so, we can never
know any thing of it; the shortest Way therefore, is not to Philosophize at all
upon the Air we breath in. But upon a certain Pure and Elementary Air which is
not to be found here below, and positively affirm with Aristotle, that it is
hot, without giving any Proof of it, or even without knowing distinctly what we
mean, by this Air or by this Heat; For this Way we shall give Principles that
will not easily be overthrown, not because of their Evidence and Solidity, but
because they are obscure like Phantoms which cannot be hurt, because they have
no Substances.

I shall not here stay upon the Definitions that Aristotle gives of Moisture
and Dryness, because it is plain enough that he has not explained the Nature of
them. For according to these Definitions, Fire is not dry, since it is not
easily contained within its own Bounds, and Ice is not moist since it is
contained within its own Bounds, and is not easily accommodated to the Limits
of other Bodies. It is true, Ice is not moist, if by moist he means fluid: But
if we understand it so, we may say Flame is very hot as well as melted Gold or
Lead: It is likewise true, that Ice is not moist, if by moist we mean, that
which easily sticks to things that touch it; but in this Sense, Pitch, Fat, and
Oil, are much more humid than Water, since they stick more strongly than Water.
In the same Sense, Quicksilver is moist, for it sticks to Metals; and even
Water is not perfectly moist, for it cleaves not to the Generality of Metals.
We must not then recur to the Testimony of the Senses, to defend the Opinions
of Aristotle.

But let us no further Examine the marvelous Definitions that this Philosopher
has given us of the four Elementary Qualities; and let us suppose also, that
all whatever the Senses tell us of these Qualities is indisputable. Let us
further excite our Faith, and believe, that all these Definitions are most
just. Let us only see if it be true, that all Qualities of Sensible Bodies are
compounded of these Elementary Qualities. Aristotle pretends it, and he ought
so to do, since he looks upon these four first Qualities as the Principles of
those things he would explain, in his Books of Physics.

He teaches us then, that Colors are engendered of the Mixture of die four
Elementary Qualities; that white is produced when Humidity surmounts Heat, as
when Old Men turn Gray: Black, when Humidity is overcome by Dryness, as in the
Walls of Cisterns, and all other Colors by the like Mixtures; that Tastes and
Smells are also produced by a different Mixture of dry and moist, caused by
Heat and Cold: that even Lightness and Heaviness depend upon it. In a Word,
according to Aristotle, it is necessary, that all Sensible Qualities should be
produced by the two Active Qualities of Heat and Cold, and be compounded of the
two Passive, moist and dry, that there may be some probable Connection between
his Principles, and the Consequences he draws from them.

However, it is yet more difficult to persuade our selves of all these things,
than of all those that we have hitherto related of Aristotle. We shall have
some Trouble to believe that the Earth, and other Elements would not be
colored or visible, if they were in their Natural Purity, and without any
Mixture of Elementary Qualities, although the learned Commentators of this
Philosopher, assures us of it. We comprehend not what Aristotle means when he
affirms the Whiteness of the Hair to be produced by Humidity, because the
Humidity of Old Men is stronger than their Heat; although to endeavor to clear
him of the Thought, we put the Definition in the Place of the thing defined:
For it seems to be an incomprehensible Piece of Nonsense, to say the Hairs of
Old Men turn White, because that which is not easily contained in its own
Limits, but in the Limits of other Bodies, surmounts what assembles things of
the same Nature. Nor have we less Difficulty to believe, that Taste is well
explained, when he says it consists in the Mixture of Dryness, Humidity, and
Heat; chiefly if we put, instead of these Words, the Definitions this
Philosopher has given of them, as it would be useful to do, if they were good.
And it may be also, that we could not forbear laughing instead of the
Definitions of Hunger and Thirst, that Aristotle gives of them by saying, that
Hunger is the Desire of Heat and Dry, and Thirst the Desire of Cold and Moist,
we should substitute the Definition of these Words, calling Hunger, The Desire
of what assembles things of the same Nature, and of what is easily kept within
its own Limits, and difficultly in the Limits of others; and define Thirst, the
Desire of what assembles things of the same, and of different Natures, and of
what cannot be easily contained in its own Limits, but easily in the Limits of
others.

Certainly it is a very useful Rule to discover, if we have defined Terms well,
and not to deceive our selves in our Reasonings, only often to put the
Definition in the Place of the thing defined: For by that means we know whether
the Terms are equivocal, and the Measures of the Relation false and imperfect:
Or if we reason consequently. This being granted, what can we say of the
Arguments of Aristotle, which become an impertinent and ridiculous Piece of
Nonsense, when we make use of this Rule? And what must we say likewise of all
those that reason only upon the false and confused Idea's of the Senses, since
this Rule which preserves Light and Evidence in all just and solid Arguments,
only breeds Confusion in their Discourses.

It is not possible to expose the Fantasticalness and Extravagances of the
Explanations that Aristotle gives of all sorts of Matters, when the Subjects he
treats of are simple and easy, his Errors are simple, and very easily
discovered, but when he pretends to explain compounded things, and such as
depend upon many Causes, his Errors are at least as compounded as the Subjects
he treats on, and it is impossible to take them in Pieces so as to discover
them all to others.

This great Genius, which they pretend, has done so well in his Rules for
Definitions, did not so much as know what things were necessary to be defined:
Because, putting no Distinction between a clear and distinct knowledge, and a
Sensible one, he imagined he was able to know and explain things to others,
which he had no distinct Idea of himself. Definitions must explain both the
Nature of Things, and the Terms which compose them, and stir up in the Mind,
distinct and clear Idea's of them. But it is impossible, after this manner, to
define the Sensible Qualities of Heat, Cold, Color, Taste, etc. when we
confound the Cause with the Effect, and the Motion of Bodies, with the
Sensation which accompanies it, because Sensations being Modifications of the
Soul, which we know not by clear Idea's, but only by an inward Sensation, as I
have explained in the third Book, it is impossible to affix Words to Idea's we
have not.

As we have clear and distinct Idea's of a Circle, a Square, a Triangle, and so
distinctly know the Nature of them, we may give good Definitions thereof: We
can even deduce the Idea's we have of these Figures, all their Properties, and
explain them to others, by Terms to which these Idea's are affixed; but we
cannot define either Heat or Cold, being only Sensible Qualities, for we know
them neither distinctly nor by Idea, but only by Conscience or Internal
Sensation.

Nor must we define Heat, which is external, by any Effects: For if we
substitute in its Place, the Definition that we shall give it, we shall soon
see that this Definition will only deceive us.

If for instance, we define Heat to be what assembles things of the same kind,
without saying any thing more; we may, in following this Definition, take such
things for Heat, as have no Relation to it. We may say, that the Loadstone
assembles the Filings of Iron, and separates them from those of Silver, because
it is hot; that a Pigeon eats Hemp Seed, and leaves other Grain, because she is
hot: That a Covetous Man separates his Gold from his Silver, because he is hot:
In fine, there is no Extravagancy that this Definition will not engage us in,
if we were stupid enough to follow it. This Definition then does not explain
the Nature of Heat, nor can we make use of it to deduce all its Properties,
since if we keep precisely to its Terms, we conclude Impertinences, and if we
put it in the Place of the thing defined, we shall have a strange Piece of
Nonsense.

Yet, if we carefully distinguish Heat from the Cause of it, although we cannot
define it, since it is a Modification of the Soul, whereof we have no Idea, we
may define the Cause of it, since we have a distinct Idea of Motion. But Care
must be had, that Heat, taken for such a Motion, does not always cause the
Sensation of Heat in us. For Water, for instance, is hot, since its Parts are
fluid and in Motion; and it is apparent, that Fish feel it warm, at least warmer
than Ice, whose Parts are more in Rest, but it is cold in relation to us,
because it has less Motion than the Parts of our Bodies: For what has less
Motion than another Body, is in some manner in rest, in respect to that Body.
So that it is not in Relation to the Motion of the Fibers of our Bodies, that we
must define the Cause of Heat, or the Motion which excites it: We must, if we
can, define this Motion absolutely and in it self, and then, the Definitions we
shall give, may serve to discover the Nature and Properties of Heat.

I do not think my self obliged to examine the Philosophy of Aristotle any
further, and to unravel the extremely confused and perplexed Errors of this
Author. It seems to me, that I have already shown that he does not prove his
four Elements, and that he defines them ill: That his Elementary Qualities are
not such as he pretends, that he knows not the Nature of them, and that all
second Qualities are not compounded of them. And lastly, although we should
grant him, that all Bodies were composed of four Elements, as second Qualities
of the first, his whole System would be useless in a Search after Truth, since
his Idea's are not clear enough always to preserve Evidence in our
Ratiotinations.

If it is doubted, that I have not related the true Opinions of Aristotle, it
may easily be seen by examining the Books he has writ of the Heavens, of
Generation and Corruption; for it is from them that I have taken almost all that
I have said. I had no Design to relate any thing of his Eight Books of
Physics, because there is some learned Men who pretend, that it is only a
Discourse of Logic: And it is very probable, since we find there many
indetermined and trifling Words.

As Atistotle often contradicts himself, and as we may maintain almost any
manner of Opinion from some Passages taken out of him, I doubt not but we may
prove by Aristotle, even some Opinions, contrary to those I have attributed to
him; but I am not afraid of it, it is sufficient that I have the Book by me I
cited him from, to prove what I have said. Nay, I shall not give my self any
great Trouble to examine whether these Books are Aristotle's or not, I take
them as for such, and as they are commonly received: For we ought not to
disquiet our selves to know the true Genealogy of things, for which we have no
Esteem.

CHAP. VI. Some general Advices which are necessary to conduct us regularly in
a Search after Truth, and in a Choice of the Sciences.
THAT it may not be said, I only destroy without establishing any thing certain
and indisputable in this Work. It will be proper to show. in a few Words, the
Order we ought to keep in our Studies, to avoid being deceived; and that I even
note some most necessary Truths and Sciences, in which we may meet with such
Evidence, as we cannot hinder our selves from consenting to them without
suffering the secret Reproaches of our Reason. I shall not explain these Truths
and Sciences at large, because it is already done: I do not pretend to make a
new Impression of other Persons Works, but content my self with referring to
them. I will only show the Order we ought to keep in our Studies, always to
preserve Evidence in our Perceptions.

Of all our Discoveries, the first is the Existence of our Souls; all our
Thoughts are undoubted Proofs of it, for there is nothing more evident than
whatever actually thinks, is actually something. But if it is easy to know the
Existence of our Souls, it is not so easy to know the Essence and Nature of
them. If we would know what it is, we must above all things, take great care,
not to confound it with the things it is united to. If we doubt, if we will, if
we reason, we must only believe that the Soul is a thing which doubts, wills,
reasons, and nothing more, provided we have no Proof of its having any other
Properties. For we know our Souls only by the Internal Sensation we have of
them: We must not take our Soul for our Body, nor for the Blood, nor Animal
Spirits, nor for Fire, nor an infinite number of other things for which
Philosophers have taken it. We must believe of the Soul, only what we cannot
hinder our selves from believing of it; and what we are fully convinced of by
the internal Sensation we have of our selves, for otherwise we should be
deceived. Thus we may know by a simple Prospect or an internal Sensation, what
can be known of the Soul, without being obliged to make such Arguments as may
be Erroneous: For when we reason the Memory Acts; and where we make use of our
Memory, we may be deceived; perhaps there is some Ill Genius on which we depend
in our Discoveries, and which diverts it self in deceiving us.

If for instance, I suppose a God who took pleasure in seducing me, I am well
persuaded he could not deceive me in any simple Discoveries, as in those
whereby I know that I am, or of what I think, or that twice 2 are 4. For
although I should really suppose such a God, and as powerful a one as I can
feign to my self, I find that in this extravagant Supposition I could not doubt
that I was, or that twice 2 were equal to 4, because I perceived these things
by a simple view, without the use of my Memory.

But when I argue, not seeing evidently the Principles of my Reasonings, and
only remember that I have evidently seen them: If this deceiving Deity joins
this Memory to false Principles, as he might do if he would, I should only
reason falsely, like those that make long Computations, imagining they remember
well how they have known that 9 times 9 makes 72, or that 21 is a prime Number,
or some suchlike Error, from whence they draw false Conclusions.

Thus it is necessary to know God, and to know that he is no Deceiver, if we
will be fully convinced that the most certain Sciences, as Arithmetic and
Geometry, are true Sciences; for without that their Evidence is not full, and
we may still refuse our Assent. And it is further necessary to know by a simple
View, and not by Reasoning, that God is no Deceiver, since that may always be
false, if we suppose God to deceive us.

All common Proofs of the Existence and Perfections of God, taken from the
Existence and Perfections of his Creatures, have this Defect it seems, That
they convince not the Mind by a simple View: All these Proofs are Reasonings,
which are convincing in themselves: But being Reasonings, they are not
convincing, if we suppose an ill Genius which deceives us. They sufficiently
prove that there is a Power Superior to us, for even this Extravagant
Supposition establishes it: But they do not fully convince that there is a
God, or an Infinitely Perfect Being. So in these Reasonings the Conclusion is
more evident than the Principles.

It is more plain that there is a Power Superior to us, than that there is a
World; since there is no Supposition that can hinder us from demonstrating this
Superior Power, whereas supposing an ill Genius which delights to deceive us,
it is impossible to prove there is a World: For we might always conceive, that
this Ill Genius would give us Sensations of things, which existed not: As our
Dreams and certain Sicknesses make us see things that never were; and make us
even effectively feel Pain in our Imaginary Members which we have lost, or
which we never had.

But the Proofs of the Existence and Perfections of God, taken from the Idea we
have of Infinity, are Proofs from a simple View. We see that there is a God, as
soon as we behold Infinity, because necessary Existence is included in the Idea
of Infinity, and there is nothing but Infinity to which we can give the Idea we
have of an Infinite Being. We see also that God is no Deceiver, because knowing
that he is infinitely Perfect, and that Infinity wants no Perfection, we see
clearly that he will not seduce us, and even that he cannot, since he is not
capable of willing it. So that there is a God, and a True God, who cannot
deceive us, although he does not always enlighten us; and though we often
deceive our selves when we think he enlightens us. All these Truths are seen at
one view by an attentive Mind, although we seem here to use a train of
Arguments to show them to others. We may suppose them as undoubted Principles
upon which we may reason; for having first discovered that God is not pleased
with deceiving us, we may then be permitted to reason.

It is evident, that the Certainty of Faith also depends upon this Principle,
That there is a God which is not capable of deceiving us. For the Existence of
God, and Infallibility of the Divine Authority, are rather Natural Knowledges,
and Notions common to Minds that are capable of a Serious Attention, than
Articles of Faith: Although it be a particular Gift of God, to have a Mind
capable of a sufficient Attention, to apprehend, and be willing to apprehend
these Truths as we ought.

From this Principle, That God is no Deceiver, we may also conclude, That we
certainly have a Body to which we are united after a very particular manner,
and that we are surrounded with many others. For we are Internally convinced of
their Existence, by the continual Sensations that God produces in us, and which
we cannot correct by Reason without hurting our Faith; although we may by
Reason correct the Sensations which represent them to us, with certain
Qualities and Perfections which they have not. So that we ought not to believe
them such as we see them, or imagine them, but only that they Exist, and are
such as we conceive them by our Reason.

But that we may reason orderly, we ought not yet to examine whether or no we
have a Body, and if there are any others about us, or whether we have only
Sensations of Bodies which Exist not. These Questions include too great
Difficulties, and it is not perhaps so necessary to resolve them to perfect our
Knowledge as we may imagine, nor even to have an exact Knowledge of Physics,
Morality, and some other Sciences.

We have in our selves the Idea's of Numbers and Extension, whose Existence is
undoubted, and whose Nature is immutable, which would eternally furnish our
Thoughts, if we would know all their Relations. And it is necessary for us to
begin to exercise our Minds upon these Idea's, for Reasons that will not be
unnecessary to remark, whereof the chief are these three.

The first is, That these Idea's are the most clear and evident of all: For if
to shun Error we ought always to preserve Evidence in our Reasonings, it is
plain that we ought rather to reason upon the Idea's of Numbers and Extension,
than upon the confused and compound Idea's of Physics, Morality, Mechanics,
Chemistry, and all other Sciences.

The second is, These Idea's are the most distinct and exact of all, chiefly
those of Numbers. So that the Habit we gain in Arithmetic and Geometry, of not
contenting our selves without knowing precisely the Relations of things, gives
the Mind a certain Exactness that those have not, who content themselves with
the Probability that is to be met with in other Sciences.

The third and greatest of all is, That these Idea's are the immutable Rules
and common Measures, of all other things that we know or can know. Those who
perfectly know the Relations of Numbers and Figures, or rather the Art of
making the Comparisons necessary for the knowing their Relations, have a kind
of universal Science, and a most certain means to discover evidently and
certainly whatsoever exceeds not the common limits of the Mind. But those that
have not this Art, can never certainly discover any Truths, if but a little
compounded, although they have very clear Idea's of those things whose
compounded Relations they endeavor to know.

These or the like, are the Reasons which induced the Ancients to make young
Men study Arithmetic, Algebra, and Geometry: Without doubt they knew that
Arithmetic and Algebra gave a certain Penetration to the Mind, that could not
be acquired by other Studies; and that Geometry so well regulates the
Imagination that it is not easily confounded; for this Faculty of the Soul, so
necessary for the Sciences, acquires a certain just Extension by the use of
Geometry, which promotes and preserves the clear view of the Mind in the most
perplexing Difficulties.

If we would then always preserve Evidence in our Perceptions, and discover the
pure Truth without any Obscurity or Mixture of Error, we ought first to study
Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry, at least after having acquired some
Knowledge of our selves and the Sovereign Being. If we would have any Book
which Facilitates these Sciences, I would prefer Descartes's Meditations to
know God and our selves; and to learn Arithmetic and Algebra, we may read the
Mathematical Elements; for common Geometry, Tacquet's Elements; and for Conick
Sections, and the Resolution of Geometrick Problems, De la Here Is Conicks, his
Geometrick Places, and Construction of Equations, to which we may add
Descartes's Geometry.

I would not advise to the reading of the Mathematical Elements for Arithmetic
and Algebra, if I knew of any Author that had clearly demonstrated these
Sciences; but the Truth obliges me to a thing which some Men will oppose.
Algebra and Arithmetic being absolutely necessary to discover compounded
Truths, I believe it a Duty to testify some Esteem for a Book which directs
very far in these Sciences, and which, according to the Opinion of some Learned
Men, explains them more clearly than any one has yet done.

When with Care and Application we have studied these general Sciences, we
shall evidently discover a great number of Truths, that are for all exact and
particular Sciences. Afterward we may study Physics and Morality, because
these Sciences are very useful, although they are not so fit to make the Mind
exact and penetrating. And if we would always preserve Evidence in our
Perceptions, we must be very careful that we are never prejudiced in favor of
any Principle that is not evident; and from which the Chinese for instance
would not be supposed to dissent after, having thoroughly weighed and considered
it.

So for Physics we must only admit the Notions common to all Men, viz. The
Axioms of Geometricians, and clear Idea's of Extension, Figure, Motion and
Rest, or any others as clear as these. It may perhaps be said, That the Essence
of Matter is not Extension, but what signifies that? It is enough that the
World which we conceive to be formed of Extension, appears like to that which
we see, if it be not of this matter which is useless and unintelligible,
although we make such a noise about it.

It is not absolutely necessary to examine whether there are indeed External
Beings which answer to these Idea's, for we reason not upon these Beings, but
upon their Idea's: We ought only to take care that the Reasonings we make upon
the Properties of things, agree with the Sensations we have of them, viz. That
what we think perfectly agrees with Experience, because we endeavor in
Physics to discover the Order and Connection of Effects with their Causes, or
in Bodies if they Exist, or in the Sensations we have of them if they have no
Being.

Indeed we cannot doubt whether there are actually any Bodies, when we consider
that God is no Deceiver, or reflect upon the just Order which he has
instituted in our Sensations, whether in Natural Occurrences, or in those
things only that happen to make us believe what we could not naturally
comprehend: But it is not necessary at first sight to make deep Reflections,
upon a thing which no body doubts of, and which is not very useful in the
Knowledge of Physics, if considered as a true Science.

Nor must we trouble our selves much to know, whether there is, or is not, any
other Qualities in those Bodies that surround us, than such as we have clear
Idea's of, for we must reason only according to our Idea's: And if there is any
thing else, of which we have not a dear, distinct, and particular Idea, we can
never know any thing of it, nor reason justly upon it: Whereas if we reason
according to our Idea's, we follow Nature, and discover that it is not so
hidden as we commonly imagine.

So those that have not studied the Properties of Numbers, often imagine that
it is not possible to resolve certain Problems, although most Simple and Easy;
and those that have not thought upon the Properties of Extension, Figure and
Motion, are extremely inclined to believe and maintain, that Physical Questions
are inexplicable. We must not stop at the Opinion of those that have examined
nothing, or have examined nothing with a necessary Application: For although
there are few Truths concerning Natural Things which are fully demonstrated, it
is certain that there are some general ones, of which it is not possible to
doubt, although it is very possible not to think of them, be ignorant, and deny
them.

If we would meditate regularly, and with all necessary Application, we should
discover many of these certain Truths that I speak of: But that we may the more
easily discover them, it is requisite to read Descartes's Principles carefully,
without receiving any thing he says, except when the Force and Evidence of his
Reasons permit us not to doubt of it.

As Morality is the most necessary of all Sciences, we must also study it very
carefully, for it is chiefly in that Science that it is dangerous to follow the
Opinions of Men: But that we may not deceive our selves in it, but preserve
Evidence in our Perceptions, we must only meditate upon undoubted Principles,
such as are confessed by all those whose Minds are not blinded with Pride; for
there is no undoubted Principle of Morality for Spirits of Flesh and Blood* and
such as aspire to the Quality of great Wits. These sort of Men comprehend not
the most simple Truths; or if they comprehend them, at least they always
dispute them, through a Spirit of Contradiction, and to preserve such a
Reputation.

Some of these most general Principles of Morality are, That God having made
all things for himself, he has created our Minds to know, and our Hearts to
love him: That being also as Just and Powerful as he is, we cannot be Happy if
we do not follow his Orders, nor Unhappy if we do: That our Nature is Corrupt,
that our Minds depend upon our Bodies, our Reason upon our Senses, and our
Wills upon our Passions: That we are incapable to do what we see clearly to be
our Duties; and that we have need of a Savior. There are also many other
Principles of Morality, as, That a retreat from the eager Pursuit of the World
and Repentance, are necessary to disunite us from Sensible Objects, and to
increase that which we have with intelligible and true Goods, I mean, those of
the Mind: That we cannot enjoy violent Pleasure without becoming Slaves to it:
That we must never undertake any thing through the Incitement of Passion: Nor
seek an Establishment in this Life, etc. But because these last Principles
depend upon the precedent, and on the Knowledge of Man, they ought not
immediately to pass for undoubted. If we consider these Principles orderly, and
with as much Care and Application as the weight of the Subject requires; and
receive for true only the Conclusions consequently deduced from these
Principles, we shall have a certain Morality, which perfectly agrees with that
of the Gospel, although it is not complete and large.

It is true, in Moral Reasonings, it is not so easy to preserve Evidence and
Exactness, as in some other Sciences; and the Knowledge of Man is absolutely
necessary to those that would make any great Progress: And this is the reason
that the generality of Men do not succeed in it. They will not consult
themselves to know the Weakness of their own Nature: They omit to enquire of
the Master who inwardly teaches them his own Will, which is the Immutable and
Eternal Law, and the true Principles of Morality. They do not hear him with
Pleasure who speaks not to their Senses, who answers not according to their
Desires, nor Flatters their Secret Pride: They have no respect for such words
as do not dazzle the Imagination, which are pronounced without a Noise, and are
never clearly heard but in the Silence of the Creatures: Yet with Pleasure and
Deference they consult Aristotle, Seneca, and some new Philosophers, who seduce
them either by the Obscurity of their Words, the Turn of their Expressions, or
Probability of their Reasons.

Since the Sin of Adam we esteem only what relates to the Preservation of the
Body, and Convenience of Life: And because we discover these sort of Goods only
by the Means of our Senses, we make use of them in all Occurrences. The Eternal
Wisdom who is our true Life, and the only Light which can illuminate us, often
shines before the Blind, and speaks only to the Deaf, when it speaks in the
Recesses of the Soul; for we are almost always out of our selves. As we
continually interrogate all Creatures to learn some new Good which we enquire
after, it is requisite, as I have already said, that this Wisdom presents it
self before us without our going out of our selves, to teach us by sensible
Words, and convincing Examples, the way to arrive at true Felicity. God
continually imprints a Natural Love in us for him, that we may always Love him;
and by this same Motion of Love we continually Estrange our selves from him, by
running with all the Power he has given us after Sensible Goods, which he has
forbid us to do. So that willing to be loved by us, he renders himself
Sensible, and presents himself before us, by the Delights of his Grace to fix
all our Vain Agitatitions, and to begin our Cure, by Sensations or Delectations
like to those which had been the Original of our Disease.

Therefore I do not pretend that Men may, by the Power of their Minds, so
easily discover all the Rules of Morality which are necessary to Salvation, and
much less that they are able to act according to what they know; for their
Heart is yet more Corrupted than their Minds. I only say, that if they admit
none but evident Principles, and consequently reason upon these Principles,
they will discover even the very Truths that we learn in the Bible; because
it is the same Wisdom which immediately speaks from it self to those who
discover Truths from the Evidence of Reasoning; and who speaks by the Holy
Scriptures to those who learn it from their Senses.

We must then study Morality in the Gospel to spare our selves the Trouble of
Meditation, and Certainly to learn those Laws according to which we ought to
regulate our Manners, For those who are not contented with Certainty, because
it only convinces the Mind, without enlightening it, must carefully Meditate
upon these Laws, and deduce them from their Natural Principles, that they may
evidently discover by their Reason, what they already know by Faith, with an
entire Certainty. This way they will be convinced that the Gospel is the most
Solid of all Books; That JESUS CHRIST perfectly knew the Disorder and Distemper
of Nature: That he has procured a Remedy the most Useful for us, and the most
Worthy of himself: But that the Light of Philosophers is only thick Darkness,
and their brightest Virtues only an insupportable Pride; and in a word, that
Aristotle, Seneca, etc. are only at best but Men, to say no worse of them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Use of the first Rule which respects Particular Questions.
WE have sufficiently explained the General Rule for Method, which chiefly
regards the Subject of our Studies, and to prove that Descartes has exactly
followed it in his System of the World, but that Aristotle and his Followers
have not observed it. It is now proper to descend to particular Rules, which
are necessary to resolve all sorts of Questions.

The Questions that may be formed upon all manner of Subjects are of diverse
kinds, of which it will not be easy to give a particular Enumeration, but
these that follow are the chief of them. Sometimes we enquire after the unknown
Causes of some known Effects; and sometimes seek unknown Effects by their known
Causes. The Fire burns, and dissipates the Wood, we seek the Cause of it. Fire
consists in a very great Motion of the Fiery Particles; we would know what
Effects this Motion is capable of producing, if it can harden Dirt, and melt
Iron, etc.

We seek sometimes the Nature of a thing by its Properties; and sometimes
knowing the Nature we seek the Properties of things: We know, or at least
suppose, that Light is transmitted in an instant, that yet it is reunited and
reflected by the means of a concave Mirror, in such sort, that it penetrates
the most Solid Bodies; and we would make use of these Properties to discover
the Nature of it. On the contrary, We know that all the Spaces which are
betwixt Earth and Heaven, are full of little Spherical Bodies extremely
agitated, and which continually fly from the Sun: And we would know if these
little Bodies can transmit themselves in an instant, or if being reflected by a
Concave Mirror, can reunite, and dissipate or penetrate the most Solid Bodies.

Sometimes we seek all the Parts from the whole; and sometimes a whole by its
Parts: We seek all the unknown Parts of a whole that is known; when we seek all
the Alliquot parts of a Number, all the Roots of an Equation, all the right
Angles which a Figure contains, etc. And we seek an unknown whole, whose Parts
are known, when we seek the Sum of many Numbers, the Area of many Figures, the
Capacity of different Vessels; or we seek a whole which has one of its parts
known, and the others, although unknown, include some known Relation with what
is unknown: As when we enquire what that Number is whereof we have 15 a known
part, and the other which composes it, is the half or third of the unknown
Number: Or when we seek an unknown Number which is equal to 15, and to twice
the Root of the unknown Number.

In fine, We sometimes enquire if certain things are equal or like to others,
or how far they are unequal or different: As when we would know if Saturn is
greater than Jupiter, or how near their Magnitudes are alike: If the Air at
Rome is hotter than that at Marseilles, or what difference between them.

What is general in all Questions is, that we form them only to know some
Truths; and because all Truths are but Relations; we may say generally, that in
all Questions, we seek only the Knowledge of some Relations, whether Relations
between things, Relations between Idea's, or Relations between things and their
Idea's.

There are Relations of many Kinds, there are some between the Nature of
things, between their Magnitudes, their Parts, their Attributes, Qualities,
Effects, Causes, etc. But we may reduce them all to two, viz. the Relations of
Magnitude, and Relations of Quality; by calling all those Relations of
Magnitude; which are between things considered as capable of More or Less; and
all others Relations of Qualities. Thus we may say, that all Questions tend to
the Discovery of some Relations of Magnitude or Quality.

The first and chief of all Rules is, to know most distinctly the State of the
Question proposed to be resolved, and to have very clear Idea's of its Terms,
to be able to compare, and by this means discover the unknown Relations.

We must therefore first perceive very clearly the unknown Relation that we
seek; for it is evident, that if we had no certain Mark to discover this
unknown Relation when we look for it, or when we would find it, it would be in
vain for us to enquire after it.

Secondly, as much as possible, we must render those Idea's distinct, which
answer to the Terms of the Question, by taking away all Equivocal Terms, and
make them clear, by considering them with all possible Attention: For if these
Idea's are so confused or obscure, that we cannot make the Comparisons
necessary for discovering the Relations we seek, we are not yet in a Condition
of resolving the Question.

In the third place, we must consider with great Attention, the Conditions
expressed in a Question, if there is any; because, without that, we have only a
confused Notion of the State of the Question: Besides, the Conditons generally
show the Way for resolving it. So that having once well conceived the State of
the Question, and Conditions of it, we know what we seek, and sometimes the Way
that we must take to discover it.

It is true, there is not always some Conditions expressed in Questions; but then
these Questions are indetermined, and we may resolve them many Ways, as if a
Square, Number, or Triangle is required, etc. without specifying any more; or
else it is because he that proposes them, knows not the means of resolving them,
or else hides them with a Design to perplex the Question: As if it is required
to find two mean Proportionals between two Lines, without adding, by the
Intersection of the Circle and Parabola, or Circle and Elipsis, etc.

It is therefore absolutely necessary, that the Character by which we know what
we seek, should be very distinct and not Equivocal, and specify only what we
seek, otherwise we can never be certain of having resolved the Question
proposed. We must likewise take care to retrench from the Question, whatever
Conditions may perplex it, and without which it is complete: For they
unnecessarily divide the Capacity of the Mind. Nay, we cannot be said to know
the State of a Question, when the Conditions which accompany it are useless.

For instance, if a Question were proposed in these Terms; whether a Man being
sprinkled with some Liquors, and covered with a Garland of Flowers, can be able
to rest, although he see nothing that can agitate him. We must know whether the
Word Man is not Metaphorical; or the Word Rest Equivocal, if it is not taken in
Relation to Local Motion, or in Relation to the Passions, as these Words,
although he see nothing that is able to agitate him, seem to note. We must know
if the Conditions, being sprinkled with some Liquors, and crowned with a
Garland of Flowers, are Essential. Afterward, the State of this Ridiculous and
Indetermined Question being clearly known, we may easily resolve it, by saying
that we only need put a Man into a Ship, according to the Conditions expressed in
the Question.

The Artifice of those that propose such like Questions, is to join Conditions
to them which seem to be necessary, although they are not, to divert the Mind
of those they propose them toward things unuseful to be resolved. As in that
Question that Servants commonly offer to Children. I have seen, say they unto
them, Hunters or Fishers, carry away with them what they could not take, and
cast into the Water what they took. The Mind being prejudiced with the Idea of
Fishermen angling for Fish* it cannot conceive what they mean, and all the
Diffiulty there is to resolve this trifling Question, proceeds from their not
having conceived it clearly, and not thinking that Fishermen, as well as
others, sometimes look in their Clothes for certain little Animals, which they
throw away as soon as they have taken them, and still carry with them what they
cannot catch.

Sometimes also, there are not all the necessary Conditions in a Question for
the answering it, and that makes it at least as difficult as when unuseful ones
are added: For instance in this, to make a Man immovable, without binding or
hurting him; or rather, having put a Man's little Finger in his own Ear, by
this Posture, to make him so immovable, that he cannot stir from the Place
where he is put, until his little Finger is taken from his Ear again. This at
first appears impossible, and it is so indeed, for we can walk very well,
although our little Finger be in our Ear. But here is a Condition wanting,
which would remove all Difficulty, if it was expressed, viz. That he must be
made to embrace some Pillar or something like it, with that Arm, whereof the
Finger is in his Ear; for then he cannot get from the Place without taking his
Finger from his Ear. It is not added as a Condition of a Question, that there
is yet some other thing to do, on purpose that the Mind should not seek for it
nor discover it; But those who undertake to resolve these sort of Questions,
must make all necessary Demands to clear the Point wherein the Difficulty of
the Question consists.

These Arbitrary Questions seem to be trifling, and so indeed they are in one
Sense; for we learn nothing by resolving them: Yet are they not so different
from Natural Questions, as perhaps we may think them to be; we must do very
nigh the same things to resolve both. For if the Craft and Malice of Men make
Arbitrary Questions perplexing and difficult to resolve; Natural Effects are
also in themselves encompassed with Obscurity and Darkness: And these
Darknesses must be dispersed by the Attention of the Mind; and Experiments,
which are kind of Demands that we make to the Author of Nature, even as we take
away Equivocal and useless Circumstances from Arbitrary Questions by Attention
of the Mind, and by the proper Demands we make to those who propose them. But
let us explain these things Methodically, and in a more Serious and Instructive
Manner.

There is a great Number of Questions which seem very difficult, because we
understand them not, and which therefore want an Explication: Yet, which ought
rather to pass for Axioms, than true Questions; for it seems to me, that we
ought not to place in the Number of Questions, certain undoubted Propositions,
whose Terms we conceive.

We demand, for instance, as a Question difficult to be resolved, whether or no
the Soul is immortal; because those that make the Question, or that pretend to
resolve it, do not clearly conceive the Terms of it. As the Words Soul and
Immortal signify different things, and know not how they are understood; so
they cannot resolve whether it is Immortal or not: For they neither know
precisely what they demand, nor what they seek.

By this Word Soul, we may understand a Substance which thinks, wills, feels,
etc. we may take the Soul for the Circulation of the Blood, and Configuration
of the Parts of the Body; or we may take it for the Blood and Animal Spirits.
So by this Word Immortal, we mean what cannot perish by the ordinary Power of
Nature, or else what can never change; or what can neither corrupt nor
dissipate like a Vapor or Smoke. Thus, suppose we take the Words Soul and
Immortal in some one of these Significations; the least Attention of Mind will
make us able to judge whether it is Immortal or not.

For first, it is plain that the Soul, taken in the first Sense, viz. for a
Substance which thinks, is Immortal, if we also take Immortal in the first
Sense, for what cannot perish by the common Power of Nature; for it is not even
conceivable that any Substance can become nothing; we must have Recourse to the
extraordinary Power of God, to conceive it possible.

Secondly, the Soul is immortal, if we take Immortal in the third Sense; for
what cannot corrupt, nor resolve into a Vapor or Smoke; for it is evident, that
what cannot be divided into an infinite Number of Parts, cannot corrupt or be
resolved into a Vapor.

Thirdly, the Soul is not Immortal, if we take Immortal in the second Sense,
for what cannot change: For we have sufficient convincing Proofs of the
Variations of our Soul: That sometimes it feels Pain, sometimes Pleasure,
sometimes it wills certain things, and then again ceases to will them; as being
united to the Body, it cannot be separated from them, etc.

If we take the Word Soul in any other Signification, 'twill be very easy to
see whether it is Immortal or not, by taking the Word Immortal in a fixed and
certain Sense; so that what makes these Questions difficult, is because we
conceive them not distinctly, and the Terms which express them are Equivocal;
so that they have rather need of Explanation than Proof.

It is true, some Persons are stupid enough, and others sufficiently
Imaginative; to take the Soul always for a certain Configuration of the Parts
of the Brain, arid Motion of the Spirits, and it is certainly impossible to
prove, to these sort of Men, that the Soul is Imortal and cannot perish: For on
the contrary, it is evident, that the Soul, taken in the Sense they understand
it, is Mortal; so that it is not a Question difficult to resolve, but a
Proposition difficult to make Men understand which have not the same Idea's of
it as we have, and who do all they can not to have them, and to blind
themselves.

When it is asked, if the Soul is Immortal, or any other Question whatever, we
must immediately take away the Equivocal Terms, and know in what Sense they are
taken that we may be able distinctly to conceive the Condition of the Question:
And if those that propose it, know not what they mean, we must require them to
form some distinct Notions, and determine them. If we ask them, and find their
Idea's agree not with ours, it will be useless to answer them: For what Answer
can we make to a Man, who for instance, imagines that a Desire is only the
Motion of some Spirits; and a Thought is nothing else but a Trace or an Image,
that Objects or Spirits have produced in the Brain; and that all the reasoning
of Men consist merely in the different Situation of some little Parts, which
are diversely disposed in the Head? To answer him, that the Soul, taken in the
Sense he means it is Immortal, is to deceive him, or make our selves ridiculous
to him: But to answer him it is Immortal, would be in one Sense to confirm him
in an Error of the greatest Consequence. We must therefore not answer him at
all, but only endeavor to make him reenter into himself, that he may receive
the same Idea's as we do, of him who is only capable of enlightening him.

It Is also a Question which appears difficult enough to resolve, viz. Whether
Beasts have a Soul or not: Yet, when we take away the Equivocation, it seems no
longer difficult; and the Generality of those Men who think they have, do not
know the Opinions of those who think they have not.

We may take the Soul for something Corporeal, diffused through the whole Body,
which gives it Life and Motion, or else for something Spiritual. Those who say
Animals have no Soul, understand it in the Second Sense; for no Man ever denied
but that there was in Animals something Corporeal, which was the Principle of
their Life and Motion, since they cannot even deny it to Watches. Those on the
contrary, who affirm Animals have Souls, mean it in the first Sense; for there
are few who believe Animals have a Spiritual and indivisible Soul, so that the
Peripateticks and Cartesians do both believe that Beasts have a Soul, viz. a
Corporeal Principle of their Motion; and both of them believe they have none,
viz. That they have nothing in them Spiritual and indivisible.

Thus the Difference that is between the Peripateticks and Cartesians, is not
in that the first believe Beasts have Souls, and the last believe it not: But
only in that the first think Animals capable of feeling Pain, Pleasure, seeing
Colors, hearing Sounds, and generally of having all the Sensations and
Passions that we have; and the last doubt it. The Cartesians distinguish the
Word Sensation to take away the Equivocation of it. For instance, they say,
that when we are too near the Fire, the Particles of Wood strike against the
Hand, and shake the Fibers; that this shaking is communicated to the Brain;
that it determines the Animal Spirits, which are there contained, to diffuse
themselves through the External Parts of the Body, in a proper manner to make
them retire. They agree, that all these things, or the like, may meet in
Animals, and that they certainly meet there, because these are the Properties
of Bodies; and the Peripateticks grant this.

The Cartesians further say, that in Man the shaking of the Fibers of his Brain
is accompanied with a Sensation of Heat, and that the Course of the Animal
Spirits to the Heart or Bowels, is followed with the Passion of Hatred or
Aversion: But deny that these Sensations or Passions of the Soul is in Beasts.
The Peripateticks, on the contrary, affirm that Beasts feel Heat as well as we;
that like us, they have an Aversion for whatever incommodes them; and
generally, that they are capable of all the Sensations and Passions that we
are. The Cartesians do not think that Beasts feel Pain or Pleasure, or that
they love or hate any thing; because they admit nothing but what is material in
Beasts, and they do not believe that Sensations or Passions are Properties of
Matter, whatever it may be. Some Peripateticks on the contrary, think that
Matter is capable of Sensation and Passion, when it is, as they say,
Subtilized; that Beasts may feel, by the means of Animal Spirits, viz. by the
means of a Matter extremely fine and delicate; and that even the Soul is not
capable of Sensation and Passion, but only as it is united to this Matter.

Thus, to resolve the Question, whether Beasts have a Soul, we must re-enter
into our selves, and consider the Idea we have of Matter, with all the
Attention we are capable of. And if we conceive, that Matter, Figured after
such manner, as Square, Round, Oval, etc. is capable of Pain, Pleasure, Heat
and Cold, Color, Smells, Sound, etc. we may affirm, that the Souls of Beasts,
how material soever they are, may be capable of Sensation. If we conceive it
not, we must not assert it is, for we must only affirm what we conceive: So if
we conceive, that Matter, agitated up and down in a Circular, Spiral,
Parabolick, Eliptick Line, etc. be capable of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, etc.
we may say that Beasts have the same Passions with us. If we see it not, we
must not say it, at least without confessing, we speak what we do not know. But
I think it may be affirmed, that we never believe any Motion of Matter can be
capable of Love or Joy, provided we think Seriously of it: So that to resolve
this Question, if Beasts feel; we need only take away the Equivocation, as
Cartesians do; for this way we reduce it to a Simple Question, that an
indifferent Attention of Mind will suffice to resolve it.

It is true, that St. Austin supposing, according to the common Prejudice, that
Beasts have Souls (or at least, I have not read in his Works, that he ever
Seriously examined it, or called it in Question) and perceiving well the
Contradiction of saying, that a Soul or Substance that thinks, feels, desires,
etc. should be Material, he believed that the Souls of Beasts were certainly
Spiritual and Indivisible. He has proved, by evident Reasons, L 4. de anima and
ejus origin. c. 23. l. 5. de quantitate animae, and elsewhere
that all Souls, that is, whatever feels, imagines, fears, doubts, desires,
etc. are necessarily Spiritual; but I have not observed that he had any Reason
to say that Beasts had Souls. He does not give himself the Trouble to prove it,
because it is very probable that in his Time there was hardly any one that
doubted of it.

Now there are some who endeavor wholly to deliver themselves from their
Prejudices, and who call all Opinions in Question, that are not maintained upon
clear and demonstrative Reasons, who begin to doubt whether Animals have a Soul
capable of the same Sensations and Passions as ours, but they always find many
prejudiced Defenders, who pretend to prove, that Beasts feel, will, think and
reason as we do, although in a much more imperfect manner.

Dogs, say they, know their Masters, they love them, suffer patiently the Blows
they receive from them, because they judge it advantageous for them, not to
abandon them: But for Strangers, they hate them so violently, that they cannot
so much as suffer themselves to be caressed by them. All Animals have a Love
for their Young Ones, and those Birds that make their Nests in the Extreme
Branches of a Tree, make it plainly appear, that they fear certain Animals that
would devour them: They think these Branches are too weak to bear their
Enemies, and yet strong enough to support their Little Ones and Nests too.
There is amongst the Spiders, and the most vile Insects, something that looks
like an Intelligence, which Animates them: For we cannot forbear admiring the
Conduct of an Animal; which, although blind, finds a means to catch others in
its Snares, that have both Eyes and Wings, and are bold enough to attack the
greatest Animal that is.

It is true, that all the Actions of Beasts show that there is an Intelligence,
for whatever is regular declares it; a Watch even shows it: It is impossible
that Chance should compose its Wheels, there must be an Intelligence which has
regulated its Motions. We plant a Seed in an inverse Order, the Roots which are
upwards, sink of themselves into the Earth; and the Germ which was turned
toward the Earth, also turns again to come forth, and this testifies an
Intelligence: This Plant is joynted at convenient Distances, to fortify it
self; it covers its Grain with a Skin to preserve it; if encompasses it with
Prickles which defends it: This shows an Intelligence. In fine, all that we see
Plants do, as well as Animals, certainly denotes an Intelligence. All true
Cartesians grant it. But they all distinguish, for they take away as much as
possible, the Equivocation of Terms.

The Motions of Beasts and Plants show an Intelligence; but this Intelligence
is not of Matter; it is distinct from Beasts, as that which disposes the Wheels
of a Watch is distinct from the Watch. For indeed, this Intelligence appears
infinitely wise, infinitely powerful, and the same which has formed us in our
Mothers Belly, and given us Growth, to which we could not, by all the Efforts
of our Minds, and will add one Cubit. Thus in Animals, there is neither
Intelligence nor Soul, as we commonly understand it. They eat without Pleasure,
cry without Pain, and grow without Knowledge: They fear nothing, they know
nothing, and they act after such a manner as intelligently shows that it is God
who made them, that preserves them; he has so formed their Bodies, that they
Machinally, and without Fear, shun whatsoever would destroy them; otherwise we
must grant that there is more Understanding in the least Animal, or even in one
Grain, than in the Wisest Man: For it is certain, there is more different
Parts, and more regular Motions produced in them, than we are capable of
knowing.

But, as Men are accustomed to confound all things, and to imagine that their
Soul produces in their Bodies, almost all the Motions and Changes that happen
to it: They falsely affix to the Word Soul, the Idea of producing and preserving
Bodies. Thus they think their Soul produces in them, whatsoever is absolutely
necessary for the Preservation of Life, although it know not even how the Body
it Animates is composed: They judge it necessary that there should be a Soul in
Beasts, to produce all the Motions and Changes which happen to them; because
they are like to what is performed in our Bodies: For Beasts are begotten,
nourished, fortified, as out Bodies are: They Drink, Eat, Sleep like us;
because we are wholly like Beasts in our Bodies, and all the difference there
is between us and them, is, That we have a Soul, and they have not. But the
Soul we have does not form our Bodies, it digests not our Food, it gives
neither Motion nor Heat to our Blood: It Feels, Wills and Reasons; and animates
the Body in this respect. It has Sensations and Passions which have relation to
it. It is not that it is diffused through all our Members, that it communicates
Sensation and Life to it, for our Body can receive nothing of what occurs in
our Mind. It is then plain, That the reason why we cannot resolve many
Questions, is because we distinguish nor, and even forget to distinguish the
different things that the same word may signify.

Sometimes indeed we may think of distinguishing, but then often we do it so
ill, that instead of taking away the Equivocation of Terms, by the Distinctions
we give them, we make them become more obscure. For instance, If it be demanded
whether the Body sees, how it sees, and after what manner the reasonable Soul
animates the Animal Spirits, the Blood, and other living Humors, if the Teeth,
Hair and Nails, are animated, etc. we distinguish the words to live and be
animated, in living or being animated with a rational Soul, or a Sensitive, or
a Vegetative one; but this distinction does only confound the state of the
Question, for these words themselves have need of an Explanation, and it may be
even that the two last, Vegetative and Sensitive Soul are inexplicable and
incomprehensible, after the manner we commonly understand them.

But if we would join any clear and distinct Idea to the word Life, we may say
that the Life of the Soul is the Knowledge of Truth and Love of God; or rather,
that its Thought is its Life: And that the Life of the Body consists in the
Circulation of the Blood, and just Temperament of Humors; or rather, that the
Life of the Body is the Motion of its Parts proper for its Preservation: And
then the Idea's applied to the word Life being clear, it will also be evident,
1. That the Soul cannot communicate its Life to the Body; for it cannot make it
Think. 2. That it cannot give it the Life by which it is nourished, grows, etc.
since it cannot so much as know how it must digest what it eats. 3. It can make
it feel any thing, since Matter is incapable of Sensation, etc. Thus we may,
without Pain, resolve all other Questions that can be put upon this Subject,
provided the Terms whereby they are expressed stir up clear Idea's: And it is
impossible to resolve them, if the Idea's of the Terms which express them are
confused and obscure.

Yet is it not always absolutely necessary to have Idea's, which perfectly
represent the things whose Relations we would examine: It often suffices to
have an imperfect or weak Knowledge of them, because sometimes we do not
enquire after an exact Knowledge of their Relations, as I shall here explain.

There are Truths or Relations of two sorts, some exactly known, and others
that are but imperfectly discovered: We exactly know the Relation between such
a Square and such a Triangle; but we do not perfectly know the Relation between
Paris and Orleance; we know that a Square is equal to a Triangle, or double or
treble to it, etc. but we only know that Paris is greater than Orleance,
without knowing how much.

Moreover, Between imperfect Knowledges there are an infinite number of
Degrees, and even all these Knowledges are only imperfect in relation to the
more perfect ones: For instance, We perfectly know that Paris is greater than
the Royal Place; and that Knowledge is not imperfect, but in relation to an
exact Knowledge, according to which we should justly know how much Paris is
bigger than the place it includes.

Thus there are Questions of many sorts. 1. There are some in which we seek the
perfect Knowledge of all exact Relations, that two or many things have between
themselves.

2. There are some, in which we enquire after the perfect Knowledge of some
exact Relation between two or many things.

3. There are some, in which we seek a perfect Knowledge of some Relation that
is very near exact, which is between two or more things.

4. And some, wherein we only try to know a Relation which is sufficiently
rambling and indetermined.

It is plain, 1. That to resolve Questions of the first Kind, and perfectly to
know all the exact Relations of Magnitude and Quality that is between two or
many things, we must have distinct Idea's which perfectly represent them, and
compare these things all possible ways. We may, for instance, resolve all
Questions which tend to discover the exact Relations which are between 2 and 8,
because 2 and 8 being exactly known, we may compare them together in all
necessary manners, to discover their exact Relations of Magnitude or Quality:
We may know that 8 is Quadruple of 2, that 8 and 2 are even Numbers, and that 8
and 2 are not Squares.

It is clear in the second place, That to resolve Questions of the second Kind,
and exactly to discover any Relation of Magnitude or Quality which is between
two or many things, it is necessary, and it will be sufficient to know very
distinctly the Superficies of them, according to which we must compare them, to
discover the Relation we seek: For instance, To resolve any Question which
tends to the discovering some exact Relation between 4 and 16, as that 4 and 16
are even Numbers and Squares, it is sufficient to know exactly that 4 and 16
may be divided into half without a Fraction, and that both are the Product of a
Number multiplied by it self, and it is useless to examine what their true
Magnitude is: For it is evident, To know the exact Relation of Quality which is
between things, it is sufficient to have a very distinct Idea of their Quality,
without thinking any thing of their Magnitude; and that to know their exact
Relations of Magnitude, it sufficies to know exactly their Magnitude without
enquiring after their true Quality.

It is plain in the third place, That to resolve Questions of the third Kind,
and to know any Relation that is almost exact, between two or more things, it
is sufficient to know pretty near the Superficies or sides thereof, according
to which we must compare them, to discover the approaching Relation that we
seek, whether it be of Magnitude or Quality. For instance, I can evidently know
that 8 is greater than 2, because I can know very near the true Magnitude of
the 8. But I cannot know how much the 8 exceeds 2, because I cannot exactly
know the true Magnitude of 8.

Lastly, It is plain, That to resolve Questions of the fourth kind, and
discover their trifling and undetermined Relations, it suffices to know things
after a manner proportionate to the need we have of comparing them, to discover
the Relations we seek. So that to resolve all sorts of Questions, it is not
always necessary, to have very distinct Idea's of their Terms, or to know
perfectly the things their Terms signify: But it is requisire to know them so
much the more exactly, as the Relations we endeavor to discover are more exact
and in greater Number: For as we have already showed, in imperfect Questions it
is enough to have imperfect Idea's of the things that we consider, to resolve
these Questions perfectly, or according to what they contain: And we likewise
resolve Questions very well, although we have no distinct Idea of the Terms
which express them; for when it is demanded if Fire is capable of melting Salt,
hardening Dirt, and evaporating Lead, and a thousand other like things, we
understand these Questions perfectly, and can very well resolve them, although
we have no distinct Idea of Fire, Salt, Dirt, etc. because those who make these
demands, would only know, if we have had any sensible Experience, that Fire has
produced these Effects: Wherefore, according to the Discoveries we have made by
our Senses, we can answer them in such a manner as may be capable of satisfying
them.

CHAP. VIII. An Application of the other Rules to particular Questions.
THere are Questions of two sorts, Simple and Compound: The Resolution of the
first depends alone upon the Attention of the Mind to the clear Idea's of the
Terms which express them: The others cannot be resolved but by the Comparison
of a third or many other Idea's; we cannot discover the unknown Relations,
which are expressed by the Terms of the Question, by immediately comparing the
Idea's of these Terms, for they cannot be joined or compared. We must therefore
have one or many mean Idea's, to be able to make necessary Comparisons to
discover these Relations; and exactly observe that these mean Idea's are clear
and distinct, in proportion as the Relations we endeavor to discover are more
exact and in greater Number.

This Rule is only a Consequence of the first, and is of equal Importance: For
if it is necessary to know exactly the Relations we compare, to have clear and
distinctly Idea's of them: For the same reason it is necessary to know well the
mean Idea's by which we pretend to make these Comparisons; since we must
distinctly know the Relation of Measure with each of the things that we
measure, to discover the Relations of them. For instance, When we suffer a
little light Vessel to swim freely with a Loadstone in it, if we turn toward
the North Pole of this Loadstone, another Loadstone that we hold in our Hands,
we shall immediately see the first Loadstone retire, as if it were compelled by
some violent Wind. And if we desire to know the Cause of this Effect.

It is plain, That to give a Reason for the Motion of this Loadstone, it is not
enough to know the Relations it has with the other; for although we should even
perfectly know all, we could not comprehend how these two Bodies could thrust
one another without meeting.

We must therefore examine what things we know distinctly to be capable
according to the Order of Nature of moving Bodies, since the Question is to
discover the Natural Cause of the Motion of the Loadstone, which is certainly a
Body: To that end we must not have recourse to any Quality, Form, or Entity, or
even of any Intelligence, that we do not clearly know to be capable of moving
Bodies: For we cannot certainly know, that Intelligences are the common Causes
of the Natural Motions of Bodies, nor even whether or no they can produce
Motion.

We know evidently, That it is a Law of Nature that Bodies should move each
other when they meet. We must then endeavor to explain the Motion of the
Loadstone, by the means of any body which meets it. It is true, that it may be
something else besides a Body which moves it; but if we have no distinct Idea
of this thing, we must not make use of it as a fit Mean, to discover what we
seek, nor to explain it to others. For it is not giving a Reason of an Effect,
to ascribe something as a Cause of it which no body conceives clearly: We must
not then trouble our selves too much, whether there is any other Natural Cause
of the Motion of Bodies than their Mutual Concurrence; but rather suppose that
there is none, and attentively consider what Body can meet and move this
Loadstone.

We discover at first sight, that it is not the Loadstone we hold in our Hands,
since it does not touch that which is moved: But because it is only moved at
the approach of that which we hold in our Hands, and is not moved of it self,
we ought to conclude, That although it is not the Loadstone in our Hands which
moves it, it must be some little Bodies which proceed from it, and which are
past by it toward the other Loadstone.

To discover these little Bodies, we must not open our Eyes and look near the
Loadstone, for the Senses would impose upon Reason, and it may be we should
judge that nothing proceeds from the Loadstone, because we cannot see any thing
go out from thence. It Is very probable we should forget that we do not see the
most impetuous Winds, nor many other Bodies which produce as extraordinary
Effects: We must keep firm to this clear and most intelligible Mean, and
carefully examine all the Effects of the Loadstone, that we may discover how it
can continually emit these little Bodies without being diminished. For the
Experiments that have been made show, that these little Bodies that go out on
one side, immediately enter in again at the other; and they will serve to
explain all Difficulties that can be brought against the manner of resolving
this Question. But it must be well observed, That we ought not to abandon this
Mean, although even we could not answer some Difficulties proceeding from our
Ignorance in several things.

If we have not a Mind to examine from whence it is that Loadstones are
repelled, when we oppose the same Poles to each other; but rather the Reason
why they approach and join to each other, when we present the North Pole of the
one to the South Pole of the other, the Question would be more difficult, and
one way alone would not be sufficient to resolve it. It is not enough to know
exactly the Relations that are between the Poles of these two Loadstones, nor
to have recourse to the Means we have taken for the precedent Question; for on
the contrary, this Method seems to hinder the Effect whose Cause we would seek.
Neither must we have recourse to any thing that we do not clearly know to be
the natural and common Causes of Corporeal Motions, nor deliver our selves from
the Difficulty of the Question, by a rambling and undeterminate Idea of an
Occult Quality in Loadstones, by which they attract each other; for the Mind
can conceive but one Body, as having a sufficient Power to attract another.

The Impenetrability of Bodies makes us clearly conceive, that Motion may be
communicated by Impulsion; and Experience proves plainly, that it is
communicated by this means: But there is neither Reason nor Experience which
clearly demonstrates the Motion of Attraction; for in the Experiments which
seem most proper to prove this kind of Motion, we visibly perceive, when we
find the true and certain Cause, that what appears to be done by Attraction, is
only performed by Impulsion. So that we must not keep to any other
Communication of Motion, but that which is made by Impulsion: Since this way is
certain and undoubted, and there is at least some Obscurity in the others which
we cannot imagine. But although we could demonstrate, that in things purely
Corporeal there are other Principles of Motion than the meeting of Bodies; we
could not reasonably reject this, we ought even to keep to it before all
others; since it is the most clear and evident, and appears so undoubted, that
we are not afraid to affirm, it has been received by all People in all Ages.

Experience shows us, that a Loadstone that swims freely upon the Water, draws
near to one which we hold in our Hands, when we present different Poles; we
must then conclude that it is pushed toward it. But as it is not the Loadstone
we hold that pushes that which swims, since that which swims draws nigh to that
which we hold, and nevertheless that which swims would not be moved, if we did
not present that to it which we hold in our Hands: It is evident, that at least
we must recur to both Methods to explain this Questoin, if we will resolve it
by the received Principle of the Communication of Motion.

diagram representing the communication of motion in lodestones

The Loadstone c draws near to the Loadstone C: Therefore the Air which
encompasses it pushes it, since there is no other Body which can push it; and
that is the first way. The Loadstone c approaches only at the presence of the
Loadstone C; therefore it is necessary that the Loadstone C should determine the
Air to push the Loadstone c; and that is the second way. It is evident that
both these ways are absolutely necessary; so that the Difficulty is now reduced
to join them together, which may be done two ways, either in beginning with
something known in the Air which encompasses the Loadstone c, or by beginning
with something known in the Loadstone C.

If we would know that the parts of Air, like those of all fluid bodies, are in
continual Agitation, we cannot doubt but they still strike against the
Loadstone c which they surround; but because they strike it equally on all
sides, they do not push it more on one side that another, whilst there is an
equal quantity of Air on both sides. Things being thus, it is easy to judge
that the Loadstone C prevents there being so much of this Air as we speak of,
toward a as toward b; but that can be done only by dispersing some other
bodies in the space which is between C and c. There must then some little
bodies go out from the Loadstones to fill this space. So these little bodies
chasing away the Air near a, the Loadstone c is less pushed on that side than
the other; and consequently must approach to the Loadstone C, since all bodies
move to the side where they are least pushed.

But if the Loadstone c had not many Pores about the Pole a, fit to receive the
little bodies which go out from the Pole B of the other Loadstone, and too
small to receive those of Air: It is plain, that these little bodies being more
agitated than Air, since they are to chase it from between the Loadstones, they
would push the Loadstone c, and remove it from C. Thus since the Loadstone c
approaches to or deviates from C, when we present its different Poles, it is
necessary to conclude, that the Poles a and b of the Loadstone c, are filled
with different Pores: Otherwise the little bodies which are emitted from the
Loadstone C, would not freely pass without pushing the Loadstone c by the side
a, and would not be repulsed by the side b: What I say of one of the
Loadstones, must also be understood of the other.

It is evident, that we always learn something by this way of reasoning upon
clear Idea's and undoubted Principles: For we have discovered, that the Air
which encompasses the Loadstone c, was driven from between the Loadstones by
Bodies which are continually emitted from their Poles' which find free passage
on one side and are stopped on the other. And if we would discover near what the
Magnitude and Figure of the Pores of this Loadstone are, through which these
little bodies pass, we must yet make other Experiments, but they would lead us
to subjects which we intend not to treat of. Upon these Questions we may
consult the Principles of M. Descartes: I shall only answer an Objection which
immediately offers it self, from whence is it that these little bodies cannot
re-enter by the same Pores they came out; that besides a certain Figure,
representing the Spiral Channels of a Screw, which we may suppose to be in the
Pores producing this Effect, the Inflexion of the little Branches which compose
these Pores, may in one Sense obey the little Bodies which pass across them,
and in another Sense make them rough, and stop their passage: So that we need
not be too much surprised at the difference of the Poles of the Loadstone, for
this difference may be accounted for many ways; and all the difficulty is,
amongst several Causes to discover the true one.

If we had endeavored to resolve the Question we have just now examined, in
beginning with the Corpuscles which we suppose to be emitted from the Loadstone
C, we should have found the same thing: And we should likewise have discovered,
that the Air is composed of an infinite Number of Particles which are in
continual Agitation, for without it 'twould be impossible that the Loadstone c
should approach to the Loadstone C. I shall not stay to explain this, because
it is not difficult.

I will give you here a Question more compound than the foregoing, in which
many Rules must be made use of, it is demanded what can be the Natural and
Mechanical Cause of the Motion of our Members.

The Idea of Natural Cause is clear and distinct, if we understand it, as I
have explained it in the precedent Question; but the Term of the Motion of our
Members, is equivocal and confused; for there are many sorts of these Motions,
some of the Will, Natural and Convulsive ones. There are likewise different
Members in Man's Body: So that according to the first Rule, I must ask of which
of these Motions it is that they would know the Cause: But if the Question is
left indeterminate, so that I may make use of any I shall choose, I would
examine the Question after this manner.

And first, consider the Properties of these Motions, and because I immediately
discover, that Voluntary Motions are commonly more readily performed, than the
Convulsive ones; I conclude from thence, that their Cause is different:
Therefore I can, and ought to examine the Question by Parts; for it would
appear to be of too long a Discussion.

I would oblige my self therefore, first, to consider Voluntary Motion; and
because we have many Parts which concur to this Motion, I would first consider
the Arm, as composed of many Muscles, which have generally some Action, when we
lift a Weight up, or when we differently move Bodies; but I keep only to one,
supposing the rest to be formed very near after the same manner. I instruct my
self of its Composition, by the Help of some Book of Anatomy, or rather by a
Sensible Sight of its Fibers and Tendons, which I get some able Anatomist to
dissect for me, to whom I make all the Demands which shall afterward produce
in my Mind some Method for me to find what I seek.

Considering therefore all things attentively, I cannot doubt but the Principle
of the Motion of my Arm depends upon the Contraction of the Muscles which
compose it. And if I have not a mind to perplex my self with too many things: I
may suppose, according to the common Opinion; that this Contraction is produced
by the Animal Spirits which fill these Muscles, and by this means shorten them;
the whole Question then, which respects Voluntary Motion, will be reduced, to
know how the few Animal Spirits, which are contained in an Arm, can suddenly
swell the Muscles, according to the Orders of the Will, with a sufficient Force
to lift a Burden of an Hundred Weight or more.

When we consider this with any Application, the first means that presents it
self to the Imagination, is commonly that of some violent and quick
Fermentation, like to that of Gunpowder, or certain Liquors filled with
Volatile Salt, when they are mixed with those that are Acid, or full of fixed
Salt. A little Gunpowder, when lighted, is capable of raising not only an
Hundred Pound Weight, but a Tower, and even a Mountain: Earthquakes, which
overthrow Towns, and shake whole Provinces, are also produced by Spirits, which
are kindled under Ground, much like Gunpowder. Thus, supposing in the Arm such
a Cause of the Fermentation and Dilatation of Spirits; we may say, that it is
the Principle of the Power that Men have to perform such quick and violent
Motions.

However, as we ought to distrust this means, which enters into the Mind only
by the Senses, and whereof we have no clear and evident Knowledge; we must not
too easily admit of it: For indeed, it is not sufficient to give a Reason of
the Force and Quickness of our Motions by a Comparison, since this Reason is
confused and imperfect: For we must here explain a Voluntary Motion, and
Fermentation is not Voluntary. The Blood excessively ferments in Fevers, and
we cannot prevent it. The Spirits are inflamed and agitated in the Brain, and
their Agitation diminishes not according to our Desires. When a Man moves his
Arm after diverse Ways, according to this Explanation, he must make a Million
of great and small, quick and slow Fermentations that begin (and which is still
more difficult to explain according to this Supposition) that end in the same
Moment he wills it. These Fermentations must not dissipate all their Matter,
and this Matter must be always ready to take Fire. When a Man walks Ten Miles,
how many Thousand Times must the Muscles, which he uses in walking, be filled
and emptied? And what a vast Quantity of Spirits would be required if
Fermentation should dissipate and destroy them at every Step. This Reason is
therefore imperfect, to explain the Motions of our Bodies which entirely depend
upon our Will.

It is evident, that the present Question consists in this Mechanical Problem.
By Pneumatick Machines, to find the means of overcoming such or such Force,
suppose a Hundred Weight, by another as small as we will, suppose the Weight of
an Ounce; and that the Application of this little Force shall produce its
desired Effect, and depend upon the Will. Now this Problem is easily resolved,
and the Demonstration of it is clear.

We may resolve it by a Vessel which has two Orifices, one of which is a little
more than 1600. Times greater than the other, in which let there be inserted
the Tubes of two equal Bellows, and only apply a Force 1600 Times greater than
the other, to the Mouth of the greater Bellows; for then the Force of 1600
Times the less, shall overcome the greater. The Demonstration of it is clear
from Mechanics, since the Powers are not exactly in Reciprocal Proportion with
the Orifices, and the Relation of the least Force to the least Orifice, is
greater than the Relation of greater Force to the greater Orifice.

But to resolve this Problem by a Machine which represents the Effect of the
Muscles, better than this Instance already mentioned. Blow up a Football and
let there be a great Stone of 5 or 6 Hundred Weight laid upon it when half
filled with Wind, or place the Ball upon a Table with a Board over it, and a
Stone over that, or let some heavy Man sit upon it, holding himself by
something that he may be able to resist the swelling of the Football. For if
one blow in the Football once only with his Mouth, it will raise up the Stone,
which presses it down, or the Man who sits upon it; provide a the Orifice, by
which the Wind enters the Football, have a Sucker to hinder it from going out
whilst the Person takes Breath. The Reason of this is, that the Orifice in the
Ball is so small, or ought to be supposed so small, in Relation to the whole
Ball which is compressed by the Stone, that a small Force is capable to
overpower a great one by this method.

If we consider also, that ones Breath is capable of pushing a Ball of Lead
very violently by the means of a long Tube, because the Force of the Breath
dissipates not, but continually renews: we may visibly discover, that the
necessary Proportion between the Orifice and Capacity of the Ball, being
supposed, ones Breath only may easily overcome a very great Force.

If then we conceive, that all the Muscles, or each of the Fibers which compose
them, have like this Football, a Capacity fit to receive the Animal Spirits;
that the Pores, by which the Spirits insinuate themselves, are still smaller in
Proportion than the Neck of a Bladder, or Orifice of a Ball; that the Spirits
are kept in, and pushed forward in the Nerves, like Air in Tubes, and that the
Spirits are more agitated than the Breath of the Lungs, and pushed with more
Force in the Muscles, than in Balls: We shall discover, that the Motion of the
Spirits, which are dispersed through the Muscles, can overcome the Force of the
most weighty Burdens we can bear; and that if we cannot carry the heaviest,
the Defect of the Power proceeds not so much from the Spirits, as that of the
Fibers and Membranes that compose the Muscles, which would break if we made too
great an Effort. Besides, if we observed, that by the Laws of the Union of the
Soul and Body, the Motions of these Spirits, as to their Determinations, depend
upon the Will of Man, we should plainly see that the Motions of the Arms must
be voluntary.

It is true, we remove our Arms with so much Quickness, that at first it seems
incredible, that the Effusion of the Spirits in the Muscles which compose them,
should be quick enough to produce such a Motion. But we must consider, that
these Spirits are extremely agitated, always ready to go from one Muscle to
another, and that there is not need of many to swell them up so little as is
necessary, to move them only, or when we lift any thing that is very light from
the Ground; for when we have any thing heavy to lift we cannot do it so
speedily. Burdens being heavy, will much swell and stretch the Muscles. To
swell them up after this manner, requires more Spirits than there is in the
adjoining or opposite Muscles. There must therefore be some little Time to
collect these Spirits, in a Quantity sufficient to resist this Weight: So that
those which are laden cannot run, and those that take any weighty thing from
the Ground, cannot do it with so much Haste as those who take up a Straw.

If we further reflect, that those that have more Heat, or a little Wine in
their Heads, are much quicker than others; as amongst Animals, those whose
Spirits are more agitated, as Birds move more swiftly than they that have their
Blood cold, like Frogs: And that even amongst them there are some, as the
Camelion, the Tortoise, and other Infects, whose Spirits are so little
agitated, that their Muscles fill not faster than a little Football which we
should blow up. If we well consider all these things, it may be, we might think
the Explanation already given fit to be received.

But although this Part of the proposed Question which regards Voluntary
Motions, is sufficiently resolved: We must not however, affirm that it is
wholly so, and that there is nothing more in our Bodies, which contributes to
these Motions, than what we have attributed to it; for there is probably in our
Muscles, a thousand Springs which facilitate these Motions, and will be
eternally unknown to those, even who make the strictest Scrutinies into the
Works of God.

The second Part of the Question which must be examined, respects Natural
Motions, or those sort of Motions which have nothing extraordinary, as the
Convulsive have; but that are absolutely necessary to the Preservation of our
Machine, which consequently depend not entirely upon our Wills.

I consider then first, with all the Attention I am capable, what the Motions
are which have these Conditions, and if they are wholly alike; but because I
immediately discover, that almost all of them differ one from another, not to
perplex my self with too many things, I only insist upon the Motion of the
Heart. This Part is the most known, and its Motions most sensible. I then
examine its Structure, and amongst many others, observe two things. The first,
that it is composed of Fibers like other Muscles; the second, that there is two
very considerable Cavities in it. I therefore judge, that its Motions may be
performed by the Animal Spirits, because it is a Muscle, and that the Blood
there ferments and dilates its self, since there are Cavities there. The first
of these Determinations is founded upon what I have already said; and the
second, because the Heart is much hotter than all the other Parts of the Body;
as it is that which disperses Heat with the Blood into all our Members, that
these two Cavities could neither have been formed nor preferved, but only by
the Dilatation of the Blood; and that thus they are serviceable to the Cause
which produced them. I can then give a sufficient Reason for the Motion of the
Heart, by the Spirits which agitate it, and the Blood which dilates it when
this Blood is fermented: For although the Cause I bring for its Motion, should
not perhaps be true, yet it appears certain to me, that it is sufficient to
produce it.

It Is true, that the Principle of the Fermentation or Dilatation of the
Liquors, probably is not enough known to all that shall read this Book, to
pretend to have shown an Effect, when we have in general discovered that its
Cause is Fermentation; but we must not resolve all particular Questions by
going back unto the first Causes. It is not because we cannot by this
demonstrate, and discover the true System upon which all particular Effects
depend, provided we stop only at clear Idea's: But that this manner of
Philosophizing is neither the most exact nor shortest.

To explain what I mean, we must know there are Questions of two Sorts. In the
first we try to discover the Nature and Properties of something: In the others
we only desire to know if such a thing has, or has not such a Propriety, or
if we know it has such a Propriety, we would only know the Cause of it.

To resolve Questions of the first Kind, we must consider things in their
Original, and always conceive them produced by the most Simple and most Natural
Ways. To resolve the rest, a very different manner must be taken: They must be
done by Suppositions, and we must examine whether these Suppositions make us
guilty of any Absurdity, or if they conduce to any Truth clearly known.

For Instance, we would discover what are the Properties of the Cycloid, or of
some of the Conick Sections: These Lines must be considered in their
Generation, and formed according to the most Simple and least perplexed Ways;
for it is the best and shortest Method to discover the Nature and Properties of
them. We easily see that the Subtense of the Cycloid is equal to the Circle
which forms it; and if we do not easily discover many Properties by this means,
it is because the Circular Line which serves to form it, is not sufficiently
known. But for these Lines, purely Mathematical, or such whose Relations we can
know more exactly, as Conick Sections, we may discover a great Number of their
Properties, by considering them in their Generation. We must only observe, that
as they may be generated by a Regular Motion several Ways; so all Sorts of
Generations are not equally proper to enlighten the Mind, but the most Simple
are the best; and that it often happens, that certain particular Methods are
more proper than others, to demonstrate some particular Properties.

But if the Question is not in general to discover the Properties of a thing,
but to know if a thing has such a Property: Then it must be supposed that it
has it effectively, and examine attentively, what must follow this
Supposition; whether it leads to a manifest Absurdity, or else to some
undoubted Truth, which may serve as a means to discover what we enquire after.
And it is that Method Geometricians make use of to resolve their Problems. They
suppose as done, what they seek for, and examine what must happen from thence,
and attentively consider the Relations which result from their Suppositions.
They represent all these Relations which include the Condition of the Problem
by Equations; and afterward reduce these Equations, according to their Rules,
so that what is unknown, they find equal to one or many things perfectly known.

If the Question then is in general, to discover the Nature of Fire, and the
different Fermentations, which are the most universal Causes of Natural
Effects: I say, that the shortest and most secure Way, is to examine it in its
Original. We must consider the Formation of the most agitated Body, the Motion
of which is dispersed into those that ferment. By clear Idea's, and the most
Simple Way, we must examine what Motion is capable of producing in Matter. And
because Fire and different Fermentations are very general things, and which
consequently depend upon few Causes; it will not be requisite long to consider
what Matter is capable of when it is animated by Motion, to discover the Nature
of Fermentation is its Principle; and at the same time we shall learn many
other things absolutely necessary to the Knowledge of Physics: Whereas if in
this Question, we would reason by Suppositions, we should go back to the first
Causes, to the Laws of Nature, according to which all things are formed; and
suppose many false things, which would be of no Use.

We might soon discover, that the Cause of Fermentation is the Motion of an
Invisible Matter, which communicates its self to the Parts of that which acts
it; for we know plain enought, that Fire, and the different Fermentation of
Bodies, consist in their Agitation, and that by the Laws of Nature. Bodies
immediately receive their Motion only by their meeting with some others more
agitated. Thus we may discover, that there is an Invisible Matter, whose
Agitation is communicated to Visible Bodies. But it would be Morally
impossible, by way of Supposition, to discover how it is done: And it is not
near so difficult to discover, when we examine the Formation of the Elements,
or some Bodies, whereof there is a great Number of the same Nature, as is
evident by Mr. Descartes's System.

The third Part of the Question, which is of Convulsive Motions will not be
very difficult to resolve, provided we suppose in Bodies Animal Spirits,
capable of some Fermentation, and of Humors sufficiently penetrating, to
insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Nerves, by which the Spirits
disperse themselves through the Muscles, provided also we do not pretend to
determine what the true Disposition of the Invisible Parts is, which contribute
to these Convulsive Motions.

When we have separated a Muscle from the rest of the Body, and hold it by the
Extremities, we Sensibly perceive that it makes all its Effort to contract it
self when we prick it in the Middle. It is very probable, that this depends
upon the Construction of the Imperceptible Parts that compose it, which like so
many Springs, are determined to certain Motions by this Pricking. But who can
affirm they have found the true Disposition of the Parts, which serve to
produce this Motion; or who can give an undoubted Demonstration of it?
Certainly it would appear impossible, although it may be through the Power of
Thought, we can imagine a Construction of the Muscles, fit to perform all the
Motions we see them capable of. Yet must we not think to determine what is the
true Construction of the Muscles: But because we cannot reasonably doubt, that
there are Spirits Susceptible of some Fermentation, by the Mixture of some
Subtle Matter, and that the sharp and pungent Humors may insinuate themselves
into the Nerves, we may suppose it.

To resolve the Question proposed, we must first examine how many Sorts of
Convulsive Motions there are; and because the Number of them appears
indetermined, we may keep to the chief, whose Causes seem to be different. We
must consider the Parts wherein they are performed, the Diseases which precede
and follow them: If they are produced with or without Pain, and particularly
how quick and violent they are; for some of them are performed very quick and
violent, others with Quickness without Violence, and some again without
Quickness or Violence. There are some of them which continually end and being
again; some which keep the Parts stiff and without Motion for some Time; and
some again which entirely take away Persons Senses, and dis^igure them.

All these things considered, it is not difficult in general to explain, how the
Convulsive Motions may be produced, after what we have already said of Natural
and Voluntary Motions. For if we conceive that there is some Matter capable of
fermenting the Spirits, mixed with those that are contained in a Muscle; this
Muscle will be swelled up, and shall in this part produce a Convulsive Motion.

If we can easily resist this Motion, it will be a sign that the Nerves are not
stopped by any Humor, since we can empty the Muscle of the Spirits which are
entered there, and determine them to swell up the opposite Muscle. But if we
cannot, we must conclude that the sharp and penetrating Humors have at least
some share in this Motion. It may even sometimes happen, that these Humors are
the sole Cause of these Convulsive Motions: So they may determine the Course of
the Spirits to certain Museles, by opening the Passages which carry them
thither, and shutting up some others: Besides, they may contract the Tendons
and Fibers, by penetrating their Pores.

When a very heavy Weight hangs at the bottom of a Cord, we can raise it much,
if we only wet the Cord; because the Particles of Water insinuate themselves
like so many little Wedges between the Threads that the Cord is composed of,
and shorten it by making it thicker. So the penetrating and sharp Humors
insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Nerves, contract them, stretch the
parts which are united to them, and produce Convulsive Motions in the Body,
which are extreme slow, violent and painful; and often for some considerable
time, leave a very great Distortion in the Part.

For the Convulsive Motions which are speedily performed, they are caused by
the Spirits; but it is not necessary that these Spirits should receive any
Fermentation; it is enough if the Conduits they pass through are more open on
one side than the other.

When all the parts of the Body are in their Natural Situation, the Animal
Spirits equally and swiftly disperse themselves every where in respect to the
Exigency of the Machine, and Faithfully execute the Orders of the Will. But
when the Humors trouble the Disposition of the Brain, and change or diversely
move the Openings of the Nerves, or by penetrating into the Muscles, agitate
their Springs; the Spirits disperse themselves through the Parts after new
manner, and produce extraordinary Motions there without the consent of the Will.

Yet may we sometimes by a powerful Resistance prevent any of these Motions,
and even by degrees diminish the Traces which produced them, when the Habit is
perfectly formed. Those who take care of them, may very easily hinder
themselves from making distorted Faces; or from assuming an unpleasant Air or
indecent Posture, if the Body be indisposed. These things may be overcome
although they are confirmed by a long habit, but with much difficulty; for they
should always be resisted in their original, before the course of the Spirits
has made a way too difficult to be stopped.

The Cause of these Motions lies sometimes in the agitated Muscle, and is some
Humor that pricks, or some Spirits which ferment there. But we must judge it
to be in the Brain, chiefly when the Convulsions agitate not only one or two
parts of the Body in particular, but almost all of it; and that in many
Distempers which change the Natural Constitution of the Blood and Spirits.

It is true, that one Nerve only having sometimes different Branches, which are
sufficiently dispersed through the remote parts of the Body, as through the
Face and Bowels; it often happens that the Convulsion having its Cause in one
part, in which some of these Branches insinuate themselves, can communicate it
self to them, or the other correspondent Branches, without the Brains being any
cause of it, or the Spirits corrupted.

But when the Convulsive Motions are common to most parts of the Body, we must
needs say, that either the Spirits ferment after an extraordinary manner, or
that the Order and Disposition of the parts of the Brain is troubled; or else,
that both these things happen together. I will stay no longer upon this
Question, for it becomes so compounded, and depends upon so many things, when
we desecend to Particulars, that it cannot easily ferve to explain those Rules
we have given.

There is no Science which furnishes us with more Examples, fit to show the
Usefulness of these Rules, than Geometry and chiefly Algebra, for in these two
Sciences they are continually used. Geometry clearly shows the necessity there
always is of beginning with the most simple things, which include the feweset
Relations: If always examines these Relations by Measures evidently known: It
takes away whatever is useless in the discovery of them, divides the Questions
into parts, ranks these parts, and examines them in order. In short, The only
Defect in this Science, is as I have before observed, that it has not a very
proper Method to abridge the Idea's and Relations we have discovered. So that
although it regulates the Imagination, and makes the Mind become exact, it does
not much increase its Extension, nor render it capable of discovering very
compound Truths. But Algebra continually teaches us to abridge Idea's and their
Relations, after the shortest Method in the World, and extremely augments the
Capacity of the Mind; for we can conceive nothing, how Compound soever, in the
Relations of Magnitude, that the Mind cannot in times discover by its
assistance, when we once know the way we must take.

The fifth and following Rules, which concern the way of abridging Idea's, only
respect this Science; for in other Sciences we have no commodious way of
abridging them; so that I shall not stay to explain them. Those that have a
great Inclination for the Mathematics, and will give to their Mind all the
Force and Extension it is capable of; and thus put themselves into a Condition
of discovering, without a Tutor, an infinite number of known Truths, will, if
they seriously apply themselves to Algebra, discover, that this Science is so
useful in an Enquiry after Truth, because it observes the Rules we have
prescribed. But by Algebra, I mean chiefly that which Descartes and some others
have made use of.

Before I conclude, I will give an Example on which I shall insist a little
longer, that we may be the better able to see what use may be drawn from it. In
this Example I will represent the Advances of a Mind, which would examine a
very important Question, and endeavor to deliver it self from its Prejudices.
I shall at first make it fall into some Error, that it may recollect what I
have said elsewhere; now its Attention at last conducting it to the Truth
enquired after, I make it speak positively, like one who pretends to have
resolved the Question he has examined.

CHAP. IX. The last Example to show the Usefulness of this Work, in which the
Cause of the Union of the Parts of Bodies, and also the Rules of the
Communication of Motion, are examined.
BOdies are united together after three different ways, by Continuity,
Contiguity, and a third way, which has no particular name, because it rarely
happens, and which I call by the general Term of Union.

By Continuity, or the Cause of it, I mean that I know not what, which links
together the Parts of a Body so strongly, that they cannot easily be separated,
and which we look upon as making altogether but one whole.

By Contiguity, I mean that I know not what, which makes me suppose two Bodies
touching after such a manner so that there is nothing between them; but which I
judge not strictly united, because I can easily separate them.

By this third Term Union, I mean that I know not what, which is the cause that
woe Glasses, or two Marbles, whose Surfaces having been polished by rubbing one
against another, are joined together in such a manner, that although we can
very easily separate them by making them slip off one another, we shall
nevertheless have some trouble to do it by any other Method.

Now this is not Continuity, since these two Glasses or Marbles being united
after this manner, are not conceived as making but one Body, because in one
Sense we can separate them so easily. Nor is it simply Contiguity, although it
comes very near it, because these two pieces of Glass or Marble are strictly
enough united, and even much more than the Parts of soft and liquid Bodies, as
those of Butter and Water.

These Terms thus explained, we must afterward enquire into the Cause which
unites Bodies, and the Differences between Continuity, Contiguity, and the
Union of Bodies, according to the Sense I have determined. I first seek the
Cause of Continuity, or that I know not what, which keeps the Parts of a Body
so strictly united together, that some Force must be used to separate them, and
which we look upon together as making one whole. I hope this Cause being found,
we shall have no great Difficulty to discover the rest.

It seems now necessary to me, that this I know not what, that ties even the
smallest Parts of a piece of Iron together which I hold in my Hand, should be
something very powerful, since I must use a great Force to break off one little
part of it. But I deceive my self, May not this Difficulty that I find in
breaking the least piece of Iron, proceed from my Weakness, and not the
resistance of the Iron? For I remember that I have formerly used more Violence
than I do now, to break a piece of Iron like that I hold in my Hand; and if I
fall Sick, perhaps I could not even do it by the utmost Power I could use. I
therefore see plainly, I must not absolutely judge of Firmness, whereby the
parts of Iron are knit together, by the Endeavors I make to dis-unite them: I
must only judge that they keep very strongly together in relation to my
Weakness, or that they keep more strongly together than the parts of my Flesh,
since the Sensations of Pain that I have whilst I make too great Efforts,
advertises me that I shall rather dis-unite the parts of my Body than those of
Iron.

I discover then, that as I am not absolutely Strong, or Weak, Iron or other
Bodies, are not absolutely hard or flexible, but only in relation to the Cause
which acts upon them; and that the Efforts I make cannot serve me as a Rule to
measure the greatness of the Force, that must be employed to overcome the
Resistance and Hardness of Iron. For Rules ought to be invariable, and these
Efforts change according to time, the abundance of actual Spirits, and hardness
of my Flesh; since I cannot always produce the same Effects, by using the same
Endeavors.

This Reflection delivers me from a Prejudice that I had, which made me imagine
the Links were strong which united the parts of Bodies, which Links perhaps are
nothing at all; and I hope it will not be useless to me in the Consequence; for
I have a strange Inclination to judge of every thing in relation to my self,
and to follow the Impressions of my Senses, which I would more industriously
avoid. But to proceed.

After having thought some time, and with some application enquired the cause
of this strict Union, without having discovered any thing of it, I find my self
carried by my Negligence and Nature to judge with many others, that it is the
Form of Bodies which preserves the Union between their Parts, or the Amity and
Inclination they have for their likeness; for there is nothing more commodious
than to suffer our selves sometimes to be seduced, and so to become Learned at
little Cost.

But since I will not believe any thing I do not know, I must not suffer my
self to be thus overcome by my own Idleness, nor give my self up to bare
Appearances. Let us quit therefore these Forms and Inclinations, whereof we
have no distinct and particular Idea's, but only confused and general ones,
that it may be we form only in relation to our Nature, and even in the
Existence of which many Persons, and perhaps whole Nations agree not.

It seems to me, that I see the Cause of this strict Union of Parts which
compose hard Bodies, without admitting of any other thing than what all the
World grants to be in them, or at least all that the World conceives distinctly
to be there; for every one distinctly conceives, that all Bodies are or may be
composed of little Particles. Thus it may be there are some of them which are
crooked and branched, and like little Links capable of holding others strongly
together, or else that they intermix all their Branches, so that we cannot
easily dis-unite them.

I have a great Mind to permit my self to espouse this Thought, and so much the
more, as that I see the visible Parts of great Bodies hold and unite themselves
together after this manner. But I cannot too much distrust my Prejudices and
the Impression of my Senses: I must therefore yet examine the Matter more
closely, and see the Reason why the smallest and utmost Parts of Solid Bodies,
in a word, even the Parts of each of these Links hold together; for they cannot
be united by other Links yet smaller, since I suppose them solid: Or else, If I
say they are united after this manner, they may reasonably demand what shall
unite these others together, and so on ad infinitum.

diagram representing presumed atomic links

So that now the Difficulty of the Question is to know, how the parts of these
little Links, or branched parts, can be so strictly united together as they
are, A for instance with B, which I suppose parts of a little Link. Or else,
which is the same thing, Bodies being so much the harder, as they are more
solid, and have fewer Pores, the Question now is, to know how the parts of a
Column, composed of a Matter which has no Pore, can be strongly joined
together, and compose a very hard Body; for we cannot say that the parts of
this Column is held by little Links, since being without Pores they have no
particular Figure.

I find my self yet extremely inclined to say, that this Column is naturally
hard, or else that the little Links, whereof hard Bodies are composed, are
Atoms, whose parts cannot be divided, as being the essential and utmost parts
of Bodies, which are essentially crooked, or branched, or of some perplexed
Figure.

But I freely confess that this is not to explain the Difficulty, and that
quitting the Prejudices and Illusions of my Senses, I should be in the wrong to
recur to an abstracted Form, and embrace a Logical Phantom for the cause I
seek: I mean, I should be in the wrong, to conceive as something real and
distinct, a rambling Idea of the Nature of Essence, which expresses only what
we know: And thus to take an abstracted and universal Form, as a Physical Cause
of a real Effect. For there are two things which I cannot too much distrust;
the first is, The Impression of my Senses; and the other, The Facility I have
to receive abstracted Natures, and general Logical Idea's, for those which are
Real and Particular: I remember I have been many times seduced by these two
Principal Errors.

But to return to the Difficulty, It is not possible for me to conceive, how
these little Links should be indivisible by their Nature and Essence, nor
consequently how they should be Inflexible; since on the contrary I conceive
them very Divisible, and necessarily divisible by their Nature and Essence: For
the part A is most certainly a Substance as well as B; and consequently it is
clear, that A can exist without B, since Substances can exist one without
another; because otherwise they would not be Substances.

We cannot say that A is not a Substance; for it is plain it is not a bare
Mode, and all Beings are either Modes or Substances. So since A is not a Mode
it is a Substance, then it may exist without B, and much more may the part A
exist separately from B. So that this Link is divisible in A and in B.

Moreover, If this Link was Indivisible, or crooked by Nature and Essence, it
would be quite contrary to what we Experience, for then we could not break any
body. Let us suppose as before, that a piece of Iron is composed of many Links,
which is intermixed one in another, whereof A, a and B, b, are two of them: I
say that we cannot unlink them, and consequently that we could not break this
Iron: For to break it, we must bend the Links that compose it, which are
nevertheless supposed naturally and essentially inflexible.

And if we do not suppose them inflexible, but only indivisible by their
Nature, the Supposition will be of no use to resolve the Question: For then the
Difficulty would be to know, why these little Links do not obey our Efforts
when we try to bend a Bar of Iron. Yet if we suppose them not Inflexible, we
must not suppose them Indivisible; for if the parts of these Links can change
their Situation one in respect to another, it is plain that they may be
separated; since there is no reason why, if one part could remove it self a
little from the other, it could not be absolutely done. Then whether we suppose
these Links Inflexible or Indivisible, we cannot by this means resolve the
Question: For if we suppose them only Indivisible, we must without trouble
break a bit of Iron: And if we suppose them Inflexible, it will be impossible
to break them, since the little Links which compose the Iron being embarrassed
one in another, it will be impossible to unlink them. Let us try then to
resolve the Difficulty by clear and undoubted Principles, and to find the
reason why this little Link has these two parts A and B, so firmly united.

I see evidently that it is necessary to divide the Subject of my Meditation
into parts, that I may examine it more exactly, and with less Intention of
Mind, since I have not been able immediately with one simple view, and all the
Attention I am capable of, to discover what I would find. And it is what I might
have done from the beginning; for when the Subjects that we consider are a
little intricate, it is always the best way to examine them in parts, and not
fatigue our selves unusefully upon false Hopes of meeting luckily with the
Truth.

What I enquire after, is the cause of the strict Union that is between the
little Particles which compose the Link A B. Now there is only three things
that I distinctly conceive capable of being the cause which I seek, viz. The
parts of this little Link, the Will of the Author of Nature, or lastly, the
Invisible Bodies which surround these little Links. I might yet bring for the
Cause of these things, the Form of Bodies, the Qualities of Hardness, or some
occult one, the Simpathy which would be between the Particles of the same kind,
etc. but because I have not a distinct Idea of these fine things, I neither
ought, nor can maintain my Arguments from them; so that if I find not the Cause
I seek, in things that I have a distinct Idea of; I will not uselessy fatigue
my self in the Contemplation of these rambling and general Logical Idea's, and
will cease from speaking of what I understand not. But let us examine the first
of these things, which may be the Cause, how the Particles of this little Link
are so strictly united, viz. the little Parts it is composed of.

When I consider only the Parts whereof hare Bodies are composed, I find my
self inclined to believe, That we cannot imagine any Cement which unites the
Parts of this Link, besides themselves and their own Rest: For of what Nature
could it be? It would not be a thing which subsists of it self, for all these
little Particles being Substances, for what Reason should they be united by
other Substances than by themselves? Neither will it be a different Quality
from Rest, because there is no Quality more contrary to Motion which might
separate these Parts, than Rest: But besides Substances and their Qualities, we
know of no other kind of Beings.

It is very true, Defc. Prin. 1. Art 55. p 2.
the Parts of hard Bodies continue united, whilst they are in Rest one with
another; and when they are once in Rest, they continue so of themselves as long
as they can. But this is not what I seek, I know not how I came to mistake the
Subject, I endeavor here to discover why the Particles of hard Bodies have
Power to continue in Rest one by another, and how they resist the Efforts we
make to move them.

I might then answer my self, Descartes, Princip. Article 43. of the second
Part.
that each Body has truly a Power to continue in the State it is in, and that
this Power is equal, either in respect to Motion or Rest: But that which makes
the Parts of hard Bodies continue in Rest by one anotherd, so that we are
troubled to separate and move them, is because we employ not Motion enough to
conquer their Rest. This is probable, it is true, but I seek a Certainty, if it
can be found, and not only a Probability. Articl. 63.
And how can I certainly and evidently know that each Body has this Power to
continue in the Condition it is in, and that this Power is equal in respect to
Motion and Rest; since on the contrary, Matter appears indifferent to Motion
and Rest, and absolutely without any Power. Let us have Recourse then with Mr.
Descartes, to the Will of the Creator, which is it may be, the Power that
Bodies seem to have in themselves; it is the second thing that we before
supposed, was able to preserve the Parts of this little Link we speak of, so
strongly united.

Certainly, it is impossible that God may will each Body to continue in the
Condition it is in, and that his Will is the Power which unites the Parts one
to another, after the same manner as I have elsewhere considered his Will to be
the moving Power which puts Bodies in Motion: For since Matter cannot move of
it self, it seems to me, that I must judge it to be a Spirit, and even that
it is the Author of Nature who maintains it and puts it in Motion, by
successively preserving it in many Places by his Simple Will, since a Being,
infinitely powerful, acts not by Instruments, and the Effects necessarily
follow his Will.

I perceive then, Descartes, Art. 33. of the 2d Part. Art:. 45. and in those
which follow.
it is possible that God should keep every thing in the Condition it is in,
whether it be in Rest or in Motion, and that his Will is the Natural Power that
Bodies have to continue in the State in which they have once been placed. If it
is so, we must, as Descartes has done, measure this Power, conclude what ought
to be the Natural Effects of it, and thus give Rules for the Power and
Communication of Motions, at the Concourse of different Bodies, by the
Proportion of Magnitude that is found between these Bodies; since we have no
other Way to discover this general and immurable Will of God, who causes the
different Powers that Bodies have to act upon and resist one another, besides
their different Magnitudes and Celerities.

Yet, I have no certain Proof, that by a positive Will, God keeps Bodies in a
State of Rest; and it seems sufficient for him to will the Existence of Matter,
not only to cause it to exist, but to remain in Rest.

It is not the same in respect to Motion, because the Idea of Matter moved,
certainly includes two Powers to which it relates, viz. That which created it,
and that which moves it. But the Idea of Matter in Rest only includes the Idea
of a Creating Power, without a Necessity of one to keep it in Rest; since if we
simply conceive Matter, without thinking of any Power, we shall necessarily
conceive it in Rest. Thus it is I determine things, for I must judge of them
according to my Idea's, and according to them, Rest is but a Privation of
Motion: For it is sufficient for God to cease to will that a Body should he
moved, for its Motion to cease, and cause it to remain in Rest.

But I remember I have heard many Ingenious Persons say, that it appeared to
them, that Motion was as well the Privation of Rest, as that Rest was a
Privation of Motion. Some even have assured me, by Reasons I could not
apprehend, that it was more probable that Motion was rather a Privation than
Rest. I do not distinctly remember the Arguments they brought, but it ought to
make me suspect my Idea's to be false. For although most Men speak what pleases
them, upon Matters that do not appear very Important: Yet, I have Reason to
believe, that the Persons I speak of, took Pleasure in speaking what they
conceived. I must therefore still examine my Idea's very carefully.

It Is a thing which appears undoubted to me, and these Gentlemen I speak of
grant it, viz. That it is the Will of God which moves Bodies. The Power then
that a Bowl has, which I see in Motion, is the Will of God which causes it to
move: And what must God now do to cause it to stop? Must he, by a positive Will
determine it to be in Rest, I imagine here that there is only God, my self, and
a Bowl.
or else is it sufficient that he ceases to will it should be moved? It is
evident, that if God only ceases to will that this Bowl should be moved, the
Cessation of this Will of God will be the Cessation of the Motion of the Bowl;
for the Will of God, which was the Power that moved the Bowl, being no more,
this Power will continue no longer, nor the Bowl therefore any more moved. Thus
a Cessation of the Power of Motion causes Rest. Rest has therefore no Power
which produces it: It Is then only a pure Privation, which supposes not a
positive Will in God; so that it would be unreasonable and unnecessary to admit
a positive Will in God, to give Bodies any Power to continue in Rest.

But let us, if possible, overthrow this Argument; suppose now a Bowl in Rest,
whereas we supposed it before in Motion; what must God do to actuate it? Will
it be enough for him to cease to will it should be in Rest? If it is so, I have
yet advanced nothing; for Motion would as well be the Privation of Rest, as
Rest the Privation of Motion. I suppose then that God ceases to will it should
continue in Rest, but if this be granted, I do not see that the Bowl moves; and
if any one sees it moved, I desire them to tell me after what Degree of Motion
it is moved. Certainly it is impossible that it should move, and not have some
Degree of Motion; and from our conceiving only that God ceases to will it
should be in Rest, it is impossible to conceive it to go with any Degree of
Motion; because it is not the same with Motion as Rest. Motions are infinitely
various, they are capable of More or Less: But Rest being nothing, one cannot
differ from another. A Bowl even, which goes twice as fast in one Time as in
another,, has twice as much Power or Motion in one Time as in another; but we
cannot say that the same Bowl has twice as much Rest in one Time as in another.

Thefore it must be a positive Will from God, to put a Bowl in Motion, or to
give a Bowl such a Power as to move it self; and it is enough for him to cease
willing its Motion, for it to be in Rest just as in the Creation of the World;
it is not sufficient that God should will the World should exist; but it is
necessary that he positively wills the Manner in which it must exist. And to
annihilate it, it must not be God's willing that it should not be, because God
cannot will nothing by a positive Will, it is enough only that God, ceases to
will that it should exist.

I do not here consider Motion and Rest according to their Relative Being: For
it is plain, that Bodies in Rest, have as real Relations to those which
encompass them, as those that are in Motion have. I only conceive, that Bodies
which are in Motion, have a moving Power, and those that are in Rest, have no
Power to keep themselves in Rest, because the Relation that Bodies moved have
to those which encompass them, always changing, it must be a continual Power
which produces these continual Changes: For indeed, it is these Changes that
cause whatsoever Revolutions we see in Nature. But there is no need of Power to
do nothing: When the Relation of a Body to those that surround it, is always
the same; there is nothing done, and the Preservation of this Relation, I mean,
the Action of the Will of God who preserves this Relation, is not different
from that which preserves the same Body.

By a Body in a Void, I mean one so separated from others, as well hard as
liquid, that there is none which helps or hinders the Communication of Motion.
If it is true, as I conceive, that Rest is only a Privation of Motion, the
least Motion, I mean that of the least agitated Body, includes more Force or
Power than the rest of the greatest Body. Thus the least Force, or smallest
Body that we should conceive moved in a Void, against a great and vast Body,
would be capable of moving it; since this great Body being in Rest, it will
have no Power to resist the little Body which will strike against it; so that
the Resistance that the Parts of hard Bodies make to hinder their Separation,
necessarily proceeds from some other Cause than that of Rest.

But we must demonstrate, by Sensile Experiments, what we have been proving by
abstracted Reasonings, to see if our Idee's agree with the Sensations that we
receive of Objects? For it often happens that such Arguments deceive us, or at
least cannot convince others, and particularly such as are prejudiced on the
contrary Side. The Authority of Descartes has so much Power over the Reason of
some Men, that one must prove by all imaginable Ways, that this great Man is
deceived to be able to disabuse them: What I have said, will make a deep
Impression on the Mind of those that are not prejudiced with the contrary
Opinion; and I plainly see they will blame me for proving things which appear
indisputable to them. But the Cartesians very well deserve that I should use my
endeavor to satisfy them; others may pass over this Discourse, if they think
it tedious.

Here then are some Experiments which sensibly prove, that Rest has no Power to
resist Motion, and which consequently discover that the Will of the Author of
Nature, which gives the Power and Force that each Body has to continue in that
State wherein it is, respects only Motion and not Rest; since Bodies have no
Power of themselves.

Experience shows us, that very great vessels, which swim in the Water, may be
agitated by the least Bodies which hit against them. From thence I pretend,
notwithstanding all the Evasions of Descartes and the Cartesians, that if these
great Bodies were in a Void, they might yet be more easily agitated: For the
Reason why there is some little Difficulty to move a Vessel in Water, is
because the Water resists the Power of the Motion we impress on it, which would
not happen in a Void; and what manifestly shows us, that Water resists the
Motion we impress on the Vessel, is the Vessels ceasing to be agitated some
time after it has been moved; for this would not happen, if the Vessel did not
lose its Motion by communicating it to the Water, or if the Water gave way
without resisting it; or in fine, if it partook of its Motion. Thus, since a
Vessel agitated in the Water, by little and little ceases to move; it is an
undoubted Mark that the Water resists its Motion instead of facilitating it, as
Descartes pretends; and consequently, it would yet be infinitely more easy to
agitate a great Body in a Void than in Water, since there is no Resistance from
Bodies about it. It is therefore evident, that Rest has no Power to resist
Motion, that the least Motion contains more Power and Force than the grearest
Rest: Or at least, that we ought not to measure the Force of Motion and Rest by
the Proportion that is found between great Bodies which are in Motion and in
Rest, as Descartes has done.

It is true, there is some Reason to believe that a Vessel is agitated as soon
as it is in the Water, because of the continual Change which happens to the
Parts of the Water that encompass it, although it seems to us that it does not
change its Place. It is that which has made Descartes and some others believe,
that it is not the Force only of that which impels it, that makes it advance in
the Water; but having already received much Motion from the little Parts of
liquid Bodies which surround it, and which equally push it on all sides: This
Motion is only determined by the new Motion of that which pushes it: So that
that which agitates a Body in Water, could not do it in a Void. Thus it is,
that Descartes, and those that are of his Opinion, defend the Rules of Motion
that he has given us.

For instance, let us suppose a Piece of Wood a Foot square in a Liquid Body:
All the little Parts of the Liquid Body acts upon it, and moves against it, and
because they equally push it on all sides, as well toward A as B: It cannot
advance nearer to one side than another: But if I then push another Piece of
Wood of half a Foot, against the first, toward the Side A; I shall see it
advance. And from thence I conclude, that it might be moved, if in a Void, with
less Force than that whereby this Piece of Wood pushes it, for the Reasons I
have already brought. But the Persons I speak of deny it, and answer, that what
makes the great Piece of Wood advance as soon as it is pushed by the little
one, is because the little one which could not move it of it self, being joined
with the Parts of the Liquid Body which are agitated, determine them to push
it, and communicate to it one Part of their Motion. But it is plain, that
according to this Answer, the Piece of Wood being once agitated, must not
diminish its Motion, but on the contrary, continually augment it. Art. 5.
For by this Answer the Piece of Wood is pushed more by the Water to the Side
of A, than to the Side of B; therefore it must always advance toward it. And
because this Impulsion is continual, its Motion must always increase. But as I
have already said, the Water is so far from facilitating its Motion, that it
continually resists it, and its Resistance always diminishes it, and at last
will make it perfectly cease.

We must now prove, that the Piece of Wood that was equally pushed by the
little Particles of the Water that surrounds it, has no Motion or Power at all
that is capable to move it; although it continually changes its Place, and
though the Surface of the Water which encompasses it, is different at different
Times. For if it is so, that a Body equally pushed on all Sides, as this Piece
of Wood is, has no Motion; it is certain, that it is only the Foreign Force
that strikes against it, which communicates it; since in the same Time that
this foreign Force pushes it, the Water resists it, and by little and little
destroys the Motion which is impressed on it, for by degrees it ceases to move.

It is certain, at least to those whom I speak to, that there never is in
Nature more Motion at one Time than at another; and that Bodies in Rest are
moved only by meeting with some agitated Bodies, which communicate their Motion
to them. From thence I conclude, that a Body which I suppose created perfectly
at rest in the middle of the Water, will never receive any Degree of Motion
from the little Particles of Water which surround it, and continually strike
against it, provided they push it equally on all Sides; because all these
little Particles which strike against it equally on all Sides, reflecting with
all their Motion, they communicate none to it; and consequently, this Body must
always be considered as in Rest, and without any moving Power, although it
continually change its Surface.

Now the Proof I have, that these little Parts reflect thus with all their
Motion, is, that besides this, that we cannot conceive the thing to be
otherwise, the Water that touches this Body, must grow cold, or even freeze,
and become very near as hard as the Wood upon its Surface; since the Motion of
the Particles of Water would be equally distributed to the little Parts of the
Body they encompass.

But to accommodate my self to those that defend Descartes's Sentiment, I
grant, we must not consider a Boat in the Water as in Rest. I also allow, that
all the Parts of the Water which are about it, agree to the new Motion that the
Water-man imprints on it, although it be but too visible by the Diminution of
the Motion of the Boat, that it resists it more on the Side it goes to, than
from that whence it was pushed. This supposed, I say, that from all the
Particles of Water that are in the River, there is, according to Descartes,
only those that immediately touch the Boat on the Side from whence it was
pushed, that can assist its Motion. Art. 63.
For, according to this Philosopher, The Water being fluid, all the Parts of
which it is composed, act not together against the Body we would move, but only
those, that touching it, conjoyntly bear upon it. Now, those which are
conjoyntly born upon the Boat, and the Waterman together, are twenty times less
than the Boat. See Art. 63. of the second Part of his Principles.
It is therefore plain, by the Explanation, that Decartes has given in this
Article, upon the Difficulty we have to break a Nail between our Hands, that a
little Body is capable of agitating a much greater than it self. For indeed,
our Hands are not so fluid as Water, and when we would break a Nail, there is
more Parts joined together, which act conjoyntly then in the Water which pushes
a Boat.

But here is a more Sensible Experiment: If we take a Board well plained, or
some other very hard Plane, drive in it a Nail halfway, and set the Plane in
an inclining Position, placing a Bar of Iron an hundred times thicker than the
Nail above it, and suffer the Bar to slide down, I say this Nail will not
break. And we must further observe, That according to Descartes, all the parts
of this Bar rest upon and conjoyntly act upon this Nail, for this Bar is hard
and solid. If then there was no other Cement than rest to unite the parts of
this Nail, the Bar of Iron being an hundred times greater than the Nail, Art.
63. Art. 50.
would according to Descartes's fifth Rule, and according to Reason,
communicate some of its Motion to the part of the Nail it fell upon, that is,
break it and pass beyond it, although even this Bar should slide but very
slowly. So that we must seek another Cause than the Rest of the parts, to make
Bodies hard, or capable of resisting the Efforts that we make, when we would
break them, since Rest has no power to resist Motion: And I believe these
Experiments suffice to show, that the abstracted Proofs we have brought are not
false.

We must then examine the third thing we have before supposed might be the
cause of the strict Union that is found between the parts of hard Bodies, viz.
An invisible Matter that environs them, which being extremely agitated, with
much Violence pushes the External and Internal Parts of these Bodies, and
compresses them after such a manner, that to separate them, more Force is
necessary than this invisible and extremely agitated Matter has.

It seems then I might reasonably conclude, that the Union of the constituent
parts of hard Bodies depends upon the subtle Matter which encompasses and
compresses them: Since the two other things that we can think to be the Causes
of this Union are not truly so, as we have already seen; for since I find
resistance enough in breaking a piece of Iron, and that this resistance
proceeds neither from the Iron, nor the Will of God, as I think I have proved;
it must necessarily proceed from some invisible Matter, which can be no other
than that which immediately encompasses and compresses it. Nevertheless I shall
further give some positive Proofs of this Opinion, after I have explained it
more at large by some Example.

Take a Globe of any hard Metal, which is hollow within, cut it into two
Hemispheres, and join these two Hemispheres with a little Wax at the place of
their union, and exhaust the Air out of it; these two Hemispheres joined one to
the other after this manner, if many Horses were fastened to them, some on one
side and some on the other, could not be separated by them, supposing the
Magnitude of the Hemispheres to be in Proportion to the number of Horses: Yet
if we suffer the Air to re-enter, one Person alone could separate them without
any Difficulty. It is easy to conclude from this Instance, That what so
strongly unites these two Hemispheres, proceeds from their being compressed and
surrounded upon their External and Unequal Surface by the Air which environs
them, whilst there was no Counterpressure in their Internal and Concave
Surface. So that the Action of the Horses that drew the two Hemispheres on both
sides, could not overcome the Efforts of an infinite Number of little Particles
of the Air that resisted them, by pressing these two Hemispheres together. But
the least Force is capable of separating them, when the Air, being entered again
within the Sphere, pushes the Concave and Internal Surfaces, as much as the Air
without presses the External and Unequal ones.

But if, on the contrary, we take a Carps Bladder, and put it in a Vessel, from
whence all the Air has been exhausted, this Bladder, being full of Air, will
crack and break, because then there is no Air without the Bladder to resist
that which is within. It Is likewise the same Reason that I have given for the
first Experiment, that two Planes of Glass or Marble having been used to be
joined one upon another, so that in one Sense we find some resistance in the
separating of them; because these two parts of Marble are pressed and
constring'd by the External Air which encompasses them, and are not so strongly
pushed by it within. I might bring an infinite Number of other Experiments, to
prove that the gross Air which environs Bodies, strongly unites their Parts;
but what I have said, may suffice clearly to explain my Thoughts upon the
present Question.

I say then, that which so strongly unites the Parts of hard Bodies, and these
little Links I have before spoke on, is other little external Bodies infinitely
more agitated than the Air we breath in, and these push and compress them; and
that which gives us some Trouble to separate them, is, not their Rest, but the
Agitation of these little Bodies which surround them: So that what resists
Motion is not Rest, which is only a Privation, and has no Power of it self, but
some contrary Motion.

This bare Exposition of my Opinion perhaps seems reasonable; yet I well
foresaw, that many Persons would have some Difficulty to receive it. Hard
Bodies make so great an Impression upon our Senses, when they strike us, or
when we make any Effort to break them, that we are inclined to believe their
Parts are united much more strictly than indeed they are. And on the contrary,
the little Bodies which I have said encompasses them, and to which I have given
the Power of causing this Union, makes no Impression upon our Senses, seeming
to be too weak to produce so Sensible an Effect.

But to destroy this Prejudice, which is founded only upon the Impressions of
our Senses, and the Difficulty we have to imagine Bodies smaller and more
agitated than those we see every Day; we must consider that the Hardness of
Bodies must not be judged of in Relation to our Hands, or to the Efforts we are
capable of making, which vary at different Times. For indeed, if the greatest
Force of Man is almost nothing in Comparison of that of the Subtle Matter, we
should be very much in the wrong to believe that Diamonds and the hardest
Stones, might not have, for the Cause of their Hardness, the Compression of
little rapid Bodies which encompass them. Now we may plainly discover, that the
Force of Man is very small, if we consider, that the Power he has of moving his
Body into many different Ways, proceeds only from a little Fermentation of his
Blood, which by agitating some few little Parts, so produces the Animal
Spirits. For it is the Agitation of these Spirits, which gives Force to our
Bodies, and gives it a Power to make these Efforts, that we unreasonably look
upon as something very great and powerful.

But it must be well observed, that this Fermentation of our Blood is only a
very little Communication of the Motion of this subtle Matter we speak of; for
all the Fermentations of Visible Bodies, are only Communications of the Motion
of Invisible Bodies, since every Body receives its Agitation from some other.
We must not therefore wonder if our Power is not so great as that of this
Subtle Matter which we receive it from. But if our Blood fermented as much in
our Hearts, as Gunpowder does when we put Fire to it, that is, if our Blood
received as great a Communication of the Motion of this Subtle Matter, as that
of Gunpowder receives: We might do extraordinary things very easily, as break
Iron, throw down a House, etc. provided we suppose there was an agreeable
Proportion between our Members and the Blood thus agitated. We ought then to
destroy our Prejudices, and not to imagine, according to the Impression of our
Senses, that the Parts of hard Bodies are so strongly united together, because
we have so much Trouble to break them. But if we should consider the Effects of
Fire in Mines, in heavy Bodies, and in many other Effects of Nature, which have
no other Cause than the Agitation of these Invisible Bodies, as Descartes has
proved in many Places, we should manifestly discover, that it is not above their
Power to unite and compress together the Parts of hard Bodies as strongly as we
see they are united. For in fine, I am not afraid to affirm, that a
Cannon-Bullet, whose Motion appears so extraordinary, does not even receive the
Thousandth Part of the Motin of the Subtle Matter that is about it.

We should not doubt of what I advance, if we first considered, that Gunpowder
is not all enkindled in the same Instant: Secondly, that although it should all
take Fire at the same Instant, it swims but a very little while in the Subtle
Matter; and Bodies which swim but a little while in others, cannot receive much
Motion from them; as we may see in Boats that we abandon to the Course of the
Water, which receive their Motion but by little and little. In the third Place,
and chiefly, because each Particle of Powder can receive only the Motion which
the Subtle Matter impresses; for the Water communicates to the Vessel, only the
direct Motion which is common to all the Parts thereof, which is generally very
small in Relation to other Motions.

I could further show the Greatness of the Motion of the Subtle Matter to those
that receive Descartes's Principles, by the Motion of the Earth, and Gravity of
Body; and could, even from thence, bring Proofs that are certain and exact
enough, but it is not necessary to my Subject. It Is enough, without having read
the Works of Descartes, or having a sufficient Proof of the Agitation of this
Subtle Matter, which I ascribe as the Cause of the Inflexibility of Bodies, to
read with some Application, what I have said of it in the 2d. Chap. of the 4th.
Book.

Being then now delivered from the Prejudices which incline us to believe that
our Efforts were very powerful, and that that of the Subtle Matter which
environs and compresses hard Bodies, is very weak, and being otherwise
persuaded of the violent Agitation of this Matter, by what I have said of
Gunpowder: It will not be difficult to see that it is absotutely necessary that
the Matters acting infinitely more upon the Surface of hard Bodies that it
encompasses and compresses, than within the same Bodies, it must be the Cause
of their Inflexibility, or the Resistance we feel when we endeavor to break
them.

Now, as there is always many Particles of this Invisible Matter which passes
through the Pores of hard Bodies, they make them not only hard, as we have
already explained, but further, are the Cause that some are Springy and
Elastick, others stand bent; and that others are fluid and liquid; and in fine,
that they are not only the Cause of the Force that hard Bodies have to continue
united together, but also that fluid Bodies have to separate, that is, are the
Cause that some Bodies are hard, and others fluid.

But because it is absolutely necessary, to know distinctly the Physics of
Descartes, the Figure of his Elements, and Parts which compose particular
Bodies, to give a Reason why certain Bodies are stiff, and some others pliable;
I shall not stay here to explain it. Those who have read the Works of this
Philosopher, will easily enough imagine what may be the Cause thereof, which I
could not explain without great Difficulty; and those who are unacquainted with
this Author, would but confusedly understand the Reason that I might bring for
it.

Nor shall I also stop here to resolve a great Number of Difficulties, that I
foresee may be brought against what I have established: Because, if those that
raise them have no Knowledge of true Physics, I should only tire and displease
them, instead of satisfying them: But if they are learned Persons, their
Objections being stronger, I could not answer them but by a great Number of
Figures and long Discourses; so that I believe I ought to desire those that
find any Difficulty in what I have advanced, very carefully to read this
Chapter over again; for I hope, if they do so, and meditate on it as much as is
necessary, all their Objections will vanish. But if they find my Request
incommodious, they may omit it; for there is no great Danger in being ignorant
of the Cause of Bodies inflexibility.

I speak not here of Contiguity: For it is plain, Contiguous things touch so
little, that there is always much Subtle Matter which passes between them, and
which endeavors to continue its Motion in a right Line, to prevent their
uniting.

For the Union that is observed between Marbles which have been polished one
upon another, I have explained it, and it is easy to see, that although this
Subtle Matter always passes between these two Parts, how united soever they may
be, the Air cannot pass it; and therefore it is that which compresses and binds
those two Pieces of Marble together, and causes some Trouble to disunite them,
if we do not make them slide off one another.

It is plain, from all this, that the Continuity, Contiguity, and Union of two
Marbles, will only be the same thing in a Void; neither have we different
Idea's of them, so that it is as much as to say, we do not understand them, if
we make them absolutely differ, without any Relation to the Bodies which
surround them.

Here now follows some Reflections upon Descartes's Sentiment, and the Original
of his error. I call his Opinion an Error, because I find no Expedient to
defend what he says of the Rules of Motion, and Cause of the Hardness of
Bodies, in many Places at the End of the Second Part of his Principles; and it
seems to me, that I have sufficiently proved the Truth of the contrary Opinion.

This great Man very distinctly conceived that Matter could not move of it
self, and that the Natural moving Power of all Bodies, was nothing else but the
general Will of the Author of Nature, and that the Communications of the
Motions of Bodies, at their mutual Meeting, could only proceed from this same
Will. If we take this for granted, we can give no Rules for the different
Communication of Motions, but by the Proportion that is found between the
different Magnitude of Bodies which beat against them, since it is impossible
to penetrate the Designs of God's Will. And because he judges, that every thing
had Power to continue in the State it was in, whether in Motion or Rest,
because that God, by his Will, determined this Power always to act after the
same manner; he concludes, that Rest has as much Power to act as Motion: So he
measures the Effects of the Power of Rest by the Magnitude of Bodies which
possessed it, as those of the Power of Motion; and hence he gave the Rules for
the Communication of Motion that are in his Principles, and the Cause of the
Hardness of Bodies which I have endeavored to refute.

It is difficult enough not to be of Descartes's Opinion, when we look upon it
as he did; for once more, since the Communication of Motions proceed only from
the Will of the Author of Nature, and that we see all Bodies continue in the
State they are once placed in, whether it be Motion or Rest; It seems, we ought
to seek the Rules of the different Communication of Motions at the meeting of
Bodies, not in the Will of God which is unknown to us, but in the Proportion
there is between the Magnitudes of these Bodies.

I do not therefore wonder that Descartes had this Thought, but I only wonder
that he did not correct it, when he had made a farther Advance in his
Discoveries, and found both Existence and the Effects of the Subtle Matter
which environs all Bodies.

I am surprised, that in the 132 Article of the 4th Part, he attributes the
Elastick Force that certain Bodies have, to this subtle Matter, and that in
Articles 55 and 43 of the Second Part, and in other Places, he does not
attribute it to their Hardness, or the Resistance they make when we endeavor
to bend or break them, but to the rest of their Parts. It appears evident to
me, that the Cause of the Elasticity and Stiffness of certain Bodies, is the
same with that which gives them the Power of Resistance, when we would break
them; for indeed, the Force that we use to break Steel, differs but insensibly
from that by which we bend it.

I will not here bring all the Reasons that might be urged to prove these
things; nor answer to any Difficulties that we might form from hard Bodies
making no Sensible Resistance, and yet we have some Trouble to bend them. For
it will be enough to make these Difficulties vanish, to consider that the
Subtle Matter cannot easily take a new course in Bodies which break when we
bend them, as in Glass and in tempered Steel; and that it cannot more easily do
it in Bodies that are composed of branchy Parts which are not brittle, as in
Gold and Lead: And indeed, there is no hard bodies which make not some little
Resistance.

It is difficult enough to persuade our selves that Descartes positively
believed the Cause of Hardness was different from that of Elasticity: And what
appears most probable is, that he has not sufficiently reflected upon the
Matter. When we meditate long upon any Subject, and are satisfied in things we
would know, we often think no more of them: We believe that the Thoughts that
we have had, are undoubted Truths, and it is useless to examine farther. But in
Men there are many things which disgust them against Application, incine them
to a rash Assent, and make them subject to Error; and although the Mind
continues apparently satisfied, it is not always because it is well informed of
the Truth. Descartes was a Man like us: I confess we never saw more Solidity,
Exactness, Extension, and more Penetration of Mind than what appears in his
Works; yet he was not infallible. So that it is probable he was so very
strongly persuaded of his Opinion, from not sufficiently reflecting that he
asserted something elsewhere in nis Principles contrary to it.

He maintained it upon very specious and probable Reasons, but such however as
were not of sufficient Force to make us submit, and therefore he might, and
ought to have suspended his Judgment. It is not enough to examine, in a hard
Body, what might be the Cause that made it so; We ought also to think of the
invisible bodies which might render them hard, as he has done at the End of his
Philosophical Principles, when he attributes the Cause of Resistance to them:
He ought to have made an exact Division, which comprised whatsoever might
contribute to the Inflexibility of bodies. It is not sufficient still to seek
the Cause in God's Will; he ought also to have thought of the Subtle Matter
which environed them. For although the Existence of this extremely agitated
Matter was not yet proved in that Place of his Principles where he speaks of
Hardness, it was not then rejected: He ought then to have suspended his
Judgment, and to have remembered that what he had writ of the Cause of
Hardness, and Rules of Motion, ought to have been reviewed anew, which I
believe he did not do carefully enough; Or else he did not sufficiently
consider the true Reason of a thing that is very easy to discover, and which
yet is of the utmost Consequence in Physics; I will explain it.

Descartes well knew, that to maintain his System, of the Truth which he could
not reasonably doubt: It was absolutely necessary that great bodies should
always communicate their Motion to the lesser bodies they should meet, and the
less reflect at their meeting with the greater, without a like Loss on their
Side. For without that, the First Element would not have all the Motion that it
is necessary it should have above the Second, nor the Second above the Third;
and his whole System would be absolutely false, as is sufficiently known to
those that have but thought a little upon it. But in supposing that Rest had
Force enough to resist Motion, and that a great Body in Rest, could not be
moved by another that is less than it, although it strike it with a furious
Agitation: It is plain, that great Bodies must have much less Motion than a
like Mass of little Bodies; since, according to this Supposition, they can
always communicate what they have, and cannot always receive from the lesser.
Thus this Supposition not being contrary to whatsoever Descartes has said in
his Principles, from the Beginning unto the Establishment of his Rules of
Motion, and agreeing very well with the Sequel of his Principles; he believed
that the Rules of Motions, which he thought he had demonstrated in their Cause,
were also sufficiently confirmed by their Effects.

I agree with Descartes, that great Bodies communicate their Motion much more
easily than little Bodies do; and therefore his First Element is much more
agitated than the Second, and the Second than the Third. But the Cause of it is
clear, without having any Regard to his Supposition. Little and fluid Bodies,
as Water, Air, etc. can only communicate to great Bodies an uniform Motion,
which is common to all their Parts: The Water in a River can only communicate
to a Boat, the Motion of Descent, which is common to all the little Parts of
which the Water is composed, and every one of these Parts, besides this common
Motion, has also an infinite Number of other Particulars. Thus by this Reason
it is plain, that a Boat for instance, can never have so much Motion as an equal
Bulk of Water, since the Boat can only receive from the Water, that Motion
which is direct and common to all the Parts that compose it. If Twenty
Particles of a fluid Body push any other Body on the one Side, and as many on
the other, it will continue immovable, and all the little Particles of the
fluid Body in which it swims, rebound up without losing any thing of their
Motion. Thus great Bodies, whose Parts are united, can only receive the
Circular and Uniform Motion of the Vortex of the Subtle Matter which environs
them.

This Reason seems sufficient to them, to make it comprehended how great Bodies
are not so much agitated as the lesser, and that there is a Necessity for an
Explanation of these things, to suppose any Force in Rest to resist Motion. The
Certainty of Descartes's Principles cannot be a sufficient Proof to defend his
Rules of Motion; and we may believe that if Descartes himself had again,
without Prejudice, examined his Principles, and compared them with such Reasons
as I have brought, he would not have believed that the Effects of Nature had
confirmed his Rules, nor have fallen into a Contradiction, by attributing the
Hardness of Bodies only to the rest of their Parts, and their Elasticity to the
Force of a Subtle Matter.

Here follows now the Rules of the Communication of Motions in a Void, which
are only the Consequences of what I have established about the Nature of Rest.

Bodies not being hard in a Void, since they are only hard by the Pressure of
the Subtle Matter which surrounds them, if Two Bodies meet, they would flatten
without rebounding; we must therefore give these Rules: Suppose them hard of
themselves, and not by the Pressure of this Subtle Matter.

Rest having no Power to resist Motion, and many Bodies before being considered
as one only in the moment of their meeting; it is plain, they ought not to
rebound when they are equal in Magnitude and Velocity; or that their Velocity
supplies the Desect of their Magnitude, or their Magnitude the Defect of their
Velocity. And it is easy from thence to conclude, that in all other Cases they
must always communicate their Motion, A general Rule for the Communication of
Motion.
so that they may afterward proceed with an equal Swiftness.

So that to know what must happen in all the different Suppositions of
Magnitude and Swiftness of Bodies which meet one another; we need only add
together all the Degrees of Motion of two or many Bodies, which must be
considered only as one at the Time when they mere, See Descartes's Rules in the
second Part of his Principles.
and after divide the Sum of all the Motions in Proportion to the Magnitude of
these Bodies.

From whence I conclude, that of the Seven Rules that Descartes gives of
Motion; the Three first are good.

The Fourth is false, and B must communicate its Motion to C, in Proportion to
the Magnitude of the same C, and afterward move together: So that if C is
double to B, and B has Three Degrees of Motion, it must communicate Two of
them. For I have sufficiently proved, that Descartes ought not to have supposed
Rest to have had any Force to resist Motion.

That the Fifth is true.

That the Sixth is false, and that B must communicate the Half of its Motion to
C.

diagram demonstrating how Descartes' fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh rules of
motion are false

And that the seventh is false, since B must always communicate its Motion to C
in Proportion to the Magnitude and Motion of both B and C. That if, according
to the Supposition, C is double to B, and has three Degrees of Motion, whilst C
has but two, they must necessarily move together, since indeed C and B are but
one Body at the Time of their Meeting; and because we must add the Degrees of
Swiftness which are five, and afterward divide them in Proportion to their
Magnitude, and so give 1 to B, and 3 to C the double of B. But these Rules
although certain by what I have said, are yet contrary to Experience, because
we are not in a Void.

The chief of all the Experiments, which are contrary to what I have said of
the Rules of Motion, is, that it always happens that hard Bodies which shock
each other, do still rebound different Ways, or at least they do not follow one
another after their meeting.

To answer to which we must call to mind what has been said about the Cause of
Elactity; that there is a Matter whose Agitation is strangely violent, which
continually passes between the Parts of hard Bodies, and makes them so by
compressing them as much upon the external as internal Parts. For from thence
it is easily seen that in the Time of Percussion, two Bodies which meet, drive
or divert the Course of this Matter from the nearest Places to those where they
are shockt: And this Matter resisting with a great Violence, repels the two
Bodies which meet, and restores its Passage which the Percussion had stopped up.

That which proves yet more clearly what I have said, is that if two Balls of
Lead, or some other less elastick Matter, meet together, they rebound not after
their Shock, but go on according to the Rules I have before established; which
they keep with so much the more Exactness, as their Elasticity is less. Bodies
then rebound after their Percussion, because they are hard, that is, as I have
explained, because there is a Sort of Matter much agitated which compresses
them, and which passing through their Pores with a great Violence, repulses the
Bodies which strike against one another. But we must suppose that the Bodies
which meet break not those they strike against, by a Motion that conquers the
Force, which these little Parts of subtle Matter has to resist, as when we
discharge a Musket against a Piece of Wood: It is true, this subtle Matter
compresses soft Bodies, and passes very quickly through their Pores, as well as
it does through those of the hard, and that nevertheless these soft Bodies make
no Resistance. The Reason is because the Matter which passes through soft Bodies,
can open its Passage on all Sides very easily, because of the Smallness of the
Parts which compose them, or of some particular Configuration proper for this
End, which hard Bodies cannot suffer, because of the Grossness and contrary
Disposition of their Parts to this effect.

Thus when a hard Body shocks another that is soft, it changes all the Ways by
which the subtle Matter passes, which is often visible, as in a Musket Bullet
that is flatted when we strike it. But when a hard Body hits another like it
self, it produces none or very sew new Ways, and the subtle Matter which is
within its Pores is forced to return by the Way it came, or else it repels
those Bodies which shut up its little Passages.

Suppose A an hard and B a soft Body, and C c the Channel of the subtle Matter,
I say that if A shocks B at the Point c, the Channel C c is obstructed, and the
subtle Matter finds out new Ways in this soft Body. Thus the subtle Matter
having a free Passage, it repels not the Bodies which hit against it, but the
Bodies themselves change their Figure and become a little flat. And we must
suppose that in the least hard Bodies, there is an infinite Number of Channels
like to C c.

But if A and a are two hard Bodies which meet, the Passage C c will be
straightened, and the subtle Matter which is there obstructed, continuing its
Motion in a right Line, must for want of new Passages, repel the Body which
shocks it with so much the more Violence as its Difficulty is greater to find a
Way, or else the Parts of the Body A, will break and separate from one another,
and be reduced into Powder, or very small Pieces.

In short, it appears evident that all Bodies in Motion continually endeavor
to keep in a right Line, and turning the least that is possible when they meet
with any Resistance, they must never reflect, since by reflecting they deviate
much from a right Line. It must therefore be either that Bodies become flat, or
that the strongest overcome the weakest, and make it move the same Way the
other does. But because Bodies are elastick and hard, they cannot follow one
another, since if A pushes a, a will repel A again, and so they must keep
asunder from one another.

Nevertheless, if the two Bodies were in a Void, although they were very Hard,
they would follow one another, because having no Bodies about them, they could
have no elastick Force, the shocked not at all resisting that which shocks it:
But Air, Gravity, etc. resisting the great Motion that the striking Body gives
to that it strikes, the stricken resists the striking, and hinders it from
following it: For Experience teaches us that Air and Gravity resists Motion,
and so much the more as the Motion is more violent.

It is easy to discover by what I have said, why when different Bodies meet
which are surrounded with Air, or Water, etc. sometimes that which strikes,
rebounds, and sometimes it communicates all its Motion, and continues as if it
were immovable, and sometimes follows the stricken, but always with less
Swiftness, if either of them is absolutely soft: For the whole depends only
upon the Proportion which is between their Magnitude, Hardness and Gravity,
supposing they are moved with an equal Swiftness.

If they are very inflexible, the striking Body rebounds more, because the
Elasticity is stronger. If the striking is very small, and the stricken very
great and heavy, the striking will rebound still more, because of the Weight
and great Quantity of Air which encompasses the stricken that resists this
Motion. In fine, if the Force of the Hardness is either diminished or increased
by the Colum of Air which answers to the stricken, the striking which rebounds
would continue in Rest after Percussion. Or on the contrary, the striking which
would continue in Rest after the Percussion may rebound.

All that is to be done then, is to compare the Hardness of Bodies which meet,
and the Air which the impuls'd Body must agitate anew in the Time of Percussion
that it may move, to foresee very near what must happen in the Percussion of
different Bodies. I always suppose an equal Swiftness in the meeting, for the
Air resists a great Motion more than it does a small one, and there is as much
Motion in a Body half as little again as another, when it goes as fast again as
this other: Thus the stricken being pushed twice as swift again, it may be
considered as having a Colum of Air twice as great to impel it.

But we must also observe, that in the Moment that one Body shocks another, the
Parts of these same Bodies have two contrary Motions: For those that are
foremost have an Inclination to turn because of the Shock, at the same Time
that those that are behind, incline to advance because of the first Motion, and
it is this Countermotion that flattens soft Bodies, and even makes certain hard
Bodies break. Now when Bodies are very hard, this counterblow which shakes
their Parts, and causes a kind of trembling in them, as appears by the Sound
they make, always produces some Change in the Communication of Motion, which is
very difficult to be discovered for many Reasons, and it seems to me very
useless to examine it in particular.

If one would think upon all these things, I believe he might easily answer
some Difficulties that may still remain upon this Subject. But if I thought
what I have said was not sufficient to show that Rest has no Power to resist
Motion, and that the Rules of the Communication of Motion given by Descartes,
are in Part false, I would here prove, that according co his Supposition,
'twould be impossible to move in the Air; and that what makes the Circulation
of Motion in fluid Bodies to be possible without recurring to a Void, is that
the first Element being easily divided after many different Manners, the rest
of its Parts would have no Power to resist Motion.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE Three Last Books.
IT seems to me, that I have in the fourth and fifth Book sufficiently shown,
that the Natural Inclinations and Passions of Men make them often fall into
Error; because they incline them more to precipitate Judgments, than to examine
things carefully.

In the fourth Book I have shown, that the Inclination for Good in general, is
the cause of the Wills inquietude: That the Inquietude of the Will puts the
Mind into a continual Agitation: And that a Mind that is always agitated, is
wholly incapable of discovering Truths that are but a little intricate: That
the Love of new and extraordinary things, often prejudice us in favor of them;
and whatever bears the Character of Infinity, is capable of dazzling our
Imagination and seducing us. I have explained, how the Inclination we have for
Greatness, Honors, and Independance, insensibly engage us into false Learning,
or into the Study of all these vain and useless Sciences, which flatter our
secret Pride, because they make us be admired by the Vulgar. I have showed,
that our Inclinations for Pleasure continually turn the Mind from the
Contemplation of abstracted Truths, which are the most Simple and most
Fruitful, and permit it not to consider any thing, with sufficient Attention
and Disinterest to be able to judge well of it: That Pleasures being the Modes
of the Souls Existences, they necessarily divide the Capacity of the Mind, and
a Mind divided cannot fully comprehend whatever has any thing of Extension. In
fine, I have shown, that the Relation and Natural Union we have with all those
we live with, is the occasion of many Errors that we are subject to, and
communicate to others, as others communicate those to us, wherein they fall
themselves.

In the fifth Book I have endeavored to give some Idea of our Passions; I
have, I think, sufficiently shown, that they are established to unite us to all
sensible things, to assist with a Disposition which is proper for the
Preservation of our Life: And that as our Senses unite us to our Body, and
diffuse our Soul, if I may so say, into all the parts which compose it; so our
Emotions make us, as it were, go out of our selves, to be diffused through all
things that are about us. And lastly, That they continually represent things to
us, not as they are in themselves, to form true Judgments, but according to the
Relation they have to us, to form Judgments that are useful for the
Preservation of our Being, and of those with whom we are naturally or
voluntarily united.

After having attempted to discover our Errors in their Causes, and to deliver
the Mind from the Prejudices to which it is subject, I thought it was time to
prepare it for an Enquiry after Truth. Thus I have in the sixth Book explained
the means which seem to me the most Natural to increase the Attention and
Capacity of the Mind, by showing the use that we may make of our Senses,
Passions, and Imagination; to give it all the Force and Penetration whereof it
is capable. Afterward I have established certain Rules that are necessary to
be observed in the Discovery of any Truth whatever it be, I have explained them
by many Instances to make them more sensible, and have made choice of those
which appeared the most useful to me, or which included the most pregnant and
general Truths, that they may be read with more Application, and made more
Sensible and Familiar.

If may be by this Essay of Method we shall discover the Necessity there is of
reasoning upon clear and eviden: Idea's; and such as we are inwardly convinced
that all Nations agree in; and never pass to Compound things, before we have
sufficiently examined the Simple ones upon which those depend.

And if we consider that Aristotle and his Followers have not observed the
Rules I have explained, as we ought to be convinced by the Proofs I have
brought of it, and by a Knowledge of the Opinions of the most Zealous Defenders
of this Philosopher, perhaps we shall condemn his Doctrine, notwithstanding all
the Impressions which persuade some who suffer themselves to be entangled by
words they understand not.

But if we observe the manner of Descartes's Philosophy, we cannot doubt of
Solidity; for I have sufficiently shown, that he reasons only upon clear and
evident Idea's, and begins with the most Simple things, before he passes to the
more Compound, which depend upon them. Those who read the Works of this Learned
Man, will be fully convinced of what I say of him, provided they read them with
all the Application that is necessary to comprehend them; and they will feel a
secret Joy for being born in so Happy an Age, since we may be freed from the
trouble of enquiring into past Ages amongst the Heathens, and in the utmost
parts of the Earth among Barbarians or Strangers, to find a Doctor to instruct
us in the Truth.

But as we ought not to be too solicitous to know the Opinions of Men, even
though we were otherwise convinced that they had discovered the Truth; so I
should be very sorry if the Esteem I have here expressed for Descartes, should
prejudice any Person in his Favor, or incline him to satisfy himself with a
bare reading and retaining his Opinions, without seeking to be illuminated with
the Light of Truth. It would be to prefer Man to God, to consult him in the
place of our Maker, and to content our selves with the obscure answers of a
Philosopher who enlightens us not, to shun the trouble of enquiting by
Meditation of him who answers and enlightens us both together.

It Is a very unworthy thing to become the Partizan of any Sect whatever, and to
look upon the Authors of it as if they were infallible: And Descartes himself
had rather make Men Disciples of Truth, than prejudiced Followers of his
Opinions: As he expressly advertises them, That they give no Faith to whatever
he has written, And the end of his Principles.
but only receive what the force and evidence of Reason constrains them to
believe. He would not, like some Philosophers, be believed upon his word, he
always maintains, That he is but a Man; and that diffusing Light only by
Reflection, those that would be instructed by him, ought to turn their Minds
toward the Sovereign Reason, which alone can make it more perfect by the Gift
of Understanding.

The chief use that we can draw from applying our selves to Study, is to make
the Mind more Just, Clear, Penetrating, and fit to discover whatever Truths we
would know. But those that read Philosophers to retain their Opinions, and put
them off to others, are very far from approaching to that which is the Life and
Nourishment of the Soul: Their Minds are weakened and blinded by the Commerce
they have with those who can neither instruct nor fortify them; they fill
themselves with a false Learning, the weight of which oppresses them, and the
brightness of it dazles them, and fancy they become very Learned, when their
Heads are full of the Opinions of Ancient Philosophers, never reflecting that
they make themselves the Disciples of those that St. Paul says, Became Fools by
attributing to themselves the Name of Wisemen. Dicentes se esse sapientes
stulti lacti sunt.

I believe the Method I have given, may be of much use to those who would make
use of their Reason, or receive from God the answers he gives to all those who
know how to interrogate him; for I think I have mentioned the chief things that
can fortify and conduct the Attention of the Mind, which is the Natural Prayer
that we make to the true Master of all Men, in order to be instructed.

But as this Natural Prospect of enquiring after the Truth, is very Painful,
and commonly Impracticable for resolving Questions of small moment, the
Knowledge of which serves oftener to flatter our Pride than to perfect our
Minds: I believe that to finish this Work usefully, I ought to say, that the
shortest and most certain Method to discover the Truth, and unite us to God
after the most perfect manner possible, is to live like a true Christian; to
follow exactly the Precepts of the Eternal Truth, which unites it self with us,
only to reunite us to it self; to hearken to our Faith rather than our Reason;
and incline to God not so much by our Natural Powers, which since Sin are
wholly corrupted, as by the assistance of Faith, by which alone God would
conduct us into this immense Light of Truth, which would dissipate all our
Darknesses. For in fine, It is much better, like good Men, to pass some years
in the Ignorance of certain things, and in a moment find our selves instructed
in them for ever, than by natural ways, and much Application and Trouble,
acquire a very imperfect Science, which will leave us in Darkness to all
Eternity.

A PREFACE TO THE EXPLANATIONS. Wherein is shown, what we ought to think of the
different Judgments that are commonly given of Books which oppose Prejudices.
WHEN a Book is to be Published, the Author never knows who to consult to learn
its Fate. The Stars do not precede at its Nativity, their Influences have no
Power over it, and the boldest Astrologers dare not make the least Predictions
upon the different Fortunes it is to be exposed to. Truth being not of this
World, Celestial Bodies have no power over it; and as the Nature of it is
altogether Spiritual, the diverse Positions of Matter can no wise contribute
toward its Establishment or Ruin. Moreover, Men's Judgments are so different in
respect to the same things, that it is almost impossible to guest with more
rashness and imprudence, about any thing, than the happy or unhappy success of
a Book. So that whoever ventures to be an Author, ventures at the same time to
be thought what every Man pleases. But among Authors, those who oppose
Prejudices, may be certain of their Condemnation: Their Works displease most
Men; and when they escape the Passions of their Enemies, they are only indebted
for their deliverance to the Almighty Power of Truth which protects them.

It Is a common defect in all Men to be too quick in Judging; for all Men are
liable to Error, and it is only that defect which makes them liable to it. Now
all rash Judgments are ever liable to Prejudices; therefore those Authors who
oppose them, can never fail of being condemned by all those who consult their
Ancient Opinions, as the Laws by which they are always to pronounce. For, in
fine, most Readers are at once the Judge and Party, in respect of those
Authors. They are Judges, no body can dispute it; and they are Parties, because
those Authors disturb them in the possession of their Prejudices, upon which
they have a right of Prescription, and with whom they have been familiar for
many years.

I own, that there is a great deal of Equity, Sincerity, and good Sense, in
many Readers; and that there are Judges, who are so reasonable as not to follow
common Opinions as the Infallible Rules of Truth. There are some, who looking
within themselves consult inward Truth, according to which we ought to Judge of
all things; but there but few of those who consult it on all occasions; and
none at all, who consult it with all the Attention and Fidelity that is
necessary, in order always to pronounce true Judgments. Therefore, though one
should suppose that there were no faults to be found in a Book, which no body
can do without Vanity, I do not believe that one could find out one Man, who
would approve it in all respects, particularly if it were a Book that did
oppose his Prejudices, since it is not Naturally possible that a Judge
continually offended, incensed abused by a Party, should do him strict Justice,
and that he would give himself the trouble to use his utmost application and
power, to consider Reasons which seem to him at first sight extravagant
Paradoxes, or ridiculous Paralogisms.

But though we find many things in a Book that please us, if we chance to meet
with any that offend us, we seldom fail to exclaim against it, and we often
forget to speak well of it. There are a thousand Motives of Self-love, which
induce us to condemn what displeases us, and reason, on that occasion, fully
justifies those Motives; for Men fancy they condemn Error and defend Truth,
when they defend their Prejudices, and condemn those who attack them. Thus the
most Equitable Judges of Books, which oppose Prejudices, commonly give General
Judgments of them which are not very favorable to those that have written them.
They may chance to say, that there are some good things in such a Work, and
that the Author refutes certain Prejudices reasonably enough, but they will not
fail to condemn it, and to decide like Judges with Authority and Gravity; and
to say, that he carries things too far on such and such occasions. For when an
Author fights against Opinions, which the Reader is not prejudiced with,
whatever the Author says seems rational enough: But the Author always carries
matters too far, when he opposes Prejudices in which the Reader is too far
engaged.

Now, as the Prejudices of different Persons are not always the same, should
any one carefully collect the diverse Judgments which are given upon the same
things, we would often find that according to those Judgments, there would be
nothing good, nor yet, at the same time, any thing bad, in those sorts of
Works. There would be nothing good, for there are no Prejudices but what are
approved by some People; and there would be nothing bad, for there are no
Prejudices but what are disliked by some. Therefore those Judgments are so
equitable, that should Authors be willing to take the advantage of them to
reform their Works, they would be obliged to blot out all, for fear of leaving
any thing that were condemned, or else alter nothing at all, for fear of
altering any thing that were approved. So that a poor Author, who is unwilling
to offend any body, finds himself strangely at a loss, among all those
different Judgments which are given in all Parts against him, and in favor of
him; and unless he resolves to remain steady, and to pass for an obstinate Man
in his Sentiments, he is obliged of necessity to contradict himself every
moment, and to assume as many different Shapes as there are different Heads in
a Nation.

However, Time does every one Justice; and Truth, which at first appears like a
Chimerical ridiculous Phantasm, is relished by degrees: Men open their Eyes,
they view it, discover its Charms, and are moved by it. He who condemns an
Author upon a Sentiment which offends him, accidentally meets with another who
approves that Sentiment, and who, on the contrary, condemns some Opinions the
other receives as undeniable: Every one speaks his Mind, and every one
contradicts the other. They Examine their own Reasons anew, as also those of
the Opponents: They dispute, they are mindful, they hesitate, they do no longer
Judge so rashly of what they have not Examined; and when they chance to alter
their Opinion, and to find that the Author is more reasonable than they
thought, a secret Inclination arises within their Hearts, which often induces
them to give him as good a Character as they gave him a bad one before.
Therefore, he than sticks close to Truth, though he offends at first, and is
looked upon as Ridiculous, must not despair of seeing that Truth he defends,
Triumph at some time or other over the Prejudices of Men; for there is this
difference between good and ill Books, between those that Instruct the Mind,
and those which Flatter the Senses and Imagination, that the latter ever appear
Charming and Delightful at first, and Time withers them; whereas the other, on
the contrary, have something odd and disgusting, which frightens at first; but
they are relished in time, by the degrees as Men read them, and meditate on
them, for Time commonly regulates the Price of things.

Books which engage Prejudices leading to Truth by a new way, require yet more
time than others to produce the Fruit which Authors expect from them: For, as
Men are often deceived in the hopes that are given by those who Compose these
sorts of Books, there are but few that read them, less who approve them, and
almost all condemn them whether they read them or no: And though it be known that
the most beaten Paths do not lead where one designs to go, yet that dread Men
conceive at the very entrance of those that are untrodden, discourages them
from engaging in them. People seldom look up to see their way, they blindly
follow those who go before; company diverts and comforts; they do not reflect
on what they are doing; they are not sensible whether they are going, and they
often forget whither they design to go.

Men are made to live in Society; but to maintain it, it is not sufficient to
speak the same Tongue, they must speak the same Sense; must think alike. They
must live by Opinion as they act by Imitation. Men think conveniently,
agreeably, and safely, for the good of the Body, and for the settling of their
Fortune, when they are of the Opinion of others, and when they suffer
themselves to be persuaded by the Air, or sensible Impression of the
Imagination of those who speak to them. But those suffer considerably, and
expose themselves to great dangers, who will only hearken to inward Truth, and
who reject, with contempt and horror, all the Prejudices of the Senses, and all
the Opinions that have been received without Examination.

Therefore those Writers, who oppose Prejudices, are very much mistaken, if
they expect to recommend themselves by it. If they succeed, perhaps a small
number of the Learned may speak Honorably of their Work, when they are Dead;
but while they are alive, they must expect to be neglected by most Men, and
Despised, Calumniated, and Persecuted, by those very Persons they look upon to
be very Wise and Moderate.

And indeed, there are so many Reasons, such strong and such convincing
Arguments, which oblige us to Act, like those we live with that Men are often
in the right to condemn those that are singular as capricious and fantastical
Persons; and whereas Men do not make a sufficient distinction between Acting
and Thinking, they commonly are displeased that any body should oppose
Prejudices: They fancy that it is not sufficient to observe the Rules of Civil
Society, to conform outwardly to the Opinions and Customs of the Country they
live in. They think it a prece of Temerity to examine Common Opinions, and that
to consult Truth is a breach of Charity; because it is not so much Truth which
unites Civil Societies as Opinion and Custom.

Aristotle is received in Universities as the Rule of Truth; he is Quoted as
Infallible. It is a Philosophical Heresy to deny what he advances. In a word,
he is respected as the Genius of Natures, and those who are best versed in his
Physics, can give no reason for any thing, and perhaps are convinced of
nothing; and Scholars that have read their course of Philosophy, dare hardly
say, before Men of Sense, what they have learnt of their Masters. That,
perhaps, may make those who reflect upon it, sensible of what we are to think
of those sorts of Studies; for a Science, which we must forget to become
reasonable, does not seem very solid. Nevertheless, those would be looked upon
as inconsiderate and rash, who should attempt to discover the falsity of the
Reasons which Authorize so extraordinary a Conduct; and they should not fail of
being troubled by those who receive advantage by them, if they were so happy as
to undeceive the Public.

Is is not evident, that the way to learn what we do not know, is to use what
we do know? And that it would be a Jest to give a Frenchman a German Grammar in
Verse to teach High Dutch? Yet it is customary to give Children the Latin
Verses of Despauterius to teach them Latin; obscure Verses in all respects, to
Children, who have much ado to apprehend the easiest things. Reason and
Experience, are visible against that Custom, for Children are a long while a
learning Latin ill. Nevertheless, it is Impudence to find fault with it; should
a Chinese hear this Custom, he could not forbear laughing at it, whilst on this
part of the World we Inhabit, the Wisest and the most Learned cannot forbear
approving it.

If such false and such absurd Prejudices and Customs, that are so
unreasonable, and of such great consequence, have a World of Protectors, how is
it to be expected that People should submit to Reasons which engage Prejudices
that are purely Speculative? A little attention is sufficient to discover, that
the Method which is used to teach Children is none of the best, and yet it is
not minded; Opinion and Custom prevail over Reason and Experience. How then
could any body expect that Works which overthrow a great number of Prejudices,
should not be condemned in many things, even by those who pass for the most
Learned, and for the Wisest?

It is observable, that those who pass in the World fox the best Judges and the
best Scholars, are those who have studied most Books both good and bad; they
are those who have the Memories, and whose Imagination is more lively, and more
extended than others. Now those Men commonly Judge of things rashly, and
without deliberation. They consult their Memory, in which they find immediately
the Law or the Prejudice, according to which they decide without much
Reflection. As they think themselves Wiser than others, they give but little
heed to what they read. Therefore it happens often, that Women and Children
discover the falsity of certain Prejudices which have been controverted,
because they dare not pass their Judgments upon them without Examination, but
use all the attention they are capable of in what they read; whereas, on the
contrary, the Learned persist in their Opinions, because they will not give
themselves the trouble to examine those of others, when they are directly
opposite to what they think already.

As for those that live with great Men, they depend on so many things that they
cannot easily retire into themselves, nor afford a sufficient attention to
distinguish what is true from what is likely. Nevertheless, they are not much
wedded to certain Prejudices, for the best way to hold strongly with the World,
is neither to be wedded to Truth nor Probability. As apparent humility, or good
breeding, and external moderation, are qualifications that please every body,
and which are absolutely necessary to maintain Society among those who have a
great deal of Pride and Ambition, the Men of the World affect not to affirm any
thing, or to believe any thing as undeniable. It ever was, and ever will be the
fashion, to look upon all things as Problematical, and to speak at random even
of the most holy Truths, lest they should seem wedded to any thing. For as
those I am speaking of, apply themselves to nothing, and mind nothing but their
Fortune, no disposition can seem so convenient, and so reasonable to them, as
that which custom justifies. Therefore those who attack Prejudices, flattering
on the one hand the Pride and Laziness of the Men of the World, they are well
received by them; but when they pretend to affirm any thing as undeniable, and
to discover the Truth of Religion, and of Christian Morality, they look upon
them as conceited Men, and as Persons, who to avoid one precipice leap into
another.

What I have said, in my Opinion, is sufficient to show what I could answer to
the different Judgments diverse persons have given against the Book, Entitled,
A Search after Truth; and I will forbear making an application which every one
may make usefully and easily. I am sensible that every body will not do it; but
it would look, perhaps, as if I would do my self Justice, in defending my self
as much as I could, therefore I abandon my Right to the Judicious Readers, who
are the Natural Judges of Books: And I conjure them to remember my Request in
the Preface to the Search after Truth, and elsewhere: Only to Judge of my
Sentiments according to the clear and distinct Answers they shall receive from
the only Master of all Mankind, after having made their application to him by a
serious, attention. For if they consult their Prejudices as the decisive Laws
of what they are to believe of the Book, Entitled, A Search after Truth, I own
that it is a very ill Book, since it is written oh purpose to discover the
Falsity and Injustice of those Laws.

Advertisement.
BEcause the following Explanations were writ to satisfy some particular
Persons, who desired a more special Explication of some Material Truths, I
think fit to premise, that what I shall say may be clearly understood, it will
be necessary for every one to have some knowledge of the Principles I Have
explained in the Search after Truth: Therefore 'twill be best not to meddle
with these Observations, till we have first carefully read the whole Work for
which they were written; and at the second reading, only examine them as they
are referred to in the Margent* Yet is not this Caution absolutely necessary to
be observed by Learned Persons, because I have endeavored so to compose these
Explanations, that they might be read without referring to the Book they were
written for; Truth, I know, of all things, gives us the least trouble to find
it out. Men don't use to collect those passages in a Book which have reference
to one another, but commonly read things as they fall in their way, and
understand as much of them as they can; wherefore, to comply with this temper,
I have essayed to make these Remarks intelligible, even to those who have
forgotten the places of reference in the foregoing Treatise. However, I would
desire those who don't care to give themselves the trouble of carefully
examining these Explanations, not to condemn them of false and extravagant
inferences which may be made for want of understanding them. I have some reason
for this Request, not only because I have a right to demand of my Readers, who
are my Judges, not to condemn me without understanding me, but upon several
other accounts, which it would be impertinent to particularize in this place.

SOME EXPLANATIONS OF THE Search after Truth.
The First Explanation of the First Chapter of the First Book.
God acts whatever is real in the motions of the Mind, and in the determination
of these Motions, yet he is not the Author of Sin.

He acts whatever is real in the Sensations of Concupiscence, and yet he is not
the Author of our Concupiscence.

SOme think I too soon forsake the comparison betwixt Mind and Matter, and
believe that the first has no more power than the second to determine the
impression that it receives from God; they would have me explain, if I can,
what God does in us, and what we do our selves when we Sin* because, as they
pretend, I shall be forced to grant either that Man can give himself a new
Modification, or else that God is truly the Author of Sin.

I answer, That Faith, Reason, and the inward Consciousness I have of my self,
oblige me to leave my comparison where I do, for I am every way convinced, that
I have in my self a principle of my own determinations; and I have some Reasons
to believe, that Matter has no such principle in it self, as will be proved
hereafter. But this is what God does in us, and what we do our selves when we
Sin.

First, God impels us continually by an invincible impression toward Good in
general. Secondly, he represents to us the Idea of a particular Good, or gives
us a Sensation of it: In fine, he carries us toward this particular Good.

God impels us continually toward Good in general, for he has made us, and
keeps us for himself, he will have us love every thing that is good; he is the
first or rather the only mover: In fine, this appears clearly by a great many
things that I have said before, and those that I have to do withal do grant it.

God represents to us the Idea of a particular Good, or gives us a Sensation of
it, for it is only he that enlightens us; and the bodies that are about us
cannot act upon our Mind: In one word, we are not our own light, nor make
our-own felicity: I have proved it at large in the Third Book, and elsewhere.

In fine, God carries us toward this particular Good. For God carrying us
toward what is good, it is a necessary consequence that he should carry us
toward particular goods when he produces the Idea or the Sensation of 'em in
our Soul. This is all what God does in us when we Sin.

But as one particular good does not include all goods, and as the Mind
considering it with a clear and distinct view cannot imagine that it includes
'em all; God does not carry us necessarily or invincibly to the love of this
good, we are sensible that we are free to stop there, that we have motion to go
farther; in one word, that the impression which we have for good in general, or
to speak as others, that our Will is neither constrained nor necessitated to
stop at this particular good.

This is then what the Sinner does; he stops, he rests, he follows not the
impression of God; he acts not, for Sin is nothing. He knows that the great
Rule he must observe, is to make use of his liberty as much as he can, and that
he must stick at no good if he be not inwardly convinced, that it would be
against order not to stick at it. If he does not discover this Rule by the
light of his Reason, he learns it, at least, by the inward reproaches of his
Conscience; he ought then to follow the impression which he receives toward
good in general, and think of other goods than that he enjoys, which he ought
only to make use of; for it is by thinking of other goods than those he enjoys,
that he may produce in himself new determinations of love, and make use of his
liberty. Now I prove, that by the impression that God gives him toward good in
general, he may think of other goods than those he enjoys, because it is
precisely in this that the difficulty lies.

It Is a Law of Nature, that the Ideas of Objects should present themselves to
our Mind, as soon as we will think of 'em, provided the capacity we have of
thinking be not filled by the quick and confused Sensations we receive from
what passes in our Body. Now we may be willing to think of all things, because
the natural impression which impels us toward good, does extend to all the
things that we may think of, and we may at all times think of all things,
because we are united to him that includes the Ideas of all things, as I proved
n="*" Read the Chapter of the 3d Book, whose Title is, That we see all things
in God; and the Explanation of this Chapter.
elsewhere.

If it be then true, that we may be willing to consider nearly what we already
see as afar off, since we are united to the Universal Being; and if it be
certain, that by virtue of the Law of Nature, Ideas come near us, as soon as we
desire it, it must be concluded;

First, That we have a principle of our determinations; for it is the actual
presence of particular Ideas which determines positively toward particular
goods, the motion we have toward good in general; and which thus changes our
natural love into free love. Our assent or acquiescence at the sight of a
particular good, is nothing real or positive on our part, as I shall explain
hereafter.

Secondly, That this Principle of our Determinations is always free in respect
to particular gooods; for we are not invincibly impelled to love 'em; since we
may examine 'em in themselves; and compare them with the Idea we have of the
sovereign good, or with other particular goods; so the principle of our liberty
is, that being made for God, and united to God, we may always think of the true
good, or of some other goods than those of which we actually think.

I suppose nevertheless, that our Sensations do not fill all the capacity of
our Mind; for that we may be free with the liberty I speak of, it is necessary,
not only that God should not invincibly impel us toward particular goods, but
also that we may make use of the impression we have toward good in general, to
love some other thing than that we actually love. Now as we can love no Object
but those we may think of, nor actually think of any other but those that cause
too quick Sensations in us; it is evident, that the dependence we have upon our
Body lessens our liberty, nay does on many occasions take away the use of it.
So our Sensations destroying out Ideas, and the union we have with our Body, by
which we only see, or rather feel our selves, weakening that which we have with
God, by which all things are present to us; the Mind must not suffer it self to
be divided by confused Sensations, if it be willing always to have the
principle of its determinations to be free.

It appears from all this, that God is not the Author of Sin, and that Man does
not give himself new Modifications: God is not the Author of Sin, since he
continually imprints a motion to go farther on him who Sins, or stops at a
particular good, and he gives him the power to think of other things, and to
apply himself to other goods than that which actually is the Object of his
thought and of his love; that he commands him not to love those things which he
can forbear loving without being troubled by any remorses; and he continually
calls him to himself by the secret reproaches of his Reason.

Is is true, Gob does in one sense impel the Sinner to love the Object of his
Sin, if this Object appears to be good to the Sinner; for, as most Divines say,
all that is positive in Sin, or what there is of act or motion, proceeds from
God. But it is only through a false judgment of our Mind that the Creatures
appear good to us, that is capable of acting in us and making us happy. The Sin
of a Man lies in this, that he does not refer all the particular Goods to the
Sovereign Good; or rather in that he does not consider nor love the Severaign
Good in the particular Goods; and so does not regulate his Love according to
the Will of God, or according to the essential and necessary order of which all
Men have a knowledge, and which is so much the more perfect as they are more
strictly united to God, and are less sensible of the impressions of their
Senses and Passions. See the Explanations upon the Third Chapter of the Second
Part of the Sixth Book, toward the end, where I explain my thoughts more
distinctly.
For our Senses diffuse our Souls through our whole Bodies, and our Passions
transport them, if I may so say, into those Objects which are about us, they
remove us from the light of God which enlightens us.

Neither does Man give himself new Modifications, for the motions of love that
God continually imprints upon us increases, or diminishes not, whether we
actually love or not; I mean, although this natural motion of love be, or be
not determined by any Idea of our Mind. This motion does not cease even by its
acquiescence in the possession of Good, as the motion of Bodies ceases by their
rest. It Is probable that God always impels us with an equal force toward him;
for he inclines us toward good in general as much as we are capable of, and we
are at all times equally capable of it, because our Will, or Natural capacity
of Willing is always equal in it self. Thus the impression or Natural motion
which carries us toward good, neither increases or diminishes.

I confess we have no clear Idea, nor even any internal Sensation of this
equality of impression or natural motion toward Good. But it is because, as I
have elsewhere proved, that we know not our selves by a clear Idea; not are we
conscious of our own Faculties whilst they don't actually operate: we do not
feel in our selves, what is natural, common, and always the same, as we are not
sensible of the heat and motion of our Hearts. We are not likewise sensible of
our Habits, and whether we are worthy of the Love or Wrath of God. There is
perhaps in us an infinite number of Faculties which are absolutely unknown to
us; for we have no internal Sensation of what we are, but only of what we feel.
If we had never felt Pain, nor a desire for particular Goods, we could not by
the internal Sensation we have of our selves, discover whether we should be
capable of feeling Pain, or willing such Goods. It Is our Memory, and not our
internal Sensation that teaches us we are capable of feeling what we no longer
feel, or of being agitated by Passions, which at present we feel no motions of.
Thus there is nothing which hinders us from believing that God always inclines
us toward him with an equal force, although after a very different manner: He
always preserves in our Souls an equal capacity of willing, or one and the same
will, as in all matter he preserves an equal quantity of motion. But although
it were not certain, I don't see how we can say that the increase or diminution
of the natural motion of our Souls depends upon us, since we cannot be the
cause of the extension of our own Will.

It is however certain, by what I have said before, that God produces, and also
preserves whatsoever is real and positive in the particular determinations of
the motions of our Souls, whether Ideas or Sensations. For it is he who
determines our motions for a general Good, toward particular Goods; but not
after an invincible manner, since we have a tendency to go farther. So that all
we do when we sin, is, that we do not all that we are able to do, by means of
the impression we have toward him who includes all Goods: For we can do
nothing but by the power that we receive from our Union with him who does all
things in us. Now, what chiefly makes us Sin, is, because we choose rather to
enjoy than to examine, because of the Pleasure we feel in enjoying, and the
Pain we find in examining: We cease to make use of the motion that is given us
to enquire after Good and examine it, and we stop in the enjoyment of such
things as we ought only to make use of. But if we narrowly observe, we shall
see there is nothing real on our part, but a defect and cessation from enquiry;
which, if we may so say, corrupts the action of God in us; but which however
cannot destroy it. Thus, What do we when we do not Sin? We do then whatever God
does in us; for we limit not to a particular, or rather to a false Good, the
love that God imprints on us for the true Good. And, when we Sin, what do we?
Nothing; for we love a false Good, that God enclines us not to love by an
invincible Impression. We cease to seek the true Good, and make useless the
motion which God imprints on us. Now, when we love any particular Good only, or
against Order, we receive from God as great an impression of Love, as if we
stopped not at this Good. Moreover, this particular determination, which is
neither necessitated nor invincible, is also given us of God. Therefore when we
Sin, we produce no new modification in our selves.

However, I confess, when we do not Sin, but resist Temptation, we may say in
one Sense, that we give our selves a new modification, because we would think
of other things than on the false Goods which tempt us. But what we then do is
produced by the action which God impresses on us, that is, by our motion
toward Good in general, or by our Will assisted by Grace, or illuminated by a
light, or impelled by a preingaged Pleasure: For in short, if it is pretended,
that to Will different things, is to give our selves different Modifications, I
grant that in this Sense the Mind can diversely modifie it self, by the action
it receives from God.

But it must always be observed, that that action that God performs in us,
depends upon us, and is not invincible in respect to particular Goods. For when
a particular Good is presented to us, we have an internal Sensation of our
liberty in respect to it, as we have of our Pleasure and Pain when we feel it.
We are even convinced of our Freedom, by the same reason that we are convinced
of our Existence; for it is the internal Sensation we have of our Thoughts,
which teaches us that we are. And if in the time that we are conscious of our
liberty in respect to a particular Good, we ought to doubt whether or no we are
free, because we have no clear Idea of our liberty: We must also doubt of our
Pain, and Existence, at the time even when we are very unhappy, since we have
no clear Idea, either of our Souls, or of our Pain.

It is not the same with internal Sensation, as with our external Senses: These
always deceive us in something, when we follow their information; but our
internal Sensation never deceives us. It Is by my external Senses, that I see
Colors upon the surface of Bodies, that I hear sounds in the Air, and feel
pain in my Hand, etc. and I am deceived, if I judge of these things upon the
relation of my Senses. But it is by internal Sensation that I see Colors, hear
Sounds, suffer Pain: and I deceive not my self, to think I see when I see, hear
when I hear, or suffer when I suffer, provided I stay there. I explain not
these things more at large, because they are evident of 'emselves. Thus having
an internal Sensation of our liberty, at the same time that a particular Good
presents it self to our Mind, we ought not to doubt, whether we are free in
respect to this Good. Yet, as we have not always this internal Sensation, and
sometimes only consult what remains of it in our memory after a very confused
manner; We may think of the abstracted Reasons which hinder us from feeling our
selves persuaded that it is not possible for Man to be free: Like a Stoic, that
wants nothing, and who can Philosophise at his ease, can imagine that Pain is
not an Evil, because the internal Sensation he has of it, does not actually
convince him of the contrary. He may prove as Seneca has done, by Reasons that
in one Sense are true, that it is even a contradiction that a wise Man can be
unhappy.

Yet when the internal Sensation we have of our selves, will not suffice to
convince us that we are free, we may persuade our selves of it by Reason. For
being convinced by Reason that God only acts for himself, and that he cannot
give us any motion which tends not toward him; the impression toward good in
general may be invincible, but it is plain the impression he gives us toward
particular Goods, must necessarily be free. For if this impression was
invincible, we should not have any motion to go to God, although he gives us
motion only for himself; and we should be necessitated to stop at particular
Goods, although God, Order and Reason forbid it. So that we should not Sin
through our own default, and God would be truly the cause of our
Irregularities, since they would not be free, but purely natural, and
absolutely necessary.

Thus although we should not be convinced of our liberty by the internal
Sensation we have of our selves, we might by Reason discover that its necessary
that Man should be created free; supposing that he be capable of desiring
particular Goods, and that he can desire these Goods, only by the impression or
motion that God continually gives him for himself, which may likewise be proved
by Reason. But it is not the same of the capacity we have of suffering any Pain.
To discover that we have this capacity, there is no other way, but internal
Sensation; and yet no one doubts but Man is subject to Pain.

As we know not our Soul by a clear Idea, as I have elsewhere explained,
'twould be in vain for us to try to discover what it is in us, which terminates
the action that God imprints on us; or what it is in us which is overcome by a
determination that is not invincible, and that may be changed by our Will, or
impression toward whatever is good, and by its union with him, who includes
the Ideas of all Beings. For, as we have no clear Idea of any modification of
our Soul, there is only an internal Sensation, which teaches us that we exist,
and what we are, It Is this Sensation therefore that we must consult to convince
our selves that we are free. It answers us clearly enough, when we actually
propose any particular good to our selves: For there is no Man who can doubt
that he is not invincibly carried to Eat a Fruit, or to shun some
inconsiderable Pain; But if instead of harkening to our internal Sensation, we
give attention to abstracted Reasons, which divert us from thinking of our
selves, it may be we might even lose the sight of our selves, and forget what
we are: and that endeavoring to reconcile the knowledge of God, and the
absolute power he has over us, with our liberty, we should fall into an Error,
which would overthrow all the Principles of Religion and Morality.

Here is an Objection that is used to be made against what I have said; and
although it be very trivial, it nevertheless is a difficulty to some Men. The
hatred of God, say they, is an action wherein there is no Good. Therefore it is
perfectly the Sinners, and God has no part in it: Consequently Man acts, and
gives himself a new modification, by an action which proceeds not from God.

I Answer, That Sinners hate God only because they freely and falsely judge that
he is Evil: For they cannot hate Good, considered as such. So that it is by the
same motion of love that God imprints on them to Good, that they Hate him. Now
they judge, that God is not Good, because they make not that use as they ought
of their liberty. Not being convinced by an undoubted evidence, that God is not
Good, they ought not to believe him Evil, nor consequently Hate him.

We must distinguish two things in Hatred, the Sensation of the Soul, and
motion of the Will. The Sensation cannot be bad: For it is a modification of the
Soul, which Morally speaking, has neither Good nor Ill in it. For the motion it
is not ill neither, since it is not distinct from that of Love. For external
Evil, being only a privation of Good, it is evident that to fly Evil, is to fly
the privation of Good, that is to incline toward Good. So that whatever there
is of real and positive in the Hatred even of God, has nothing bad in it: And
the Sinner cannot hate God, but by making an abominable abuse of the action
that God continually gives him to induce him to love himself.

God causes whatever we have that is real in the Sensations of Concupiscence;
This Explanation relates to the fifth Chapter of the first Book of the Search
after Truth.
and yet he is not the Author of our Concupiscence.

As the difficulties that are raised about Concupiscence have much relation to
those things I have explained, it will be proper for me here to show that God
is not the Author of Concupiscence, although he performs all things in us; and
it is only he who produces even sensible Pleasures in us.

It seems undoubted to me that we ought to grant, for the Reasons I have given
in the fifth Chapter of the first Book of the Search after Truth, and
elsewhere, that following the Natural Laws of the union of the Soul and Body,
Man even before Sin, was carried by a foresight of Pleasure to the use of
sensible Goods, and that every time that certain traces were formed in the
chief part of his Brain, certain thoughts were produced in his Mind. Now, these
Laws were very just for the Reasons brought in the same Chapter. This supposed,
as before the Fall all things were perfectly well regulated, so Man had
necessarily a power over his Body, that he could hinder the formation of these
traces when he would; for order requires, that the Mind should govern the Body.
Now this power of Man's Mind over his Body, consisted strictly in that according
to his desires and different applicacations, he could stop the communication of
the Motions which were produced in his Body by those Objects that were about
him, over which his Will had not an immediate and direct power, as it had over
his own Body. I don't see how we can conceive, that after any other manner, he
coud hinder the traces from being formed in his Brain. Thus the Will of God, or
general Law of Nature, which is the true cause of the communication of Motion,
would on certain occasions depend upon Adams Will; for God had this respect for
him, that he produced not new Motions in his Body, if he consented not to them,
or at least in the chief part of it, to which the Soul is immediately united.

Such was the Institution of Nature before Sin; Order requires it so; and
consequently, he whose Will is ever conformable to Order. Now this Will
continuing always the same, the Sin of the first Man has overturned the Order
of Nature, because the first Man having Sinned, Order would not permit him
absolutely to rule over any thing. In the Objection of the 7th Article of the
Explanation of the 7th Cap. of the 2d l.; I explain what I speak here in
general of the loss that Man sustained as to the power he had over his Body.
It is not just that the Sinner shoud suspend the communication of Motions;
that the Will of God should be accommodated to his; and that in favor of him,
there shoud be exceptions in the Law of Nature. So that Man is subject to
Concupiscence; his Mind depends upon his Body; he feels in himself indeliberate
Pleasures, and involuntary and rebellious Motions, in consequence of his most
Just Law who united both parts of which he is composed.

Thus formal Concupiscence, as well as formal Sin, is nothing real; It is in
Man only, the loss of that power he had of suspending the communication of
Motions on certain occasions: We must not admit in God a positive Will of
producing it. This loss that Man has sustained, is not a Natural consequence of
the Will of God, which is ever conformable to order, and always the same; it is
a consequence of Sin which has made Man unworthy of an advantage due only to
his Innocence and Justice. So that we must say, that God is not the cause of
Concupiscence, but only Sin.

Yet whatever is real and positive in the Sensations and Motions of
Concupiscence, is performed by God; Aug. against the two Epistles of the Pel.
l. 1. cap. 15, etc.
for God effects whatever is done, but that is no Evil: It Is by the General Law
of Nature, it is by the Will of God that sensible Objects produce certain
Motions in the Body of Man, and that these Motions excite certain Sensations in
the Soul, useful for the preservation of the Body, or propagation of the
Species; who dares then say, that these things are not good in themselves?

I know very well, that we say Sin is the cause of certain Pleasures; we say
it, but do we know it? Can we think that Sin, which is nothing, should actually
produce something? Can we conceive nothing to be a Cause? However, we say it,
but it may be the reason is, because we will not take pains enough to think
seriously upon what we say; or else it is, because we will begin an Explication
which is contrary to what we have heard persons say, who, it may be, spoke with
more Gravity and Assurance, than Reflection and Understanding.

Sin is the cause of Concupiscence, but it is not the cause of Pleasure; as
Free Will is the cause of Sin, without being the cause of the Natural Motion of
the Soul. The pleasure of the Soul is good, as well as its motion or love; and
there is nothing good that God does not. The rebellion of the Body, and
malignity of Pleasure, proceeds from Sin, as the inclination of the Soul to, or
its acquiescence in a particular good, comes from the Sinner: But these are
only privations and nothings that the Creature is capable of.

All Pleasure is good, and even in some manner makes him happy that enjoys it,
at least whilst he enjoys it. But we may say that Pleasure is Evil, because
instead of raising the Mind to him that causes it, it happens through the
error of our Mind, and corruption of our Heart, that it abases it toward
sensible Objects which seem to cause it.

It is Evil, in as much as it is Injustice in us who are Sinners, and
consequently deserve to be punished rather than rewarded, to oblige God in
pursuance of his Primitive Will, to recompense us with agreeable Sensations. In
a word, for I will not repeat here what I have already said, it is Evil because
God now forbids it; since it alienates the Mind from him for whom it was made
and preserved: for that which God ordained to preserve the Righteous Man in his
Innocence, now establishes the Wicked Man in his Sin, and the Sensations of
Pleasure which he wisely ordained as the easiest and most obvious expedient to
teach Man, without diverting his Reason from his true Good, whether he ought to
unite himself with the Bodies about him; these Sensations, I say, at present,
fill the Capacity of his Mind, and fix him on Objects incapable of acting, and
infinitely below him, because he looks upon these Objects to be the true Causes
of the Happiness he occasionally enjoys from them.

THE SECOND EXPLANATION OF THE First Chapter of the First Book.
Where I say,

That the Will cannot differently determine the Impession it has toward good,
but by Commanding the Understanding to represent some particular Object to it.

WE must not imagine that the Will commands the Understanding otherwise than by
its desire and motions; for the Will has no other Action. Neither must we
believe, that the Understanding obeys the Will in producing in it self the
Ideas of those things which the Soul desires: For the Understanding does not
Act: It only receives the Light or the Ideas of Objects by the necessary union
it has with him who includes all Beings after an intelligible manner, as we
have explained it in the Third Book.

See the Explanation of the 6th Chapter of the 2d Part of the 3d Book.
This then is the whole Mystery. Man participates of the Sovereign Reason, and
Truth discovers it self to him proportionally as he applies himself to it, and
prays it. The desire of the Soul is a Natural Prayer which is always granted;
for it is a Natural Law, that the Ideas should be so much the more present to
the Mind, as the Will desires them with the more fervency. Thus, provided the
Capacity we have of thinking, or our Understanding, be not filled with the
Confused Sensations we receive by means of what passes in our Body; we never
desire to think on any Object, but the Idea of the said Object is immediately
present to us; and as experience it self teaches us, the said Idea is the more
present and clear, according as our desire is stronger, and that the confused
Sensations we receive by the Body, are weaker and less sensible, as I have
already observed in the preceding Remark.

Therefore in saying, that the Will commands the Understanding to present some
particular Object to it, I only meant, that the Soul which would consider that
Object with attention, draws near unto it by its desire; because this desire,
pursuant to the efficacious Will of God, which is the inviolable Law of Nature,
is the cause of the presence and clearness of the Idea which represents that
Object. I could not express my self otherwise, nor explain my self as I do now;
since I had not as yet proved, that God alone is the Author of our Ideas, and
that our particular Wills are the Occasional Causes of it. I spoke according to
the common Opinion, and I have often been forced so to do, because all things
cannot be said at one and the same time. Readers must have Equity, and trust
for some time, in order to be satisfied; for none but Geometricians can always
pay in ready Coin.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Where I say,

That it is no Wonder we have no Evidence of the Mysteries of Faith, since we
have not so much as Ideas of them.

When I say that we have no Ideas of the Mysteries of Faith, Ne omnino
taceremus interrogati, quid tres, cum tres esse fateamur. De Trinitate. B. 7.
Chapter 4. Cum quoeritur; quid tres? Magna prorsus inopia humanum laborat eloquium.
Dictum est tamen tres Personae, non ut illud diceretur, sed non taceretur. In
the same place B. 5. Chapter 9.
it is visible by what precedes, and what follows, that I speak of the clear
Ideas which produce Light and Evidence, and by which we have a Comprehension of
the Object, if I may so speak. I grant, for Instance, that a Peasant could
never believe, that the Son of God was made Man, or that there are Three
Persons in the Godhead, unless he had some Idea of the union of the Word with
our Humanity, and some notion of Person. But if those Ideas were clear, we
might by applying our selves to them, perfectly apprehend those Mysteries, and
explain them to others; they would no longer be ineffable Mysteries. The Word
Person, according to St. Augustine, has been spoken of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, not so much clearly to explain what they are, as not to
be silent upon a Mystery which we are obliged to speak of.

I say here, that we have no Ideas of our Mysteries, as I have said elsewhere,
that we have no Ideas of our Soul; because the Idea we have of our Soul is not
clear, no more than that of our Mysteries. Thus this Word Idea is Equivocal: I
have sometimes taken it, for whatever represents to the Mind any Object whether
clearly or confusedly. I have taken it, yet more generally for whatever is the
immediate Object of the Mind. But I have also taken it for that which
represents things to the Mind in so clear a manner, that a Man may discover at
first fight whether such or such Modifications belong to them. Therefore I said
sometimes that we had an Idea of the Soul and sometimes I have denied it. It is
difficult, and often tiresom and disagreeable, to keep too rigorous an
exactness in our Expressions, since it is sufficient to make our selves
understood.

When an Author only contradicts himself in the Mind of those who Criticize
upon him, and who are desirous he should contradict himself, he needs not much
value it; and if he should undertake by a tedious Explanation to solve,
whatever the malice or ignorance of some Persons might urge against him, he
would not only make an ill Book; but moreover the Readers would be displeased
at his Answers to his Objections, that would be contrary to a certain Equity
which all Men pretend to. For Men hate to be suspected either of Malice or
Ignorance; and commonly Men are not allowed to answer weak and malicious
Objections, until they are actually made, whereby the Readers are secured
against the reproach which such Answers seem to charge those with who exact
them.

AN EXPLANATION OF These Words of the First Chapter.
This being granted, we must say that Adam was not induced to the Love of God,
and to perform his Duty by pre-ingaging Pleasures; seeing that the knowledge he
had of his Good, and the Joy which possessed him continually as a necessary
consequence of the prospect of his happiness in uniting himself to God, might
suffice to engage him to perform his Duty, and to make him Act with more merit,
than if he had been, as it were, determined by Pre-ingaging Pleasures.

TO apprehend all this distinctly, it is necessary to understand, that nothing
but knowledge and pleasure determine Men to Act. For when we begin to love an
Object, it is, either because we know by Reason that it is good, or because we
find by our selves that it is agreeable. Now, there is a great deal of
difference between Knowledge and Pleasure: Knowledge enlightens our Mind, and
makes us distinguish good, without inducing us actually and forcibly to love
it: Pleasure on the contrary induces and determines us forcibly to love the
Object which seems to occasion it. Knowledge does not induce us of it self; it
only makes us freely and of our own accord incline our selves toward that Good
which it offers us; it leaves us wholly to our selves. Pleasure on the contrary
anticipates our Reason; it hinders us from consulting it; It does not leave us
wholly to our selves, and it weakens our liberty.

Therefore, as Adam before the Fall had a time appointed to merit Eternal
Happiness; and in order thereunto a full and absolute Liberty; and as his
Knowledge was sufficient to keep him strictly united to God, whom he already
loved by the Natural motion or tendency of his Love; he was not to be induced
to his Duty by Pre-ingaging Pleasures, which would have lessened his Merit in
lessening his Liberty. Adam would have had reason in some measure to complain
of God, had he hindered him from meriting his Reward, Fortissimo quipped
dimisit atque permisit facere quod vellet. Aug. de corrupt. and great. cap. 12.
as he ought to have merited it, that is by Actions perfectly free. God would
have injured his free Will in some measure, in giving him that kind of Grace,
which is now only necessary for us upon the account of the Pre-ingaging
Pleasures of concupiscence. Adam being endued with whatever was necessary for
his perseverance, to prevent him would have looked like a diffidence of his
Virtue, and like a reproach of Infidelity. He would have had some reason to
magnify himself, had he not been sensible of the necessity he might be liable
to, and of the Weakness into which he was also subject to fall. In fine, that
which is yet infinitely more considerable, is, that it would have rendered the
Inclinations of Jesus Christ, in relation to us, Look upon the Fifth Dialogue
of the Christian Conversations toward the latter end, of the Impression of
Brussels.
indifferent, though it was certainly his first and greatest design, who
suffered Men to be involved in Sin in order to show Mercy to them all in Jesus
Christ, to the end that he who glories should only glory in the Lord.

Therefore it is evident to me, that Adam felt no Pre-ingaging Pleasure in his
Duty; but I am of opinion, that it is not altogether certain that he felt Joy,
though I suppose it in this place, because I think it very probable. But to
explain my self,

There is this difference between Pre-ingaging Pleasure, and the Pleasure of
Joy, that the first anticipates Reason, and the latter follows it; for Joy
naturally results from the knowledge we have of our Happiness, or of our
Perfections, since we can never look upon our selves as happy or perfect,
without being immediately joyful at it. As we may be sensible of our Happiness
by Pleasure, or discover it by Reason; so there are two sorts of Joy. But I do
not speak in this place of that which is purely sensible: I speak of that which
Adam could feel, as a necessary consequence of the knowledge he had of his
happiness in uniting himself to God. And there is some reason to question
whether he really had that Joy.

The chief is, that this Joy might have taken up his Mind to that degree, as to
deprive him of his Liberty, and would have united him to God after an
invincible manner. For we may believe, that as this Joy must be proportionable
to the happiness Adam possessed, it must needs be excessive.

But I answer to this, first, That the Joy which is purely Intelectual leaves
the Mind absolutely free, and has but little influence over its capacity,
thinking therein it differs from sensible Joy, which commonly disturbs our
Reason, and lessens our Liberty.

I answer in the second place, That Adam's Happiness at the first instant of
his Creation, did not consist in a full and entire possession of sovereign
Good; he was liable to lose it, and to become unhappy. His Happiness chiefly
consisted in that he felt no pain, and that he was in his favor who was to
make him perfectly happy, had he persevered in his Innocence. Therefore his Joy
was not excessive; moreover, it was, or ought to have been mixed with a kind of
fear, for he had reason to be diffident of himself.

Finally, I answer, That Joy does not always apply the Mind to the real Cause
which produced it. As we feel Joy at the sight of our Perfections, it is
natural to believe that the said sight occasions it; for when one thing always
follows another, we naturally look on it as one of its Effects. So we look upon
our selves as the Authors of our present Felicity: We have a secret
Complaisance in our Natural Perfections: We love our selves: We do not always
think on him who operates in us after an Imperceptible manner.

It is certain that Adam knew more distinctly than the best Philosopher that
ever was, that God only was capable to act in him, and to occasion that
Sensation of Joy which he felt in himself at the sight of his Happiness and
Perfections: He knew that clearly by the light of Reason whenever he applied
himself to it; but he did not feel it. He felt on the contrary, that the said
Joy was a Consequence of his Perfections, and he always felt it, without any
application on his part. Therefore that Sensation might induce him to consider
his own Perfections, and to delight in himself, in case he forgot, or any wise
lost the sight of him whose Operations are not sensible. So that Joy was so far
from rendering him Impeccable, as it is pretended, that on the contrary his Joy
perhaps proved the occasion of his Pride and Ruin. And therefore I say in this
Chapter, that it behooved Adam to take care, not to suffer the Capacity of his
Mind to be filld with a presumptuous Joy excited in his Soul upon the sight of
his Natural Perfections.

AN EXPLANATION OF The Fifth Chapter.
Where I say,

That the Pre-ingaging Delectation is the Grace of Jesus Christ.

THough I say in this Chapter, that the Pre-ingaging Delectation is the Grace
which Jesus Christ has particularly merited for us, and in another place I call
it absolutely the Grace of Jesus Christ; it is not that there is no other Grace
but that, or that there is any which Christ has not purchased for us: But I
call it the Grace of Jesus Christ, to distinguish it from the Grace that God
gave to the first Man when he Created him, which is commonly called the
Creator's Grace. For the Grace, by which Adam might have preserved, his
Innocence, was chiefly a Grace of Light, as I have explained in the preceding
Remark; because that Adam having no concupiscence, he stood in need of no
Pre-ingaging Pleasures to oppose it.

But the Grace which we now stand in need of to keep us within the bounds of
our Duty, and to produce and maintain Charity in us, is Pre-ingaging
Delectation. For as Pleasure produces and maintains the Love of those things
which occasion it, or seem to occasion it; the Pre-ingaging Pleasures we
receive in relation to our Bodies produce and maintain Cupidity in us. So that
being directly contrary to Charity, unless God were pleased to produce and
maintain Charity in us by Pre-ingaging Delectations; it is plain that the
Pre-ingaging Pleasures of Concupiscence would weaken it proportionably as
Cupidity should be strengthened.

What I say here, supposes that God permits our Concupiscence to Act in us, and
that he does not weaken it by inspiring us with horror against all sensible
Objects, which as a result of Sin must needs tempt us. I speak of things as
they commonly happen. But, supposing that God diminishes Concupiscence instead
of increasing the Delectation of Grace, that may produce the same Effects. We
are sensible that there are two ways of putting Scales in Equilibrio, when one
of them is overcharged; not only in adding Weights to the other side to even
it; but also in removing some of the other weights which bear it down.

Neither do I pretend that Men can do no good Actions without Pre-ingaging
Delectation. I have sufficiently explained my self upon that subject in the 4th
Chapter of the 3d Book. And it appears so evident to me, that a Man who has the
Love of God in his Heart, may by the force of his Love, and without
Pre-ingaging Delectation, give, for Example a Penny to the Poor, or bear some
small injury with patience; that I can not apprehend how any body can question
it. In my opinion Delectation is only necessary when the Temptation is Strong,
or Love Weak: If however it may be said, that it is absolutely necessary to a
righteous Man, whose Faith I think may be firm enough, and his Hopes strong
enough to overcome great Temptations; The joy or fore-tast of Eternal Happiness
being capable to resist the sensible Charms of Transitory Pleasures.

It is true that Delectation or Actual Grace is necessary for all good Actions,
if by the Word Delectation or Grace is understood Charity, as St. Austin
commonly takes it; for it is evident, that what ever is not done for God, is no
wise good. But removing the Equivocation, and taking the Word Delectation in my
sense, I do not think any body can question what I have said.

But this is the Case. It is supposed that Pleasure and Love are one and the
same thing, because the one seldom goes without the other; and St. Augustine
does not always distinguish them. And this being supposed Men are in the right
in saying what they say. We may conclude with St. Austin; Quod amplius nos
delectat, secundum id operemur necesse est; for Men certainly Will that which
they Love; and we may also say, that we can do nothing good or meritorious
without Delectation or without Charity. But I hope to show in an Explanation I
shall give upon the Treatise of the Passions, that there is as much difference
betwixt Pleasure and Deliberate or Indeliberate Love, as there is betwixt our
Knowledge and our Love; or to express that difference sensibly, as there is
between the Figure of a Body and its Motion.

AN EXPLANATION OF What I have said at the beginning of the 10th Chapter of the
First Book, and in the 6th of the Second Book, of Method: That it is very
difficult to prove that there are Bodies. Which must be understood of the the
Proofs that are alleged of their Existence.
IT is very usual among Men to be perfectly ignorant of what they think they
understand best, and to understand certain things pretty well, which they fancy
they have not so much as Ideas of. When their Senses have some share in their
Judgments, they yield to what they do not apprehend, or to things they have but
a very imperfect knowledge of; and when their Ideas are purely Intellectual (I
desire the like Expressions may be allowed me) they unwilling receive
Indisputable Demonstrations.

For Example, What can the generality of Men think, when the major part of
Metaphysical Truths are proved to them; When the Existence of God is
demonstrated to them, the Power of his Will, the Immutability of his Decrees;
That there is but one God, or one real Cause which does all in all things; That
there is but one sovereign Reason, of which all Intelligences participate; That
there is but one necessary Love, which is the Principle of all Created Wills?
They think Men speak Words absolutely void of Sense, that they have no Ideas of
the things they advance, and that they would do well to hold their Tongues.
Metaphysical Truths and Proofs having nothing that is sensible in them, Men are
not moved, and consequently not convinced by them. Nevertheless it is most
certain, that abstracted things are the most distinct, and Metaphysical Truths
are the clearest and the most evident.

Men say sometimes that they have no Ideas of God, and that they have no
knowledge of his Will; and moreover think often as they say; but it is only
because they fancy they do not know that, which perhaps they know best. For
where is the Man who hesitates to answer, when he is asked, Whether God is
Wise, Just, Powerful; whether he is, or is not Triangular, Divisible, Moveable,
Liable to any Alteration? Nevertheless it is impossible to answer without fear
of being deceived, whether certain qualifications agree not to a subject, if
one has no Ideas of that subject. So likewise, Where is the Man who dares say,
that God does not Act by the Plainest Means; That he is Irregular in his
Designs; That he makes Monsters by a positive, direct, and particular Will, and
not by a kind of necessity; In a Word, That his Will is, or may be contrary to
the Order, of which there is no Man but has some knowledge? But if we had no
Idea of the Will of God, we might at least question whether he acts according
to certain Laws, which we clearly conceive he must follow, supposing he will
Act.

Therefore Men have Ideas of things that are purely Intelligible; and these
Ideas are much clearer than those of sensible Objects. Men are more certain of
the Existence of God, than of Bodies; and when they look within themselves,
they discover more clearly certain Wills of God, according to which he
preserves all Beings, than those of their best Friends, or of those whom they
have studied all their life. For that Union of their Mind with God, and of
their Will with his, I mean with the Eternal Law, or with the Immutable Order,
is an immediate, direct, and necessary Union; and the union they have with
sensible Objects, being only Established for the preservation of their Health
and Life, it only makes them know those Objects according to the relation they
have to that design.

It is this immediate and direct Union, which is only known, says St. Augustine,
by those whose Mind is purified, which enlightens us in the most secret
recesses of our Reason, and exhorts and moves us, in the most inward part of
our Heart. It Is this which teaches us what God Thinks, and even what God Wills;
that is, his Eternal Truths and Laws; for no body can question our knowing some
of them evidently. But the union we have with our best Friends does not teach
us evidently, either what they think, or what they will. We think we know it
perfectly; but we are commonly mistaken, when we only know it because they tell
it us.

The Union we have by our Senses with Bodies which surround us, cannot inform
us neither; For the relation of the Senses is never absolutely true, nay, it is
often false in all respects, according as I have explained it in this Book. And
therefore I say, that it is more difficult than Men think, to prove positively
that there are Bodies, notwithstanding our Senses assure us there are; because
Reason does not assure us of it so positively as we imagine, and because it is
necessary to consult it with great application to be satisfied in it.

But as Men are more sensible than, reasonable, and hearken more willingly to
the Testimony of their Senses, than to that of internal Truth; they have always
consulted their Eyes to assure themselves of the Existence of Matter, without
giving themselves the trouble to consult their Reason: And therefore they are
surprised when they are told that it is difficult to demonstrate it. They think
it is sufficient to open their Eyes to see that there are Bodies; and in case
there is any fear of being deluded, they think it sufficient, to draw near and
to touch them; after which, they can hardly conceive there can be any reason to
doubt of their Existence.

But our Eyes represent Colors to us upon the surface of Bodies, and Light in
the Air and in the Sun: Our Ears convey Sounds to us, as being dispersed through
the Air, and Bodies which reverberate the Echo: And if we credit the Relation
of the other Senses, Heat will be in Fire, Sweetness in Sugar, Odor in Musk,
and all sensible qualities in the Bodies which seem to exhale or to disperse
them. Nevertheless it is certain, by the Reasons I have alleged in the first
Book of The Search after Truth, That all those Qualifications are not out of
the Soul which feels them; at least, it is not evident that they are in the
Bodies which surround us. Why then should we conclude, on the bare Relation of
the Senses, which deceive us on all occasions, that there are indeed external
Bodies, and even that these Bodies are like unto those we see, I mean those
which are the immediate Object of our Soul, when we look upon any with the Eyes
of our Body. Certainly this is not without its difficulty, what ever men may
say of it.

Moreover, if we may assure our selves of the exiistence of any Body by the
bare Relation of our Senses, it is particularly of that to which our Soul is
immediately united. The most lively Sensation, and that which seems to have the
most necessary Relation to any Body actually existing, is Pain. Nevertheless,
it happens often, that those who have lost an Arm, feel violent Pains in it,
even long after its Amputation. They are very sensible that they have lost it,
when they consult their Memory, or look upon their Body; but the sensation of
Pain deceives them. And if, as it sometimes comes to pass, one should suppose
their absolutely losing the Remembrance of what they have been, and their
retaining no other Sense, but that by which they feel a Pain in their imaginary
Arm; certainly they could never persuade themselves that they have not an Arm,
in which they feel such cruel Pains.

There have been Men who fancied they had Horns upon their heads; others who
believed themselves to be Butter, or Glass; or that their Body was not formed
like other Men; that it was like that of a Cock, of a Woolf, of an Ox. It will
be urged that they were mad, and I grant it. But their Soul might be mistaken
in those things; and consequently all Men may fall into the like Errors, if
they judge of things according to the Relation of their Senses. For it is
observable that those Madmen really behold themselves as they fancy they are:
The Error is not precisely in the Sentiment they have, but in the Judgment they
form; for if they did say barely that they feel, or behold themselves like a
Cock, they would not be deceived. They are only deceived in believing that
their Body is like unto that which they feel, I mean, to that which is the
immediate Object of their Mind, when they consider themselves. Thus those who
believe they are such as they really are, are no more judicious than Madmen in
the judgment they form of themselves, if they only judge barely according to
the Relation of their Senses. It is not by Reason, but good Fortune, they are
not deceived.

But at the bottom, how can we be certain, whether those who are called
Madmen, are really so? Might not one say, that they only seem to be mad,
because they have particular Sentiments? For it is evident that a Man is looked
upon as a Madman, not because he sees that which is not; but because he sees
the contrary: of what others see, whether others are deceived or not.

A Peasant's eyes, for instance, are disposed in such a manner, that he sees
the Moon such as she really is, or such only as she is seen, We partly see
those things when we behold the Moon through a Telescope.
or perhaps as she will be seen at some time or other with Prospectives of a
new Invention: He looks upon her with Admiration, and cries out to his
companions, What huge Mountains do I see what deep Valleys, what Seas, what
Lakes, what Gulphs, what Rocks! Do you not see many Seas toward the East, and
that there is hardly any thing but Lands and Mountains toward the West and
South? Do you not behold a Mountain on that very side, much higher than any of
those we have ever seen; and do you not admire a perfect black Sea, or a horrid
Whirl pool, in the center of that Planet? What will his Companions answer to
such Exclamations, and what will they think of him? That he is a Madman, who
has been distempered by the malignant Influences of the Planet which he admires
and considers. He is alone of that opinion, and that is sufficient. Thus, to be
mad in the opinion of others, it is not necessary to be so effectively; it is
sufficient to think, or to see things otherwise than they do: For should all
Men fancy themselves to be Cocks, he that should think himself to be what he
really is, would certainly be looked upon as a Madman.

But perhaps some will ask, whether Men have a Bill at the end of their Nose,
and a Cock's-comb upon their head? I suppose not. But I know nothing of it,
when I only judge by my Senses, and know not how to make that use of them which
I ought to do, let me feel my Face and my Head never so much. I only feel my
Body, and those which surround me, with hands of which I neither know the
length nor figure: I do not so much as know certainly that I have hands; I only
know it while I think I stir them. There are certain Motions in a certain part
of my Brain, which, according to the general opinion, is the Seat of common
Sense; but perhaps I want that very part which people speak so much of, and
which is so little known; at least, I do not feel it in my self, though I feel
my hands: So that I have yet more reason to believe I have hands, than that
little Glandula pinealis which Men still daily dispute about. But in fine, I
neither know the figure not the motions of that little Gland; and yet I am
told, That that only can instruct me in the figure and motion of my Body, and
of those which surround me.

What then are we obliged to think of all this? That it is not the Body which
instructs Reason; That the part to which the Soul is immediately united, is
neither visible nor intelligible of it self; That neither our Body, nor those
that are about it, can be the immediate Object of our Mind; That we cannot
learn from our Brain, whether it actually exists, and much less, whether there
are Bodies that surround us. That for that Reason we are obliged to acknowledge
that there is some superior Intelligence which alone is capable of acting in
us; and which may act after such a manner in us, as truly to represent external
Bodies to us, without giving us the least Idea of our Brain; though the Motions
which are produced in our Brain, are an occasion for it to discover those
Bodies to us. For in fine, we see, with eyes whose figure we know not, how the
Bodies which surround us are figured: And though the Colors which appear upon
Objects are not more lively than those which are painted upon the Optic Nerve,
we do not in the least see these, even while we admire the beauty of the others.

But after all, what obligation lies on that Intelligence to show us Bodies,
when our Brain has certain motions? or what necessity is there of external
Bodies to excite motions in our Brain? Do not Sleep, Passions, and Folly,
produce those motions without the help of those external Bodies? Is it evident
that Bodies which cannot move each other, n="*" See the 3d Chap. of the 2d part
of the 6 Book, and the Explanation on the said Chapter.
should communicate to those they meet a moving force which they have not in
themselves? Yet allowing that Bodies move themselves, and those they hit
against; shall not he who gives a Being to all things, be able of him self to
excite in our Brain those motions to which the Ideas of our Mind are affixed?
In fine, where is the Contradiction, That our Brain being without new motions,
our Soul should nevertheless have new Ideas; since it is certain that the
motions of the Brain do not produce the Ideas of the Soul; that we have not so
much as a knowledge of those Motions; and that God only can represent our Ideas
to us, n="" See the 6. Chap. of the 2. part of the 3. Book, and the Explanation
on the said Chapter.
as I have proved elsewhere? Therefore it is absolutely necessary, to be
positively assured of the Existence of external Bodies, to know God, who gives
us the Sensation of them; and to know, That as he is infinitely perfect, he
cannot deceive us. For if the Intelligence which gives us the Ideas of all
things, would, as it were, divert it self in representing Bodies to us as
actually existent, though there were none, it is evident that it would not be
difficult for it so to do.

It is for those Reasons, or the like, that Descartes, who was desirous to
establish his Philosophy upon a true Foundation, has not thought fit to suppose
that there are Bodies, nor to prove it by sensible Demonstrations, though they
appear very convincing to the common sort of Men. Apparently he knew as well as
we do, that it was enough to open our Eyes to see Bodies; and that we might
draw near unto them, and feel them, to be certain whether our Eyes did not
deceive us in their Testimony: He was sufficiently acquainted with the Genius
of Men, to be sensible that the like Proofs would not be rejected: But he
neither mattered sensible Probabilities, nor the vain Applauses of Men. He
preferred Truth, though despised, to the Glory of a Reputation without Merit;
and chose rather to be thought ridiculous by Men of mean Parts, and make such
Doubts as seemed extravagant to them, rather than to assert things which he did
not judge to be certain and undeniable.

But though Descartes has given the strongest Proofs, that Reason alone can
furnish, for the Existence of Bodies; though it is evident that God is no
Deceiver, and indeed we might say that he did actually deceive us, if we
deciev'd our selves by making a due use of our Sense, and other Faculties,
whereof he is the Author: Yet we may say that the Existence of Matter is not as
yet perfectly demonstrated. For in fine, in point of Philosophy, we must
believe nothing, but what Evidence obliges us to believe: We must make as much
use of Liberty as we can: Our Judgments must have no farther Extent than our
Perceptions. Therefore let us only judge that we see Bodies, when we see them
really; and that these visible or intelligible Bodies do actually exist: But
why should we judge positively that there is a material World without, like
unto the intelligible World which we see.

It may be urged, perhaps, That we see those Bodies without us, and even at a
great distance from that which we animate; and therefore we may judge that they
are without us, without extending our Judgments beyond our Perceptions. Bus
what of that? Do not we see the Light without us, and in the Sun, though it is
not there? Nevertheless, I grant that those Bodies which we see without us, are
really external; for that is undeniable. But is it not evident that there are
external Places and Distances, That there are intelligible Spaces in the
intelligible World, which is the immediate Object of our Mind? The material
Body which we animate, (let us observe this) is not that which we see, when we
look upon it, I mean when we turn our bodily Eyes toward it; the Body which we
see, is an intelligible Body; and there are intelligible Spaces between that
intelligible Body and the intelligible Sun which we see, as there are material
Spaces between our Body and the Sun which we behold. Certainly God sees that
there are Spaces between the Bodies he has created; but he does not see those
Bodies or those Spaces by themselves; he can only see them by intelligible
Bodies and Spaces. God draws his Light only from himself; he only sees the
material World in the intelligible World, which he includes; and in the
knowledge he has of his own Will, which actually gives Existence and Motion to
all things. Therefore there are intelligible Spaces between the intelligible
Bodies which we see, as there are material Spaces between the Bodies we behold.

Moreover, we must observe, That as there is none but God who of himself knows
his own Will, which produces all Beings; it is impossible for us to know from
any but himself, whether there is really without us a material World like unto
that which we see: Because the material World is neither visible nor
intelligible of it self. Therefore to be fully convinced that there are Bodies,
we must not not only have Demonstrations that there is a God, and that God is
not deceiver; but also that God has assured us that he has created such: Which
I do not find to be proved in Descartes's Works.

God only speaks to the Mind, and obliges it to assent after two ways; by
Evidence, and by Faith. I own that Faith obliges us to believe that there are
Bodies; but as to the Evidence, it seems to me not to be full, nor are we
invincibly induced to believe that there is any thing besides God and our Mind.
It is true, we have a great Propension to believe that there are Bodies which
surround us. Sixth Meditation.
I grant it to Mr. Descartes: But nevertheless, as natural as it is, it does
not force us to it by Evidence; it only inclines us to it by Impression. Now,
we are only obliged in our free Judgments to follow Light and Evidence; and if
we suffer our selves to be guided by sensible Impression, we shall for the most
part be mistaken.

Why do we deceive our selves in the Judgments we form upon sensible Qualities,
upon the magnitude, figure, and motion of Bodies; unless it be because we
follow an Impression, like unto that which induces us to believe that there are
Bodies? Do we not see that Fire is hot, that Snow is white, that the Sun is
dazzling with Light? Do we not see that sensible Qualities as well as Bodies are
external? Nevertheless it is certain that these sensible Qualities which we see
without us, are not really out of us; or rather, there is no certainty in all
this. What reason have we to judge that beside the intelligible Bodies which we
see, there are others which we look upon? What Evidence have we, that an
Impression which is deceitful, not only in relation to sensible Qualities, but
also in relation to the magnitude, figure, and motion of Bodies, should not be
the same in relation to the actual Existence cf Bodies? I ask what Evidence we
have of it? For as to Probabilities, I grant that they are not wanting.

I know there is this difference between sensible Qualities and Bodies, that
Reason can much easier correct the Impression or Natural Judgments which have a
relation to sensible Qualities, than those which have a relation to the
existence of Bodies: And moreover, that all the corrections of Reason, in
relation to sensible Qualities, agree perfectly with Christian Religion and
Morality, and that the Existence of Bodies cannot be denied out of a principle
of Religion.

It is easy to apprehend, that Pleasure and Pain, Heat, and even Colors are
no modifications of Bodies: That sensible Qualities in general are not
contained in the Idea we have of matter; in a word, that our Senses do not
represent sensible objects to us, as they are in themselves, but as they relate
to the preservation of Health and Life. This is not only Consonant to Reason,
but much more yet to the Christian Religion and Morality, as have been shown in
diverse parts of this Work.

But it is not so easy to assure our selves positively that there are no
Bodies without us, as that Pain and Hear are not in Bodies, which seem to cause
them. It is most certain, at least, that there may be external Bodies. We have
nothing to prove that there are none, and on the contrary we have a strong
inclination to believe that there are. Therefore we have more reason to
conclude that there are such, than to believe that there are not. For which
Reason, I am of Opinion, that we ought to believe there are. For we are
naturally inclined to follow our natural Judgment, when we cannot positively
correct it by Knowledge and Evidence. For all natural Judgment proceeding from
God, we may conform our free Judgments to it, when we find no means to discover
the falsity of them: And should we deceive our selves on those occasions, the
Author of our Mind would seem in some measure to be the Author of our Errors,
and Faults.

This Argument perhaps is pretty just. Nevertheless we must grant that it
cannot pass for an evident demonstration of the existence of Bodies. For in
fine. God does not force us invinsibly to submit to it. If we consent to it,
it is freely: and we may choose whether we will consent to it or not. If my
Argument is Just, we ought to believe that it is altogether probable there are
Bodies: but we must not remain absolutely convinced of it by the said Argument.
Otherwise it is we who act, and not God in us. It Is by a free Act, and
consequently liable to Error we consent, and not by an invinsible Impression:
For we believe, because we will it freely, and not because we see it evidently.

Certainly nothing but Faith can convince us that there are Bodies indeed. We
can receive no exact demonstration of the existence of any other Being, but of
that which is necessary. And, if we examine it strictly, we shall find it is
not even possible to know with an absolute evidence, whether God is, or is not
really Creator of a material and sensible World; for such an evidence is only
met with in necessary relations, and there is no necessary relation between
God, and such a World. He might not have Created it, and if he has done it,
it is because it was his Will, and his Free Will too.

The Saints which are in Heaven are sensible by an evident Light, that the
Father begot his Son, and that the Father and the Son produced the Holy Ghost;
for these Emanations are necessary. But the World not being a necessary
Emanation of God, those who see his Being the most clearly, do not see
evidently which are his external productions. Nevertheless, I do believe, that
the Blessed are certain that there is a World: but it is because God assures
them of it in making his Will known to them after a manner which is unknown to
us: And even we here below are certain of it, because Faith teaches us that God
has Created this World; and that this Faith is Consonant to our Natural
Judgments, or to our compound Sensations, when they are confirmed by all our
Senses, corrected by our Memory, and rectified by our Reason.

It is true it seems at first, that the Proof or Principle of our Faith
supposes there are Bodies; Fides ex auditu. It seems to suppose Prophets,
Apostles, Holy Writ, and Miracles. But if we observe it strictly, we shall
find, that though we only suppose appearances of Men, of Prophets, of Apostles,
of Holy Writ, of Miracles, etc. What we have learned by those pretended
appearances, is absolutely undeniable: since, as I have proved it in diverse
parts of this Work; God alone can represent those pretended appearances to the
Mind, and God is no deceiver; for Faith it self supposes all this. Now in the
appearance of Holy Scripture and Miracles, we learn that God has Created an
Heaven and an Earth, that the Word was made Flesh, and other Truths of this
kind, which suppose the existence of a Created World. So that it is certain by
Faith, that there are Bodies; and thereby all those appearances become
Realities. I need not enlarge any farther to answer an Objection which appears
too abstruse to the common sort of Men, and I am of Opinion that this will
suffice to satisfy all those who are not too difficult.

Therefore we must conclude from all this, that we can, and even that we ought
to correct the Natural Judgments, or compound perceptions which have a relation
to sensible Qualities, which we attribute to external Bodies, or to that which
we animate. But, as to the Natural Judgments that have a relation to the actual
Existence of Bodies, though we might absolutely forbear forming free Judgments
agreeable to them, we ought not to do it, because those Natural Judgments agree
perfectly with Faith.

Besides, I have particularly made this Remark, that Men should seriously
reflect upon this Truth: That nothing but Eternal Wisdom can inlighten us, and
that all the sensible knowledge, in which our Body has any share, is deceitful;
or at least is attended with that Light to which we feel our selves obliged to
submit. I am sensible that the common sort of Men will not approve these
Thoughts, and that according to the abundance or defect of their Animal
Spirits, they will either laugh or be frightened at these Arguments. For the
Imagination cannot endure abstract and extraordinary Truths: It either looks
upon them as frightful Specter, or ridiculous Phantasms. But I had rather be
exposed to the raillery of strong and bold Imaginations, and to the Indignation
and Fear of the weak and timorous, than to be wanting in what I owe to Truth,
and to those generous defenders of the Mind against the efforts of the Body,
who know how to distinguish the answers of illuminating Wisdom from the
confused noise of a perplexing and seducing Imagination.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Fifth Chapter of the Second Book. Of Memory, and
Spiritual Habits.
I Forbear speaking of Memory and Spiritual Habits in this Chapter for several
Reasons, the chief of which is, that we have no clear Idea of our Soul. For
what means have we clearly to explain the dispositions which the Operations of
the Soul leave in it, which dispositions are its Habits, since we do hot even
clearly know the Nature of the Soul? It is evident that we cannot distinctly
know the alterations a Being is capable of, when we do not distinctly know the
Nature of that Being. For, if for instance, Men had no clear Idea of extension,
they would in vain endeavor to discover the Figures of it. However, since some
are desirous I should speak upon a matter which in it self is not known to me,
this is the method, I will observe to follow none but clear Idea's in it.

I suppose that God only acts in the Mind, and represents the Idea's of all
things to it; and that when the Mind perceives any Object by a very clear and
lively Idea, it is because God represents that Idea to it after a very perfect
manner.

I suppose, moreover, that the Will of God being absolutely consonant to Order
and Justice, it is sufficient to have a right to a thing to obtain it. These
Suppositions, which are distinctly conceived, being made, the Spiritual Memory
explains it self easily; for Order requiring that Persons, who have often
thought on some Object, should the easier think on it again, and have a clearer
and more lively Idea of it than those who have thought but little on it, the
Will of God, which operates continually according to Order, represents to their
Mind, as soon as they desire it, the clear and lively Idea of that Object. So
that, according to that Explanation, the Memory, and other Habits of pure
Intelligences, consist not in a facility of operation which results from
certain Modifications of their Being, but from an immutable Order of God, and
in a Right which the Mind acquires over those things Which have already been
submitted to it; and the sole power of the Mind depends immediately arid only
on God, the force or facility which all Creatures find in their Operations,
being in that sense only the Efficacious Will of the Creator.

And I do not think we are obliged to abandon this Explanation upon the account
of the ill habits of Sinners, and of the Damned; for though God does whatever is
real and positive in the Actions of Sinners, it is evident, by what I have said
in the first Explanation, that God is not the Author of Sin.

However, I do believe, and think my self obliged to believe, that after the
action of the Soul, there still remains some alterations which do dispose it to
that same Action: But as I know them not, I cannot explain them, for I have no
clear Idea of my Mind, in which I can discover all the Modifications it is
capable of. I believe, by Theological Proofs, and not by clear and evident
ones, See the Explanation on the 7th Chap. of the 2d part of the third Book.
that the Reason for which pure Intelligences see Objects which they have
already considered more clearly than others, is not merely because God
represents those Objects to them in a more lively and more perfect manner, but
because they are really better disposed to receive the same Action from God in
them. Just as the facility which some persons have acquired to play upon some
Instruments, does not consist in that the Animal Spirits, which are necessary
for the Motion of the Fingers, have more action, or force in them than in other
Men, but that the ways through which the Spirits slide, are more slippery and
smoother through the habit of Exercise, as I have explained in this Chapter.
Nevertheless I grant, that all the Uses of Memory, and of the other Habits, are
not necessary to those, who being perfectly united to God, find in his Light
all sorts of Idea's, and in his Will all the facility to act that they can
desire.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Seventh Chapter of the Second Book.
The Summary of the Proofs and Explanations I have given about Original Sin;
with Answers to the Objections that seemed most weighty to me.

TO answer those difficulties regularly, which may arise in the Mind about
Original Sin, and the manner how it is transmitted from Father to Son, I think
it will be necessary to give in few words what I have said upon that Subject in
several parts of the Search after Truth. These then are my principal Proofs; I
have disposed them in a peculiar manner, to make them the more sensible to
those who will consider them.

I. God Wills Order in his Works; he Wills what we conceive clearly to be
consonant to Order: And that which we conceive to be clearly contrary to Order,
God Wills it not. This Truth is evident to all those who can consider, with a
fixed and pure Sight, the infinitely perfect Being. Nothing can trouble or
shake them in that; and they clearly see that all the difficulties which can be
formed against this Principle, only proceeds from the ignorance we have of
those things which it would be necessary to know in order to resolve them.

II. God has no other end but himself in his Operations: Order requires it.

III. God makes and preserves the Mind of Man that it might be employed about
him, that it should know and love him; for God is the end of his own Works.
Order requires it so. God cannot Will that we should love that which is not
lovely; or rather, God cannot Will, that what is least lovely should be most
beloved. Therefore it is evident, that Nature is corrupted and in disorder,
since the Mind loves Bodies which are not lovely, and often loves them more
than God. Original Sin, or the depravation of Nature, therefore requires no
proof, for every one sufficiently finds within himself, a Law which captivates
and disorders him, and a Law which is not established by God, since it is
contrary to the Order which regulates his Will.

IV. Nevertheless, Man was admonished before his Fall by preingaging
Sensations, and not by a clear knowledge, whether he was to unite himself to
external Bodies, or to separate from them: Order requires it. It is a disorder
for the Mind to be obliged to apply it self to Bodies; it may be united to
them, but it is not made for them. Therefore it ought to know God, and be
sensible of Bodies. Moreover, as Bodies are incapable of being its good, the
Mind could not easily unite it self to them, if it only knew them as they are,
without finding that in them which is not there. Therefore false Good must be
discerned by a preingaging Sensation, to be beloved by a love of Instinct; and
the real good must be known by a clear knowledge, to be beloved by a free and
reasonable love. In fine, God makes and preserves Man that he may know and love
him; therefore, the capacity of his Mind must not be filled, nor even divided
against his Will, by the knowledge of the Infinite Figures and Configurations
of Bodies which surround him, nor of that which he animates. However, in order
to know by a clear knowledge, whether such a Fruit, at such a time, is fit for
the nourishment of the Body, we must apparently know so many Things, and form
so many Ratiocinations, that the most extended Mind would be wholly taken up by
it.

V. But, though the first Man had notice by preingaging Sensations, whether he
was or was not to make use of external Bodies, yet he was not agitated by
Involuntary or Rebel Motions; yea, he blotted out of his Mind the Idea's of
sensible Objects, when he pleased, whether he used or used them not, for so
Order requires. The Mind may be united to the Body, but it must have no
dependence on it; it must command it. Moreover, all the love God puts in us
must center in him, for God produces nothing in us but for himself. Finally,
Bodies are not lovely; they are below that which is in us capable of loving.
Therefore, in the first Institution of Nature, Bodies could not turn our Mind
toward them, or incline it to consider or love them as its Goods.

VI. External Bodies never act in our Soul, but when they produce some Motions
in our Body, and when those Motions communicate themselves to the principal
part of the Brain; for it is according to the alterations which happen in that
part of the Brain, that the Soul changes it self, and finds it self agitated by
sensible Objects. I have sufficiently proved it, and Experience demonstrates
it. This being granted, it is clear, by the precedent Article, that the first
Man, when he pleased, stopped the motions communicated to his Body, or at least
those which were communicated to the principal part of his Brain: Order would
have it so; and consequently, he whose Will is always consonant to Order, and
can do nothing against Order although it be Almighty. Thus Man had the power, on
some occasions, to suspend the Natural Law of the Communication of Motions,
since he had no Concupiscence, and felt no involuntary and rebellious Motions
in himself.

VII. But the first Man, by Sin, has lost that power: Order Wills it so; for it
were not reasonable, that in favor of a Sinner and a Rebel, there should be
any exceptions in the General Law of the Communication of Motions, besides
those which are absolutely necessary for the preservation of our Life, and
Civil Society. Therefore the Body of Man, being continually shaken by the
Action of sensible Objects, and his Soul being agitated by all the Motions of
the principal part of the Brain, it is a dependant upon the Body to which it
had only been united, and which it did command before the Fall.

VIII. Let us now see how Adam was capable of Sinning It is natural to love
Pleasure and to relish it; and that was not forbidden to Adam. It is the same
of Joy; we may lawfully rejoice at the sight of our natural Perfections; that
is not ill in it self. Man was made to be happy, and Pleasure and Joy actually
makes us Happy and Contented. The first Man then enjoyed Pleasure in the use of
sensible Goods; he also rejoiced at the sight of his Perfections; for we cannot
consider our selves as being happy or perfect without rejoicing thereat: For
though he knew that God was his Good, he did nor feel it, as I have proved in
several places. Therefore the Joy he could find in his Duty was not very
sensible; which being supposed, as the first Man had not an infinite Capacity
of Mind, his Pleasure, or his Joy, lessened the clear sight of his Mind, which
made him sensible that God was his Good, and that he ought to love him only.
For Pleasure is in the Soul, and modifies it. So that it fills the Capacity we
have of thinking, proportionably as it affects us and acts in us. This is what
we learn by Experience; that is, by the inward Sensation we have of our selves.
Therefore we may conceive that the first Man, having by degrees suffered the
Capacity of his Mind to be divided, or filled up by the lively Sensation of a
presumptuous Joy, or perhaps by some love or sensible Pleasure, the presence of
God, and the remembrance of his Duty, were blotted out of his Mind, by his
having neglected courageously to follow his light in search of his real Good.
Having thus divided his Mind, he was capable of falling, for his principal
Grace and Power was his Light, and the clear knowledge of his Duty, since then
he did not want those preingaging delectations which we now stand in need of to
resist Concupiscence.

IX. And we must observe, that neither the preingaging Sensations which Adam
felt in the use of the Goods of the Body, nor the Joy which he found in
considering his Happiness or Perfection, are the real causes of his Fall; for
he was sensible that God only was capable to make him feel Pleasure or Joy.
Therefore he ought to have loved him only, since we ought to love nothing but
the real cause of our Happiness. As nothing did disturb the Knowledge and Light
of the first Man, while he was willing to preserve it pure; he could, and ought
to have obliterated out of his Mind, whatever Sensations did divide it, and put
it into the least danger to forget or lose the sight of him who enlightened,
and satisfied it. It was his Duty to remember, that if God did not make him
feel him as good, but only know him as such, it was that he might the sooner
deserve his reward by the continual use of his Liberty.

Supposing then that Adam and Eve Sinned, and that in consequence of their Sin
they have felt in themselves involuntary and rebellious motions: I say, it was
necessary their Children should be Born Sinners, and liable, like them, to the
motions of Concupiscence. These are my Reasons.

X. I have proved at large in the Chapter that occasioned this Discourse, that
there is such a communication between the Mothers Brain and her Child's, that
all the Motions and Traces which are made in the Mothers Brain, are excited in
the Child's. Therefore as the Child's Soul is united to its Body in the first
moment it is created; because it is the conformation of the Body which obliges
God, pursuant of his General Will, to give it a Soul to inform it: It is
evident, that at the very Instant the Soul is created it has corrupt
inclinations, and is inclined toward the Body; since from that very moment, it
has the inclinations which answer to the motions, that are actually in the
Brain to which it is united.

XI. But whereas it is a disorder that the Mind should incline to Bodies, and
love them, the Child is a Sinner, and in disorder as soon as it is created. God
who loves Order hates it in that condition. Nevertheless its Sin is not free;
it is its Mother who has conceived it in Iniquity, upon the account of the
communication which is Established by the Order of Nature between the Brain of
the Mother and that of the Child.

XII. Now the said communication is very good in its Institution for several
Reasons: 1. Because it is useful, and perhaps necessary toward the
conformation of the Foetus. 2. Because the Child might thereby have some
commerce with its Parents, for it was reasonable it should know from whom it
derived the Body it animates. Finally, the said communication was the only
means by which the Child could know what passed without, and what it ought to
think of it. Having a Body, it was reasonable it should have thoughts that had
a relation to it, and that it should not be deprived of the sight of the Works
of God amongst which it lived. It is very probable, that there are many other
Reasons for the said communication, besides those I have related; but these are
sufficient to justify it, and to vindicate the Conduct of him whose Will is
necessarily conformable to Order.

XIII. However, it is not Just the Child should receive the Trace of sensible
Objects forcibly: And if the Soul of Children was created but one moment before
its being united to their Bodies, if it were but one moment in a state of
Innocence or Order, it would of Right, and by the necessity of the Eternal
Order, or Law, have a power to suspend the said Communication; just as the
first Man before his Fall, had a power to stop whenever he pleased, the Motions
which were excited in him, for Order requires the Body should obey the Mind.
But as the Souls of Children never were agreeable to God, there was no reason
that God should change the Law of the Communication of Motions in their behalf;
therefore it is Just that Children should be Born Sinners and in disorder. And
the cause of their Sin is not the Order of Nature, that Order is Just; but it
is the Sin of those from whom they derive their Being. In this sense it is not
Just that a Father, who is a Sinner, should get Children more perfect than
himself, nor that they should have a power over their Body which their Mother
has not over hers.

XIV. I grant, that after Adam's Fall, which corrupts and overthrows all
things, God might, in making some alterations in the Order of Nature, have
remedied the disorder which the said Fall had caused. But God does not change
his Will thus; he Wills nothing but what is Just. What he Wills once, he Wills
it ever; he does not correct himself; he does not repent; he Wills constantly;
his Eternal Decrees do not depend on the inconstancy of a Man's Will, it it not
Just they should be submitted to it.

XV. But, if it be allowable to penetrate into the Councels of God, and to say
what we think upon the Motives which he may have had to Establish the Order I
have abovementioned, and to permit the Fall of the first Man, I am of Opinion
that it is impossible to have Sentiments more worthy of the greatness of God,
and more consonant to Religion and Reason, than to believe that Gods principal
end in his external Operations, is the Incarnation of his Son: See the 9th
Dialogue of the Christian Conversation.
That God established the Order of Nature, and permitted the disorder which has
happened in it to favor that great Work; That he permitted all Men to be
subjected to Sin, that no Man might Glory in himself; and that he leaves even
Concupiscence in the most holy and most perfect, that they may have no vain
Satisfaction in themselves. For when we consider the Perfection of our Being,
Aug. in Tul. lib. 6. c. 9.
it is difficult to despise our selves, unless at the same time we see and love
Sovereign Good, in the presence of which all our Perfection and Grandeur
vanishes in a moment.

I own that Concupiscence may prove the Subject of our Merit, and that it is
reasonable the Mind should, for a time, follow Order difficultly, to deserve to
be Eternally submitted to it with pleasure. I grant that it may be, upon this
account, that God has permitted Concupiscence, after having foreseen Sin. But
Concupiscence not being absolutely necessary to our Meriting, if God permitted
it, it was because Man might be able to do no good without the assistance which
Jesus Christ has merited for us, and that he might have no reason to Glory in
his own power; for it is plain, that Man cannot sight against, and overcome
himself, unless he be animated by Jesus Christ, who, as the Head of the
Faithful, inspires them with such Sensations as are directly opposite to the
Concupiscence they derive from the first Man.

XVI. Supposing then that Children are Born with Concupiscence, it is evident
that they are really Sinners, since their heart is set upon Bodies as much as
it is capable. There is as yet but one love in their Will, and that love is
irregular. So there is nothing in them that God can love, since God cannot love
disorder.

XVII. But when they have been Regenerated in Jesus Christ; that is, when their
Heart has been turned toward God, either by an actual motion of love, or by an
inward disposition, like unto that which remains after an Act of Loving God,
then Concupiscence is no longer a Sin in them, for it inhabits no longer alone
in the Heart, it has no longer any dominion there: The habitual Love, which
remains in them by the Grace of Baptism in Jesus Christ, is freeer, or stronger
than that which is in them by the Concupiscence they have in Adam. They are
like the Just, who in their Sleep follow the Motions of Lust, yet lose not the
Grace of Baptism, for they do not freely consent to these Motions.

XVIII. And it should not be thought strange, if I believe it possible for
Children while they are Baptizing to love God with a free Love. For, since the
second Adam is contrary to the first, why should he not at the time of
Regeneration deliver Children out of the servitude of their Bodies, to which
they are only subjected by the first Adam; so that being enlightened and excited
by a lively and effectual Grace to love God; they may love him with a free and
reasonable love, without being hindered by the first Adam. It is not
observable, some may urge, that their Bodies ceases one moment from acting over
their Mind. But should Men wonder at their not seeing that which is not
visible? That Act of Love may be produced in one Instant. And whereas that Act
may be formed in the Soul without making any Traces in the Brain, we need not
wonder if even those who are come to Men's estate when they are Baptized, do
not always remember it; for we have no remembrance of those things of which the
Brain keeps no traces.

XIX. St. Paul teaches us that the Old Man or Concupiscence is Crucified with
Jesus Christ, and that we are dead and buried with him by Baptism. It is not
that we are then delivered from the warring of the Body against the Mind, and
that Concupiscence is, as it were, dead that moment? It is true it revives; but
having been destroyed, and thereby left the Children in a state of loving God,
it can no longer harm them, though it revives in them. For, when there are two
Loves in the Heart, the one Natural and the other Free, Order wills that only
that should be regarded which is free. And if Children loved God in Baptism by
an Act no wise free, loving Bodies afterward by several Acts of the same kind;
God perhaps could not according to Order, have more regard to one only Act,
than to many, which are all natural and constrained. Or rather if those
contrary Loves were equal in force, he must have regard to the last; by the
same reason, that when there have been successively in a Heart two free Loves
contrary to one another, God ever has regard to the last, since Grace is lost
by one Mortal Sin.

XX. However it cannot be denied that God may without suspending the Dominion
of the Body over the Child's Mind, make it Just, or turn its Will toward him,
by infusing into its Soul a disposition like unto that which remains after an
Actual motion of Love toward God. But that way of proceeding does not perhaps
appear so natural as the other; for we do not conceive clearly what those
dispositions may be which would remain. Indeed we need not wonder at it, for
having no clear Idea of the Soul, as I have proved elsewhere See the 7th
Chapter of the 2d Part of the said Book, with its Explanation.
, we must not wonder if we do not know all the Modifications it is capable of.
But the Mind cannot be fully satisfied with things it does not conceive
clearly. In my Opinion it requires an extraordinary Miracle to give those
dispositions to the Soul without a preceding Act. Surely it cannot be done by
the most simple means. Whereas the second Adam producing for a moment in the
Mind of the Child which is Baptized, the contrary of what the first did produce
there before; it is sufficient to regenerate it, that God should act in it by
the usual means, according to which he sanctifies the Adult; for the Child not
having at that moment any sensations or motions to divide its capacity of
thinking and willing, nothing hinders it from knowing and loving its real Good.
I say no more, because it is not necessary to know precisely, how the
regeneration of Children is performed, provided we admit a real regeneration in
them, or an inward and real Justification caused by the Acts, or at least by
the habits of Faith, Hope, and Charity. If I propose an Explanation so contrary
to received Prejudices; it is to satisfy even those who will not admit
spiritual habits, and to prove to them the possibility of Children's
Regeneration, for Imputation seems to me to include a down right contradiction;
since God cannot repute as just, and actually, love Creatures who are actually
in disorder; the he may for the love of his Son design to restore them to
order, and love them when they are restored.

OBJECTIONS Against the Proofs and Explanations of Original Sin.
Objection against the First Article.
GOD Wills Order, it is True; but it is his Will which makes it: It does not
suppose it. Whatever God Wills, is in Order, from this only reason, that God
Wills it. If God Will, At every Objection see the Article against which it is
made.
that Minds shall be subject to Bodies, that they shall love and fear them;
this is no disorder. If it were Gods pleasure that two times two should not be
four, we should not lie in saying that two times two was not not four, for it
would be a truth. God is the Principle of all Truth; and the Master of all
Order; He supposes nothing, neither Truth nor Order; but makes both.

Answer.

All is then overthrown. There is no longer any Science, nor Morality, nor
undeniable proofs of Religion. This Consequence is clear to any one who
apprehends this false Principle, that God produces Order and Truth by a Will
absolutely Free. But that is no Answer.

I Answer then, That God neither does nor wills any thing without knowledge;
that therefore his Will supposes something; but what is supposes is nothing
that is Created. Order, Truth, Eternal Wisdom, is the Pattern of all the Works
of God, and this Wisdom is not made. God who makes all things, never made it,
though he constantly begets it by the necessity of his Being.

Whatever God Wills is in Order, from this only reason, that God Wills it: I
own it. But it is because God cannot Act against himself, against his Wisdom
and Light. He may forbear to produce any External thing; but if he will Act, he
can only do it according to the Immutable Order of that Wisdom which he
necessarily loves; for Religion and Reason teach me, that he does nothing
without his Son, without his Word, without his Wisdom. Therefore I am bold to
say, that God cannot positively Will that the Mind should be subject to the
Body; because this Wisdom according to which God Wills whatever he Wills, shows
me clearly that this is contrary to Order. And I see this clearly in that
Wisdom; because that is the sovereign and universal Reason of which all Spirits
do participate; for which all Intelligences are Created, by which all Men are
Reasonable. For no Man is his own Reason, Knowledge, and Wisdom, unless it be
perhaps when his Reason is particular, his Knowledge a false Light, and his
Wisdom Folly.

As most Men know not distinctly, that nothing but Eternal Wisdom directs them,
and that Intelligible Ideas, which are the immediate Object of their Mind, are
not Created, they imagine that Eternal Laws, and Immutable Truths, have been
established such by a Free Will of God: And it is for that very reason Descartes
says, that God could have made two times four not to be eight, and that the
three Angles of a Triangle should not be equal two right ones, An Answer to the
6th Objection against his Meditations. Art. 6. Art. 8. and Let. 68. of the 3d
Vol.
because there is no Order, says he, no Law, no Reason of Goodness and Truth,
but what depends on God, and that it is he, who from all Eternity has ordained
and established. Eternal Truths as Sovereign Lawgiver. This Learned Man did
not mind that there is an Order, a Law, a sovereign Reason which God loves
necessarily, which is Coeternal with him, and according to which it is
necessary he should Act, supposing he will Act. See the Explanation of the 6th
Chapter of the 2d Part of the 3d Book, How all things are seen in God.
For God is indifferent as to his External Works, but he is not indifferent
though perfectly free, in the manner by which he does 'em; he always Acts in
the Wisest and most perfect manner possible; he always follows the immutable
and necessary Order. Therefore God may choose whether he will create Spirits and
Bodies; but if he creates those two kinds of Beings, he must create them in the
simplest way, and place them in a perfect order. He may for instance, unite
Spirits to Bodies, but I affirm that he cannot subject them to 'em, unless in
pursuance of the Order which he always follows, the Sin of Spirits obliges him
to proceed thus, as I have already explained in the 7th Article, and first
Remark toward the latter end.

To prevent some Instances which might be objected against me, I think my self
obliged to say, that Men are in the wrong to Consult themselves, when they have
a mind to know what God can do, or will. They ought not to judge of his Will by
the Internal Sensations they have of their own Inclinations; for then they
would often make an Injust, Cruel, and Sinful, instead of a powerful God. They
ought to lay aside the general Principle of their Prejudices, which makes them
judge of all things according to themselves: They must attribute nothing to
God, but what they conceive clearly to be included in the Idea of an infinitely
perfect Being; for they ought only to judge of things by clear Ideas. Then the
God they will adore, will not be like unto those of Antiquity, which were
Cruel, Adulterous, Voluptuous, like the Persons who had set them up. Nor will
he so much as resemble the God of some Christians, who to make him as powerful
as Sinners desire him, ascribe to him an absolute power of Acting against all
Order, of leaving Sin unpunished, and Condemning some Persons to Eternal
Torments, though never so Just and so Innocent.

The Second Objection against the First Article.
IF God Wills that Order which makes Monsters; I do not say among Men, for they
have sinned; but amongst Animals and Plants; What is the Cause of the general
Corruption of the Air which breeds so many Distempers? By what Order are
Seasons irregular, and the Sun of Frosts burn up and destroy the Fruits of the
Earth? Does it argue Wisdom or Order to give an Animal parts altogether
useless, and to freeze Fruits after having formed them? Is it not rather
because God does what he pleases, and that his Power is above all Order and
Rule? For to speak of things of greater Consequence than some Fruits, with
which it is lawful to do what he pleases; the Clay out of which God makes
Vessels of Wrath, is the same wherewith he makes Vessels of Mercy.

Answer.

These difficulties are only fit to obscure Truth, because they proceed from
the darkness of the Mind. We know that God is Just: We see that the Wicked
Prosper; Must we deny what we see, must we doubt what we know; because perhaps
we may be so stupid as not to know, or such Libertines, as not to believe what
Religion teaches us of future Punishments? So likewise, we know that God is
Wise, and that he does nothing but what is Good; yet we see Monsters, or
defective Works. What shall we believe? that God was mistaken, or that those
Monsters are not from him. Certainly those who have sense or steadiness of
Mind, will believe neither; for it is evident that God does all, and that he
does nothing but what is as perfect as possible, in respect to the simplicity
and small number of means which he imploys in the formation of his Works. We
must keep steadily to what we see, without suffering our selves to be shaken by
difficulties which it is impossible to resolve, when our Ignorance is the cause
of that impossibility. If Ignorance be admitted to form Difficulties, and if
such Difficulties overthrow the best established Sentiments, what will be
certain among Men who know not all things? What! shall not the most radiant
Lights be able to dissipate the least Obscurities; and shall any little
Darkness be able to obscure the most clear and lively Lights?

But though we might forbear answering such like difficulties, without
weakening the Principle we have established, yet it is fit the World should
know they are not altogether unanswerable. For the mind of Man is so unjust in
its Judgments, that it may perhaps prefer the Sentiments which seem to be
Subjects of these imaginary Difficulties to real Truths, which cannot be
questioned, unless Men have a mind to do it on purpose, and therefore cease to
consider them. I say then that God wills Order, though there are Monsters; and
also, that there are Monsters, because God loves Order. This is the Reason of
it.

Order requires that the Laws of Nature, by which God produces that infinite
Variety which we see in the World, should be very plain, and very few. Now it
is the Simplicity of those general Laws, which in some particular cases, and by
reason of the disposition of the Subject, produces irregular Motions, or rather
monstrous Dispositions: And consequently there are Monsters, because God wills
Order. Thus God wills not positively or directly that there should be Monsters;
but he positively wills certain Laws of the communication of Motions, whereof
Monsters are the necessary Consequences: And he wills those Laws, because tho
they are very plain, they are nevertheless capable of producing that variety of
Forms, which we can never sufficiently admire.

For instance, in consequence of the general Laws of the Communication of
Motions, there are Bodies which are in some measure driven toward the Center
of the Earth. The Body of a Man, or of an Animal, is one of these: That which
sustains it in the Air sinks under its Feet. Is it just and suitable to Order,
That God should change his general Will for that particular Case? Certainly
that does not appear likely. Therefore that Animal must either break or maim
his Body. We must argue in the same manner as to the Generation of Monsters.

Order indeed requires that all Beings should have whatever is necessary for
their Preservation, and the Propagation of their Kind; provided it may be done
by simple means, and such as are suitable to the Wisdom of God. And it is true
we see that Animals, and even Plants, have general means for their
Preservation, and the continuation of their Kind; and if some Animals are
destitute of them on certain particular occasions, it is because the general
Laws according to which they have been formed could not permit it, because
those Laws do not relate to them alone, but generally to all Beings, and that
public Good must be preferred to private Advantages.

It is evident that if God made but one Animal, it would not be monstrous. But
Order would require that he should not make that Animal by the same Laws by
which he now forms all the rest. For the Action of God must be proportioned to
his Design. By the Laws of Nature he makes not one Animal, but the whole World;
and he must do it by the simplest means, as Order requires it. Therefore it is
enough that this World is not monstrous, or that the general Effects should be
worthy the general Laws, to hinder any one from finding fault with the Work of
God.

Had God established particular Laws for all particular Alterations, or had he
placed in every thing a particular Nature or Principle of the Motions which
happen to it; I own it would be difficult to justify his Wisdom against so
many visible Irregularities. Perhaps we should be obliged to own, either that
God wills not Order, or that he cannot or will not remedy Disorder. For in
fine, it seems to me impossible to reconcile the almost infinite number of
Second Causes, or of Powers, Virtues, Qualities, and natural Faculties, with
what we call the sports or irregularities of Nature, without engaging the
Wisdom and infinite Power of the Author of all things.

Objection against the Second Article.
GOD can never act for himself. Those that are wise do nothing that is useless;
and whatever God should do for himself, would be useless, for he wants nothing.
God wills nothing for himself, if by the necessity of his Being he has all the
Good he could will for himself. And if God desires nothing, he does nothing for
himself, since he only acts by the Efficacy of his Will. The Nature of God is
to communicate and be diffusive; to be useful to others, and not to it self; to
seek; and if possible, to create Persons whom it may render happy. Therefore
God being Essentially and Sovereignly Good, it implies a Contradiction that he
should act for himself.

Answer.

GOD may act for himself two ways, either to derive some advantage by what he
does, or that his Creature may find its happiness and perfection in him. I do
not examine at present, whether God acts for himself according to the first
manner, and whether, to receive some Honors worthy of himself, he has made and
restored all things by his Son, in whom, according to the Scripture, all
Creatures do subsist. I only assert, That God can neither make nor preserve
Spirits, in order to their knowing and loving the Creatures: It is an
unalterable, eternal, and necessary Law, that they should know and love God, as
I have explained in the Third Article. Therefore this Objection does not impugn
my Principle; but on the contraey it favors it: And if it be certain that it
is the Nature of God to Communicate and extend it self, (for I do not examine
this Axiom) it is evident that God being Essentially and Sovereignly Good, it
implies a Contradiction that he should not act for himself in the sense which I
pretend to establish.

Objection against the Fourth Article.
AS Ignorance is a Consequence of Sin, Adam, before the Fall, had a perfect
Knowledge of the Nature of his own Body; and of all those which were about him.
For instance, it was necessary he should perfectly know the Nature of all
Animals, to give proper Names to them, as he did.

Answer.

It is a mistake. Ignorance is neither an Evil, nor a Consequence of Sin: It is
error or blindness of the mind which is an Evil, and a Consequence of Sin.
There is none but God who knows every thing, and is ignorant of nothing:
Ignorance dwells in the most enlightened Intelligences. Whatever is finite
cannot comprehend infinity. And therefore there is no Mind that can so much as
apprehend all the Properties of Triangles. Adam, in the moment of his Creation,
knew whatever was fit for him to know, and nothing more; and it was not fit he
should have known exactly the disposition of all the parts of the Body, and of
those he made use of: I have given Reasons for it in this Article, and
elsewhere.

A giving of Names is rather a sign of Authority in the Scripture, than of a
perfect Knowledge. As the Lord of Heaven had made Adam Lord of the Earth, he
was willing Adam should give the Animals Names, as he himself had done to the
Stars. Omnibus eis nomina vocat. Ps. 47.
It is evident that Sounds or Words neither have, nor naturally can have a
Relation to the things they signify, whatever the Divine Plato and mysterious
Pythagoras say about it. One might perhaps explain the Nature of a Horse, or of
an Ox, in a whole Book; but a Word is not a Book: And it is ridiculous to
imagine that Monosyllables, as Sus, which in Hebrew signifies a Horse, and
Schor, which signifies an Ox, should represent the Nature of those Animals.
Nevertheless, it is very likely that those are the Names which Adam has given
them; for we find them in the Book of Genesis: Cap. 49.17. and 32.5.
And the Author of Genesis assures us moreover, That the Names which Adam gave
to the Animals, are the very same which were used in his time; for I do not see
that he could mean any thing else by these words, Omne quod vocavit Adam animae
viventis, ipsum est nomen ejus.

But I grant that Adam gave Names to Animals which had some Relation to their
Nature, and submit to the learned Etymologies which an Author of this Age gives
us about them. I grant that Adam might call Domestic Animals Behemoth, because
they keep silence; the Ram Ajil, because he is strong; the Goat Sair, because
he is hairy; the Hog Chazir, because he has little eyes? and the Ass Chamor,
because there are many red ones in the East. But I think it enough only to open
ones eyes to know whether the Goat is hairy, the Ass red, and whether the Hog
has little eyes, Adam calls Beir and Behemah what we call a Brute, or a great
Domestic Animal, because those Beasts are mute and stupid: What is to be
concluded from thence, that he perfectly understood their Nature? That is not
evident. I should rather fear that Men would conclude from thence, That Adam
being simple enough to interrogate an Ox, as the largest of all Domestic
Animals, and being surprised at his not being able to answer him, he despised
him, and in contempt called him by the name of Beir, and of Behemah.

Second Objection against the Fourth Article.
THere are pre-engaging Sensations, which are troublesome and uneasy. Adam was
just and innocent; therefore he could not be affected with them: He must needs
be guided on all occasions by Reason and Knowledge, and not by pre-engaging
Sensations, like to those we have at present.

Answer.

I own that there are Pre-engaging Sensations which are disagreeable and
painful: But they were never uneasy to the first Man; because that, as soon as
ever they began to assault, he would no longer be affected by them; and as soon
as ever he had that he was no longer affected by them. Those Sensations only
respectively gave him notice of what he was to do, or not to do: They did not
disturb his Felicity; they only made him sensible that God could punish him and
make him miserable, if he should prove unfaithful to him.

To persuade our selves that the first Man was never surprised by any sensible
Grief, we need only consider two things: First, that Grief is very
inconsiderable, when the Motions to which it is annexed are very weak; since it
is always proportioned to the strength of the Motions which are communicated to
the principal part of the Brain. Secondly, that it is the nature of Motion
always to include a succession of time, and that it cannot be violent at the
first instant it is communicated. This being supposed, it is plain that the
first Man was never surprised by any violent Grief, that was capable of making
him unhappy: For it was in his power to stop the Motions which occasioned it.
Therefore if it was in his power to stop them at the very instant they began
their Action, certainly he did not fail to do it, since he desired to be happy,
and that Aversion is naturally joined with the sense of Pain.

Thus Adam never felt any violent Pain: But I think we are not obliged to say
that he never felt any inconsiderable uneasiness, like unto that which we feel
when we taste green Fruit, which we thought to be ripe. His Felicity would have
been very tender, if it could have been disturbed by so small a matter: For
Delicacy is a sign of Weakness; and Pleasure and Joy have but little Solidity
in them, when the least thing dissipates and annihilates them. Pain or Grief
never disturb Happiness effectually, unless it is involuntary, and when it
subsists in us against our Wills. Jesus Christ was happy, even upon the Cross,
though he felt great Pains, because he suffered nothing but what he was willing
to suffer. Therefore as Adam suffered nothing against his Will, no body can say
that we make him unhappy before his Fall, because we suppose here, that he was
warned by pre-engaging Sensations; but such as were respectful and submissive
of what it was fit for him to avoid for the preservation of his Life.

Objection against the Fifth Article.
ADam felt pre-engaging Pleasures; which are involuntary Motions: Therefore
Adam was agitated by involuntary Motions.

Answer.

I answer, That Adam's Sensations did precede his Reason. I have proved it in
the Fourth Article. But I deny that they did pre-engage his Will, or that they
excited any involuntary Motions in the same. For Adam was willingly warned by
his Sensations of what he ought to do for the Preservation of his Life; but he
never would suffer himself to be agitated against his Will, for that is
contradictory. Also, whenever he had a mind to apply himself to the
Contemplation of Truth without the least Distraction of Mind, his Senses and
Passions kept a perfect Silence. Order requires it, and it is an absolute
Consequence of the Power he had over his Body.

See the Explanation upon the 3d Chapter of the 5 Book,
I answer in the second place, That it is not true that the Pleasure of the Soul
is the same thing with its Motion and Love. Pleasure and Love are manners of
the Soul's Existence: But Pleasure has no necessary Relation to the Object
which seems to occasion it; and Love has a necessary Relation to Good. Pleasure
is to the Soul what Figure is to the Body; and Motion is to the Body what Love
is to the Soul. Now the Motion of a Body is very different from its Figure. I
grant that the Soul, which is continually moved toward Good, advances as it
were more easily toward it, when induced thereto by Pleasure, than when it
suffers Pain; as a Body which is pushed forward, rouls more easily when it has
a Spherical Figure, than when it has a Cubical one. But the Figure of a Body is
different from its Motion, and it may be Spherical, and stand still. It is
true, Spirits are not like Bodies; they can feel no Pleasure, without being in
Motion; because God, who only makes and preserves them for himself, moves them
continually toward Good. But this does not prove that the Pleasure of the Soul
is the same thing with its Motion; for two things, though different, may always
meet together.

Finally, I answer, That though Pleasure were not different from the Love or
Motion of the Soul, that which the first Man felt in the use of the Goods of
the Body, did not incline him to love those Bodies. Pleasure inclines the Soul
toward the Object which occasions it: I grant it. But it is not the Fruit
which we eat with Pleasure* which occasions that Pleasure in us. Bodies cannot
act in the Soul, and make it in any measure happy: God only can do that. It Is
through Error we fancy that Bodies have that in them which we feel by their
means. Adam was not so stupid before his Fall, as to imagine that Bodies
occasioned his Pleasure. Therefore the Motion which accompanied his Pleasures,
did not move him toward Bodies. If Pleasure contributed toward the Fall of
the first Man, it was not by causing that in him which it now causes in us. It
is only the taking up or dividing the Capacity he had to think, it blotted or
diminished in his Mind the Presence of his real Good, or of his Duty.

Objection against the Sixth Article.
WHat likelihood is there that the immutable Will of God should have depended
on the Will of Man; and that in favor of Adam Exceptions should have been made
in the general Law of the Communication of Motions.

Answer.

At least it is not evident, that there can be no such Exceptions. But it is
plain that immutable Order requires that the Body should be subject to the
Mind; and it were contradictory to believe that God neither loves nor wills
Order: In the Explanation which relates to the Nature of Ideas, I shall explain
more particularly what Order is, and why God loves it necessarily.
For God necessarily, loves his Son. Therefore it was was, necessary, before
the fall of the first Man, that Exceptions should be made in his Favor, in the
general Law of the Communication of Motions. This perhaps may seem abstruse;
but here is something that is more sensible.

Man, though a Sinner, has the Power to move and stop his Arm whenever he
pleases. Therefore, according to the different Volitions of Man, the Animal
Spirits are determined to produce or stop some Motions in his Body; which
certainly cannot be done by the general Law of the Communication of Motions.
Thus the Will of God being still at this very time subject to ours, why might
it not have been subject to Adam's? If, for the advantage of the Body, and for
the sake of Civil Society, God stops the Communication of Motions in Sinners,
why should he not have stopped it in favor of a Just Man, for the Good of his
Soul, and for the Preservation of the Union and Society he had with him; for
God had only made Man for himself? As God will have no Society with Sinners, he
has taken from them, after the Fall, the power they had to leave as it were the
Body, to unite themselves to him. But he has left them the Power to stop or
change the Communication of Motions in reference to the preservation of Life,
and Civil Society; because he was unwilling to destroy his own Work, having
even before he had formed it, designed, according to St. Paul, to restore it,
and reform it in Jesus Christ.

Objection against the Seventh Article.
MAN still conveys his Body at this time where he will; he moves as he pleases
all the parts of it, the motion of which is necessary for the prosecution and
avoiding of sensible Good and Evils. And consequently he stops or changes every
moment the Natural Communication of Motions, not only in things of small
Consequence; but also in things which are of no use for Life or Civil Society,
and even in Crimes which ruin Society, shorten Life, and dishonor God in all
respects. God Wills Order, I grant it. But does Order require that the Laws of
Motion should be violated for Evil, and remain inviolable on the account of
Good? Why should not Man have the Power to stop the Motions which sensible
Objects produce in his Body, since those Motions hinder him from doing good,
from drawing near to God again, and from returning to his Duty; and still have
the Power to do so much evil, with his Tongue, his Arm, and with the other
parts of the Body, the Motions of which depend upon his Will?

Answer.

To answer this Objection, we must consider, that Man having sinned was to
return to his Original Nothingness. For being no longer in order, nor in a
possibility to return to it, he ought to cease to exist. God loves nothing but
Order; See the 5th Dialogue of the Christian Conversation.
a Sinner is not in Order: Therefore God does not love him. Sinners then cannot
subsist, since Creatures only subsist because God will have them to be, and God
will not have them to be unless he loves them. Neither can a Sinner restore
himself to Order, because he cannot justify himself, and whatever he can
suffer cannot atone for his Offense: Therefore he ought to be reduced to
nothing again.

But whereas it is unreasonable to think, that God should make a Work to
annihilate it, or to put it yet into a worse condition; it is evident that God
would not have made Man, nor permitted his fall which he had foreseen, had he
not had in view his Sons Incarnation; in whom all things subsist, and by whom
the Universe receives a Beauty, Perfection, and Greatness worthy the Wisdom and
Power of its Author.

We may then consider that Man after his Sin is without a Restorer, but under
expectation of one. If we consider him without a Restorer, we see clearly that
he can have no Society with God; that he cannot have the least power in himself
to draw near unto God again; that God must needs repulse and use him ill when
he pretends to leave the Body to unite himself to him: That is to say, that Man
after Sin must lose the power of freeing himself from sensible Impressions and
Motions of Concupiscence. Moreover he ought to be annihilated for the reasons
abovesaid. But he expects a Restorer; and if we consider him under that
expectation, it is plain he must subsist, together with his Posterity out of
which the said Restorer is to come; and therefore it is necessary that Man
after his fall should still retain the power of moving diversely all those parts
of his Body whose motions may be useful toward his preservation.

It is true Men continually abuse that Power they have of producing certain
Motions; and that that Power, for instance, they have to move their Tongue
several ways, occasions an infinite number of Evils. But then it is evident,
that this Power is absolutely necessary to maintain Society; to ease one
another in the wants of this present Life; and to be Instructed in that
Religion, which gives the hopes of that Redeemer for whose sake the World
subsists. If we carefully examine those Motions which we produce in our selves,
and in what part of our Body we can produce them, we shall find clearly that
God has left us no more Power over our Body, than what is necessary to preserve
our Life, and maintain Civil Society. For instance, the Beating of the Heart,
the Dilatation of the Diaphragme, the Peristaltick Motion of the Bowels, the
Circulation of the Spirits and Blood, and diverse Motions of the Nerves in our
Passions, are produced in us without staying for Orders from the Soul. As they
must needs be partly the same on the same Occasions, nothing obliges God to
submit them now to the Will of Men; But whereas the Motions of the Muscles
which serve to stir the Tongue, the Arms and Legs, must change every moment,
according to the almost infinite diversity of the Good or Ill Objects which
surround us; it was necessary those Motions should depend on the Will of Men.

We must observe, that God always Acts by the most simple Means, and that the
Laws of Nature must be general; and therefore having given us the Power to move
our Arm and Tongue, he must not take away that Power from us to strike a Man
unjustly, or to Calumniate him. For if our Natural Faculties did depend on our
Designs, there would be no Uniformity, nor certain Rule in the Laws of Nature;
which nevertheless must be very plain and general, to be suitable to the Wisdom
of God, and conformable to Order. Insomuch that God, in pursuance of his
Decrees, chooses rather to perform the Materiality of Sin, as the Divines say,
or to serve the Injustice of Men, as one of his Prophets says, than by changing
his Will to put a stop to the disorder of Sinners: But he reserves his
Vengeance for the unworthy treatment he meets with, until he may be allowed to
do it without acting against the Immutability of his Degrees; that is, when
Death having corrupted the Body of the Voluptuous, God will lie no longer under
the necessity he has imposed upon himself of giving them Sensations and
Thoughts relating thereunto.

Objection against the Eleventh and Twelfth Articles.
ORiginal Sin does not only make Man a Slave to his Body, and subject to the
motions of Concupiscence, but likewise fills him with Spiritual Vices: The
Child's Body is not only corrupted before Baptism, but its very Soul and all its
Faculties are infected by Sin. Though the Rebellion of the Body is the chief
cause of some gross Vices, as Intemperance and Incontinency; yet it does not
occasion Vices that are purely Spiritual, such as Pride and Envy. So that
Original Sin is something very different from the Concupiscence wherewith we
are Born: and is probably the privation of Grace, or of Original Justice.

Answer.

I own that Children are deprived of Original Righteousness: and I prove it
when I show they are not born Just, and that God hates them. For in my Opinion,
it is impossible to give a clearer Idea of Justic^ and of Righteousness, than
in saying; that the Will is upright, when it loves God, and that it is
irregular when it is turned toward the Body. But if by Original Justice or
Grace, you mean certain or unknown Qualifications, like unto those which it is
said God had infused into the Soul of the first Man, to adorn it, and to render
it agreeable in his sight; it is also evident, that the privation of this
Justice is not Original Sin; for properly speaking that Privation cannot be
transmitted. If Children have nor those Qualifications, it is because God does
not give 'em to them. And if God does not give 'em, it is because they are
unworthy of it. It Is then that unworthiness which is transmitted, and which is
the cause of the privation of Original Justice. Therefore it is that
unworthiness which properly speaking is Original Sin.

Now this unworthiness, which consists, as I have shown in this, that the
Inclinations of Children are actually corrupted, that their Heart is turned
toward Bodies and Loves them; this, I say, is really in them: It is not the
Imputation of their Fathers Sin, they are actually in disorder. So those that
are justified by Jesus Christ, of which Adam was the Figure, are not justified
by Imputation: They are actually restored into Order by an inward Justice,
different from that of Jesus Christ, though it is only he that has merited it for
them.

The Soul has but two Natural or Essential Relations, the one to God, the other
to its Body. Now it is evident, that the Relation or Union it has with God, can
neither corrupt it, or make it vicious. Therefore it is only so in the moment
of its Creation, by the Relation it has to its Body. So that it is necessary to
say, either that Pride, and the other Vices, which are called Spiritual, may be
Communicated by the Body, or that Children are not liable to them at the moment
of their Birth. I say at the moment of their Birth, for I do not deny but those
ill habits are easily acquired. Yet pure Intelligences have no other relation
then to God, and that in the moment of their Creation they were subject to no
Vice, yet they are fallen into Disorder; but it is only by their having made an
ill use of their Liberty; and Children have made no use of it, for Original Sin
is not free.

But I am of Opinion, that those are mistaken who fancy the Rebellion of the
Body only occasions gross Vices, as Intemperance and Incontinency; and not
those which are called Spiritual, as Pride and Envy. And I am persuaded, that
there is such a Correspondence between the dispositions of our Brain and those
of our Soul, that perhaps the Soul has no ill habit but what derives its
Principle from the Body.

Saint Paul, in diverse places, calls Law, Wisdom, Desires, and the Works of the
Flesh, whatever is contrary to the Law of the Spirit; he does not mention
Spiritual Vices. He places among the Works of the Flesh, Idolatry, Heresies,
Dissentions, and many other Vices, which are called Spiritual. According to his
Doctrine we follow the motions of the Flesh, in being guilty of Vainglory,
Gal. c. 5.
Passion and Envy. Finally, it appears by the Expressions of that Apostle, that
all Sins proceed from the Flesh; not that the Flesh commits them, or that the
Spirit of Man, without Grace or the Spirit of Jesus Christ, does that which is
good, but because the Flesh acts upon the Mind of Man, in such a manner, that
it does no Evil which the Flesh does not solicit. Romans c. 7.
St. Paul speaks thus about it in the Epistle to the Romans, I delight in the
Law of God after the inward Man. But I see another Law in my Members warring
against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of Sin,
which is in the Members of my Body. And afterward, So then with the Mind, I my
self serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of Sin. He speaks after
the same manner in several other places of his Epistles; so that Concupiscence,
or the Rebellion of the Body, does not only incline us to those Vices which are
carnal or unseemly, but even to those that are thought to be Spiritual. I will
endeavor to prove it after a sensible manner.

When any Person is in company, to my seeming, it is certain that Traces are
machinally formed in his Brains, and Motions are excited in his Animal Spirits,
which beget Wicked thoughts and inclinations in his Soul. Our thoughts, at
those times, are not naturally conformable to Truth, nor our inclinations to
Order: They arise in us for the good of the Body, and of the present Life,
because they are excited by the Body; therefore they make us lose the presence
of God, and the thoughts of our Duty, and only tend to make other Men respect
us as being worthy of their Affection and Esteem. So that this secret Pride,
which is stirred up on those occasions. is a Spiritual Vice, of which the
Rebellion of the Body is the Principle.

For Instance, If the Persons before whom we are are Honorable, the Pomp of
their Grandeur dazles and humbles us. As the Traces which their presence
excites in our Brains, are sometimes very great, and their Motions very lively,
they shine, as it were, throughout our Body; they diffuse through our Face, and
sensibly discover Respect and Fear there, together with our most concealed
Sentiments. In the next place, these Traces, by these sensible Expressions of
our inward Motions, affect the Person who looks upon us; they inspire him with
Sentiments of Mildness and Civility by the Traces, which our respectful or
timorous Air produce machinally in his Brains, which reflecting on his Face,
conceal that Majesty which appeared there before, and give the rest of his Body
a Posture which composes our Trouble, and reassures us. So that after many
repercussions of those sensible Expressions, our Air and Deportment are settled
at last in the state which this Honorable Person desires.

Now as all the Motions of the Animal Spirits are attended by the Motion of the
Soul, and as the Traces of the Brain are followed by the Thoughts of the Mind;
it is evident, that being now deprived of the Power to obliterate those Traces,
and to stop those Motions, we find our selves solicited by the presence of the
Person who is above us, to enter into his sentiments and desires, and to apply
our selves wholly to him, as he is inclined to make his application to us,
though after a different manner. And this is the Reason that the Conversation
of the World revives and strengthens the desire of Pride, as dishonest
Commerce, Feasting, and the enjoyment of Sensual Pleasures increase Carnal
Desires; the Moral of which deserves our observation.

It Is very necessary there should be Traces in the Brain to represent a Man
continually to himself, that he may take care of his Person; and that there
should be others to form and maintain Society, since Men were not made to live
alone. But Man having lost the Power to obliterate those Traces at pleasure,
and when it might be convenient, they solicit him continually to evil. As he
cannot help representing himself to himself, he is continually excited to
motions of Pride and Vanity, to despise others, and to attribute all things to
himself; and whereas he is not master of the Traces which solicit him, to
maintain Society with others, he is agitated as it were against his Will, by
motions of Complaisance, Flattery, Jealousy, and the like Inclinations. Thus
all the Vices which are called Spiritual, proceed from the Flesh, as well as
Incontinency and Intemperance.

There are not only dispositions in our Brain which excite Sensation and
Motions in us, in relation to the Propagation of the Species and the
Preservation of Life; there are perhaps yet a greater number of them which stir
up Thoughts and Passions in us, in reference to Society, to our particular
advancements, and those of our Friends. We are Naturally united to all the
Bodies which surround us, and by those Bodies to all things that have any
relation to us. Now we cannot be united to them but by certain Dispositions
which are in our Brain. Therefore, not having the Power to hinder the Action of
those Natural Dispositions, our Union is changed into a Dependence, and we
become subject to all manner or Vices through our Body.

We are not pure Intelligence: All the Dispositions of our Soul produce some
Dispositions in our Body; as the Dispositions of our Body excite the like
Dispositions in our Soul. It is not that the Soul cannot absolutely receive any
thing but by the Body: But because so long as it is united to it, it can
receive no alteration in its Modifications, without the Body's also receiving
some. It is true that it may be Enlightened, or receive new Ideas, without the
necessity of the Body's having any share in them: But it is because pure Ideas
are no Modifications of the Soul, as I have proved it elsewhere. I do not speak
of sensible Ideas here; for those Ideas include a Sensation, and all Sensations
are Manners of the Souls Existence.

Second Objection. Against the Eleventh and Twelfth Article.
If Original Sin is Transmitted upon the Account of the Communication Between
the Brain of the Mother and that of her Child, Sicut per unum hominem peccatum
in hunc mundum intravit, etc. Romans 5.
it is the Mother who is the Cause of that Sin, and the Father has no share in
it. Nevertheless St. Paul teaches us, that by Man Sin came into the World: He
does not so much as mention the Woman. Therefore, etc.

ANSWER.

David assures us; that his Mother conceived him in Iniquity: And the Son of
Syrach says, that Sin proceeds from the Woman, In Iniquitatibus conceptus sum,
and in peccatis concepit me matter mea: Ps. 10.
and that it is through her we are all liable to Death: Neither of them spoke
of the Man, St. Paul on the contrary says, that it is by Man Sin was introduced
into the World: He speaks not of the Woman.

How must we reconcile those Testimonies, and which of the Two ought we to
Justify, if it were necessary to Justify either? A muliere initium factum est
peccati, and per illam omnes morimur. Ecch 25.23. Luc. 2.48.
In Discourse we never attribute any thing to the Woman in which she has no
share, and which is only the Man's: But we often attribute that to the Man
which is proper to the Woman, because the Husband is her Head and Master. We
see that the Evangelists, and even the Blessed Virgin calls Joseph the Father
of Jesus Christ; when she says unto her Son: Thy Father and I have sought thee
sorrowing; Ecce pater tuus and Ego dolentes quaerebamus. Therefore since the
Holy Scripture assures us that it is by the Woman we are all liable to Death
and to Sin, it is absolutely necessary to believe it: Nor can it be thrown upon
Man. But though it assure us in other places that by Man Sin came into the
World, there is not the same necessity to believe it, since that may be
attributed to the Man which belongs to the Woman. And if we were obliged by
Faith to excuse either the Man or the Woman, it would be mote reasonable to
excuse the Man than the Woman.

However I am of opinion that the Passages I have quoted ought to be explained
in the Literal sense, and that we ought to conclude, That both the Man and the
Woman are the Real Causes of Sin, each in their way. The Woman, because Sin is
Communicated by her, as it is by her that Man begets Children: And Man, because
his Sin has occasioned Concupiscence, as his Action is the Cause of the
Impregnation of the Woman, or of the Communication which is between the Woman
and her Child.

It Is certain that it is the Man who impregnates the Woman, and consequently he
is the Cause of the Communication which is between her Body and the Child's,
since that Communication is the Principle of its Life. The said Communication
does not only give to the Bodies of Children the Dispositions of their Mothers;
it also gives to their Minds, the Dispositions of her Mind. Therefore we may
say, with St. Paul, That By Man Sin was introduced into the World; and
nevertheless upon the account of that Communication, we may also say, that Sin
proceeds from the Woman; that it is by her we are all liable to Death, and that
our Mother has conceived us in Iniquity, as it is said in other places of the
Scripture.

Perhaps it may be urged, That though Man had not sinned, the Woman would have
had sinful Children; for having sinned her self, she had lost the Power God
had, given her over her Body: And therefore though the Man had remained Just,
she would have Corrupted the Brain, and consequently the Mind of her Child,
upon the account of the Communication she had with it.

Certainly, this does not appear lively: For Man whilst Righteous, knowing what
he does, cannot give the Woman that miserable Fruitfulness of conceiving sinful
Children. If he remains Righteous, he will have no Children but for God, and
sinful Children can never be acceptable to God; for I do not suppose a Mediator
in this place. However I grant, that in this case the Marriage might not have
been dissolved, and that the Man might have known his Wife. But it is certain,
the Body of the Woman did belong to her Husband, since it was taken out of his,
and was of the same Flesh; Duo in carne una. It is also certain, that the
Children belong as much to the Father as to the Mother. This being granted, we
can never imagine that the Woman, after her Sin, would have lost the power she
had over her Body, unless her Husband had sinned as well as her self; for had
the Woman been deprived of that power, her Husband remaining in Innocence,
there would have been this disorder in the Universe, That a Just Man should
have had a Corrupt Body and Sinful Children. Now, it is contrary to Order, or
rather it is contradictory, that a Just God should punish the Man, when he is
in perfect Innocence. Therefore Eve feels no Involuntary and Rebel Motions
immediately after her Sin: She is not as yet ashamed to see her self naked: She
does not hide her self: On the contrary, she draws near to her Husband, though
naked as well as her self: Her Eyes are not as yet opened: She is, as before,
the absolute Mistress of her Body. Order required that immediately after her
sin her Soul should have been disturbed by the Rebellion of her Body, and by
the shame of her own and Husband's Nakedness: For it was not reasonable that
God should any longer suspend the Laws of the Communication of Motions in
favor of her, as I have said in the Seventh Article. But whereas her Body
belongs to her Husband, and her Husband is still Innocent; she is not punished
in that Body: That punishment is deferred until he has himself eaten of the
Fruit which she presented to him. Then it was they both felt the Rebellion of
their Bodies; they perceived they were naked; and that shame obliged them to
cover themselves with Fig Leaves. Therefore we must say, That Adam is really
the Cause of Original Sin and Concupiscence, since it is his sin that has
deprived his Wife as well as himself of the power they had over their Bodies,
and that it is for want of this power the Woman produces Traces in her Brain,
and in the Brain of her Child, which corrupt the Soul from the very moment it
is created.

OBJECTION. Against the Twelfth Article.
Those speak by guess who say, that the Communication of the Mothers Brain with
that of her Child, is necessary or useful toward the Conformation of the
Foetus: For there is no such Communication between the Brain of a Hen and her
Chickens; and yet the Chickens are perfectly well formed.

ANSWER.

I Answer, that in the Seventh Chapter of the Second Book I have sufficiently
demonstrated that Communication, by the use I make of it to Explain the
Generation of Monsters, and certain Marks, and Natural Apprehensions. For it is
evident, that a Man who falls into a swoon at the sight of a snake, because his
Mother was frightened by one while she bore him, can only have this Weakness,
because the Traces were formerly formed in his Brain like unto those which open
themselves when he sees a snake, and that the said Traces have been attended
with the like accident. Therefore I guess not; for I do not presume to
determine wherein the said Communication does precisely consist. I might say,
it proceeds from the Fibers which the Foetus shoots into the Mothers Womb, and
by the Nerves with which that part is probably filled. And yet I should no more
guess in this than a Man, who never having seen the Machines of the *
Samaritan, Fountain upon Pont Neuf in Paris.
should affirm that there are Wheels and Pumps in it to draw up the Water.
However, I am of opinion it is sometimes lawful to guess, provided we do not
pretend to set up for Prophets, or speak with too much assurance. I fancy, Men
may be allowed to say what they think, provided they do not aim at
Infalibility, or injustly impose upon Men's Minds with a discisive behavior, or
by the help of some Terms of Art. We do not always guess in saying things that
are not seen, and are contrary to Prejudices, provided we only say what may be
conceived well, and enter easily into the Minds of those who are willing to
hearken to Reason.

Therefore I say, that in supposing the general Laws of the Communication of
Motions, such as they are, it is very likely that the particular Communication
of the Mothers Brain, with the Child's is necessary, in order to form its Body
as it ought to be; or at least, that it is necessary to make the Child's Brain
receive certain Dispositions, which must vary according to Times and Countries;
as I have explained in the same Chapter.

I own that there is no Communication between the Brain of a Hen and that of a
Chicken, which is formed in an Egg, and that nevertheless the Body of the
Chicken is perfectly formed. But you may observe, that the Chicken is far more
forward in the Egg when the Hen sits upon it, than the Foetus when it descends
into the Womb. We may easily judge this; since it requires less time to hatch
the Eggs, for instance, than to have Puppies; notwithstanding the Belly of a
Bitch being very hot, and her Blood in perpetual motion, the Whelps ought to be
sooner formed than the Eggs hatched, if the Chickens were not more forward in
their Eggs, than the Puppies in their Germ. Now it is very likely, that the
said formation of the Chicken in the Egg before its being laid, was produced by
the Communication I am speaking of.

I Answer in the second place, That the growth of the Body of Fowls is perhaps
more conformable to the general Laws of Motion, than that of four-footed
Beasts; and therefore the Communication of the Females Brain with her Young, is
not so necessary in Birds as in other Animals. For the Reason which makes the
said Communication necessary, is probably to remedy the defect of the General
Laws, which are not sufficient in some particular cases for the Formation, and
Increase of Animals.

Finally, I Answer, That it is not necessary for the Preservation of the Life
of Birds, that there should be as many particular Dispositions in their Brain,
as in that of other Animals: They have Wings to avoid harm, and to catch their
Prey: They have no need of all these particular springs, which are the
Principles of the Cunning and Docility of some Domestic Animals. Therefore it
is not necessary that the Female in forming them should instruct them with many
things, or make them capable of being instructed of them by a Disposition of
Brain proper for such Docility. Those who train up young Dogs for Hunting, do
sometimes meet with some who set Naturally, by the bare Instruction they have
received from the Bitch, who has often Hunted whilst big with Whelps. A
difference is generally observed among the breed of Animals, and that some are
apter and more capable to be instructed than others of the same kind. But I
don't believe, that ever any Bird taught her Young ones any thing
extraordinary; or that a Hen, for instance, ever hatched a Chicken, that could
do any thing besides what they Naturally do: Therefore Birds are not so apt,
nor so capable of Instruction, as other Animals. The Disposition of their Brain
is not commonly capable of much variation: They do not act so much by
Imitation, as some Domestic Animals do. Young Ducks, that are hatched of a
Hen, do not tarry for her Example, to leap into the Water; neither do Chickens
use themselves to swim, though hatched by a Duck, which leads them, and swims
continually. But there are Animals which easily and quickly imitate the
extraordinary Motions which others perform before them. Nevertheless, I do not
pretend, that Men should rely much on these last Reflections; since they are
not necessary to establish what I bring them for.

Second Objection. Against the Twelfth Article.
It Is also nothing but Guess, to affirm, That the Mother before her Sin might
have any intercourse with her Embrio; for there is no necessary relation
between our Thoughts and the Motions that pass in our Brain. Therefore this
Communication of the Mothers Brain to the Child's, is useless.

ANSWER.

It is evident, that without the said Communication, the Child could not have
any Commerce with its Mother, nor the Mother with it. Now before the Fall,
Order required that the Mother should be acquainted with all the Corporal wants
of her Child, and that the Child should not be ignorant of its Obligations to
its Parents. Therefore as all things were in Order before the Fall, and that
God always acts according to Order, the Mother and Child would have had some
Commerce by means of the said Communication.

To apprehend wherein this said Commerce might have consisted: We must remember
that the relation of the Traces of the Brain, with the Ideas of the Soul, may
be made several ways; either by the Nature or the Will of Men, or some other
way, as I have explained in the Second Book Chap. 2. of the second Part
.

When we look upon a Square, or upon the Air of a person who indures pain, we
have in our minds the Idea of a Square, or of some person in affliction: This
is common to all Nations, and the relation which is between these Ideas and
Traces is natural. When an Englishman hears any one pronounce this word,
Square, he also has the Idea of a Square: But the relation that is between the
sound, or the characters of this word and his Idea, is not natural; neither is
it common to all Men. Therefore I say, that the Mother and the Child would
naturally have had a commerce between them about all things that can be
represented to the Mind by natural relations. And if (for instance) the Mother
had seen a Square, the Child would also have seen it; and had the Child
imagined any Figure, it would also have excited the Trace of the said Figure in
its Mothers imagination. But the Mother and the Child would not naturally have
had a commerce together about things that are purely spiritual, nor yet about
such as are corporeal, if they had conceived them without making use of their
senses or imagination. The Mother would have thought on God, she would have
heard people read this word Square, or the like, without the Child's having
been able to discover what thought she had: Unless she could have been able in
time to have established a new commerce of Intellectual Ideas with it, almost
as Nurses do when they teach their Children how to speak. But to explain and
prove these things.

I think I have sufficiently showed, by the Explanation I have given of the
cause of Hereditary Aversions, and the marks we draw from our Birth, that the
Traces of Mothers are communicated to their Children. The Traces of corporal
things are inseparable from their Ideas: Therefore those Ideas also communicate
themselves, and Children feel and imagine the same things with their Mothers.
Now it is against their will they feel what their Mothers feel: But were they
not Sinners, they would have the power to hinder at pleasure the effect of the
communication they have with their Mothers. Moreover, they would be adle to
excite in their Brain the Traces they had received, from the same reason as we
imagine whatever we please, when our Sensations are not too lively. This being
supposed, it is evident that the Mother, being attentive to her Child, might
discover by a kind of repercussion, whether or no it would receive the
impression she should excite in it, and also the other things she should think
on. For as the Mother would not be able to move the Fibers of her Brain,
without making an impression thereby on the Child's; neither could the Child
receive the said impression, without the Mothers having notice of it by some
slight impression, provided she became very attentive to it by the power she
should have to make all other noise cease but that which her Child should
excite in her. Therefore we must conclude, that the Child and irs Mother would
have had some commerce together before the Fall, or deny the relation of the
Brain of the one to the Brain of the other, or the power of the Soul over the
Body, as I have before established. This appears evident, though the
imagination is startled at it and prejudice opposes it. It Is true, that at
first that commerce would only have been in such things as are liable to our
senses and imagination. Children being only related to their Mothers by their
Bodies, it is not absolutely necessary they should receive any Ideas from them
but those of sensible Objects. For their Soul, being strictly united to God, if
we consider them without sin, they receive immediately from him all the Ideas
which have no relation to the Body. But whereas it is possible, in time to find
the most abstracted Ideas to sensible things which have no relation to them,
the commerce of Mothers with their Children would probably have soon extended
it self to the most spiritual things, had they endeavored to entertain
themselves upon those matters.

I am extremely sensible that what I say here will not appear very reasonable
to the generality of men, and that even those who impugn Prejudices and the
continual Effort of sensible Impressions, will be surprised at the novelty of
this Thought. But if we reflect seriously upon the manner how a Master
instructs his Disciple, if we consider how many different means he is obliged
to make use of to discover to him the Ideas he himself has of things, the
comparisons he makes of them, the judgments he gives about them, and the other
dispositions, of his mind in relation to them; we shall find, that Mothers have
a far greater facility to discover their thoughts, and inward dispositions to
their Children, than Masters to their Disciples; provided we only suppose that
the Traces of the Mothers Brain are imprinted on that of their Children: Which
is evident by what I have said. For in fine, it is plain that voice and all
external signs we use, to express our thoughts to others, have only the effect
we desire, because they imprint on the Brain of those who hearken to us, the
same Traces, and excite the same Emotions of the Spirits, which accompany our
Ideas, and inward disposition in relation to them.

OBJECTION: Against the Seventeenth Article, and the following ones.
It is presumptuous to say, that Children are Justified in Baptism by Actual
motions of their Will toward God. We ought not to give way to new Opinions,
that only serve to make a Noise.

ANSWER.

I grant, we must not say positively that Children are Justified by formal Acts
of their Will. I believe no man knows any thing about it, and we must affirm
nothing positively but what we know. But whereas there are but too many of
those who believe the Justification of Children is only external and by
imputation, because (say they) they are incapable of forming any Act of Love
toward God: I believe it necessary to make them sensible that their Opinion
only proceeds from Prejudice. For the Prejudices of Men in relation to Children
are such, that they commonly imagine they do not think in their Mothers Womb
and in their first Years, and moreover that they are incapable of thinking. Men
fancy they have not as yet the Ideas of things in themselves; that they are
inspired into them by their Masters in Discourse; and that if they have any
inclinations, they are not of the same nature with ours, and that they cannot
lead them to sovereign Good. The generality of men do not apprehend distinctly
that the Soul of children is like that of persons advanced in years; that is
does not fortify and perfect it selt like the Body; and that if it were
delivered for one moment from the impression which the Body makes upon it, and
moved by the Delectation of Grace, it would be more enlightened and more pure
in that moment, than that of the greatest Saints who always fight against some
concupiscence in their mind and heart.

Concupiscence is commonly looked upon as if it were natural: Men do not always
think that it is a consequence of sin. Therefore they judge unawares that the
Stupidity of children is a necessary consequence of the Weakness of their Body,
of their Youth, and even of the incapacity of their Mind. Now this Judgment or
Prejudice represents it self continually to the mind, and pre-ingages it in
such a manner as to hinder it from examining the thing in it self. So those who
have spoken of Baptism in former Ages, have not explained the Regeneration of
children by Actual motions of their Heart. Not because strong Reasons induced
them to judge that it was impossible; for it does not appear by their Works
that they have so much as examined it: But rather because they have supposed it
so, and have hardly had any thoughts to doubt it, or perhaps because they were
unwilling to give an Explication which would have opposed Prejudices, at a time
when people were not so solicitous to lay them aside, as they are at present.

But if we consider the necessity there is of giving a more exact Explanation,
for Instance, than St. Augustine does in some passages, which favors B. 1. de
Nupt. C. 25, 26, 27 and in Jul. B. 6 c. 19. and elsewhere.
Imputation, though in other places he speak after a manner which does not
favor it. Ep. 23. Lib. de peccatorum meritis C. 19. and alibi.
If we consider that Imputation is very convenient, that it seems to have been
received in this case by some Ancient and very Orthodox Innocent 3. In 3. De
Baptismo and ejus effectu. Capite Majoris. Et in Conc. Viennensi Generati 15.
under Clement V.
Divines, and moreover that it is absolutely necessary for those who deny,
though without any convincing Proofs, the Habits of the Soul, whom it would be
good to satisfy if possible. In fine, if we will have a regard to natural
Equity which forbids the condemning of secret Intentions, we may perhaps judge
that what I say is improbable: But I do not think that any one can be offended
at it, since I endeavor thus to satisfy Men's minds, even those who are the
most troublesome, in the difficulties they propose about Original Sin.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Third Chapter, of the Third Part, of the Second Book.
In which I speak Of the Power of the Imagination of some Authors, and
particularly of Tertullian.
AS I am convinced that the most general, and most exuberant Principle of the
Errors we meet with in Sciences, and particularly in Morality, is the
Impression which lively Imaginations make upon Men's Minds, who are guided more
by Mechanism than by Reason; I thought my self obliged to make the World so
sensible of this Truth, as to awaken Men out of their Lethargy, in relation to
it. And whereas Examples are most powerful over us, especially when there is
something great and extraordinary in them, I have thought that the celebrated
Names of Tertullian, Seneca, and of Montagne, would be capable of exciting
their Attention, and convince them sensibly of the contagious power of the
Imagination over Reason. For in fine, if dead Words, which are not animated by
the Air and sensible Behavior of those famous Authors, have still more force
than the Reason of certain Persons: If the turn of Expression, which gives but
a weak Idea of the sensible Action, which the Imagination diffuses livelily
upon the Face, and the rest of their Body, who are persuaded of what they say,
is capable of agitating, penetrating, and convincing many; certainly it must be
granted, that nothing can be more dangerous than a respectful attention to
Persons, whose Imagination is strong and lively. For their Air and manner of
speaking, is a Natural Language, so strong and convincing; they know how to
draw things so much to the Life, that they commonly make the Passions and the
Senses rise against Reason; that they infuse, as it were, conviction and
certainty into all those who look upon them.

I was very sensible, that in producing these great Examples, I should not cure
all those who had been struck with astonishment and admiration at the reading
of these three famous Authors. For there is no need to very well acquainted
with the Nature of Man, to know that the Wounds which the Brain has received,
are harder to be cured than those of the other parts of the Body; and that it
is easier to close a Wound which is not exposed to the Action of some Body that
may renew it, than perfectly to cure certain Prejudices which are justified
every moment by very probable Reasons.

It is very difficult to close up the Traces of the Brain exactly, because they
are exposed to the course of the Spirits, and may be continually renewed by a
vast number of Traces, which may be called accessories. Those kind of Wounds
cannot commonly be cured or closed up, unless it be when the Brain having
received others that are deeper and opposite to them, a strong and continual
revulsion is made in the Spirits. For we must not imagine that a Prejudice is
absolutely cured as soon as we fancy it is; because we are not actually
affected with it. A Prejudice is only absolutely cured, when the Trace is
perfectly closed up; and not so soon as the Spirits begin no longer to take
their course that way for some particular Reason.

Therefore I was very sensible that those who had been overcome by the Force
and Motions of Tertullian, said and dazzled by the Greatness and Beauties of
Seneca, charmed and corrupted by the free and natural Expressions of Montaigne,
would not change their Sentiments after the reading of a few Pages of my Book.
I judged on the contrary, that they would be displeased at my Endeavors to
dissipate the Spell which charms them.

But whereas I was in hopes that these Examples would prove of use to my
Design, for the Reasons I have alleged; I thought my self obliged to have more
regard to the Advantage many persons may derive by it, who are unprejudiced,
than to the Uneasiness of some others, whom I thought would criticize upon the
Liberty I have taken. I considered also, that there are few Men so much
prejudiced in favor of their Authors, as to despair of prevailing with them,
to side with Reason again. Lastly, I thought that as there are perhaps no Men
prejudiced in favor of all three of them, by reason of the diversity of the
Character of their Imaginations, the most obstinate might think that I am in
the right in many things.

I know the respect I owe to the Works of Tertullian, as well upon the account
of the Subjects he treat of, as the approbation they have had from several
persons who ought to be Judges of them. And I have sufficiently discovered this
disposition of my Mind, by what I have said concerning them, and by the quality
of the Book de Pallio, the only one I have freely spoken of, though there are
others which perhaps would have been fitter for my Design.

But after all, I do not think that Time ought either to magnify or alter the
Ideas of things, that all Antiquities are Venerable, and that false Reasons and
extravagant Expressions deserve Respect, because they have been introduced into
the World long before us. I do not think we are obliged to receive Affected
Obscurities like Sacred Mysteries; Sallies of Imagination like evident Truths;
The Hearts of Africa which Labor in a Mind naturally full of Fire, like the
Motions of the Prophetical Spirit, which can only teach Sublime Truths.

I am sensible that even those who have most respect for Tertullian's Works,
allow all this, and that they are too Equitable to Justify the irregularities
of Imagination against Reason. But perhaps they are like those Judicious
Persons who are great Lovers of Truth, and yet are taken with the Style. For I
have often met with some of them who were so much enchanted by some strong,
lively, great and magnificent Expressions of Tertullian; that after having
proved to them, that the Author was neither Judicious, not very Reasonable,
they did nothing but repeat them to me to surprise and persuade me.

I own that Tertullian has very bold and strong Expressions, and that they
produce very Lively and Sprightly Images in the Mind: And it is for that Reason
I take him for an Example, that strong Imaginations have much power to act, and
convince by Impression. Therefore those who make those kind of Objections to
me, confirm my Opinion, while they oppose it. The Prepossession or Esteem they
have for Tertullian, justifies my Conduct. The frequent Quotations and the
Pompous Words they allege from him, prove what I say. For men seldom quote in
Discourse entire Arguments: But they often quote strong and lively Expressions,
to dazzle and to convince by sensible Impression.

I suppose no body will imagine that I pretend to censure so many Great Men who
daily quote Tertullian in their Pulpits. They have Reasons for it, which I do
not pretend to Examine. What I have said of that Author to me seems evident.
Let every Man make his Inferences according to his own knowledge, without
imputing Thoughts to me which I never had. Those who pretend to dive into the
Designs of others, often form Phantasms which are only like themselves: For it
is usual for us, to diffuse, as it were, the Malignity of our Passions upon
others. We judge of all Things by our selves: And those who do condemn me,
perhaps judge themselves; though they reflect not upon it. But if the World
would have me to declare my Opinion about Tertullian's Quotations, I own that
Men are in the right to make use of them for several Reasons; and also that
they are sometimes very useful to make some Practical Truths the more sensible,
which are barren and unfruitful, so long as they are in the secret Recesses of
our Reason, and excite in us no Motions contrary to those which the goods of
the Body do.

However I do not think there is any thing unreasonable in their Opinion who
maintain, That we ought never to quote Authors by Name, but when they are
infallible; and that unless it be in such things in which Reason has no share,
or in which Authority must take place, we should never quote any Body. This was
formerly the Custom of the Fathers. St. Cyprian never quoted Tertullian, though
he has taken many things from him. And if we may credit what St. Jerome relates
of that Holy Bishop, by report, that speaking of Tertullian, he called him his
Master; certainly the Name of Tertullian had no great Authority, nor his
Expressions the power they have at present over Men's Minds: or else St. Cyprian
followed the Custom of his Time with a very surprising Rigor. For it is very
strange that such a Disciple should never have mentioned his Master in any of
his Works.

This Story of St. Jerome is commonly made use of to defend Tertullian; And I
have been told sometimes, that I was to blame to speak as I did of no Man whom
St. Cyprian called his Master. But I do know not whether St. Jerome was not too
credulous in believing a thing which made for the honor of Tertullian. He
seems to have had a little too much inclination for him, since he has in some
measure excused his Fall, by imputing his Heresy to the Envy of the Romish
Clergy, and to the ill Treatments he had received from them. But, if this Story
be true which is only grounded upon what St. Jerome has heard one Person say,
Invidia postea, and contumeliis Clericorum Romanae Ecclesiae, ad Montani dogma
delapsus, in multis libris novae prophetiae meminit. Hieron. in Catalogo de
Script. Eccl.
I own that I cannot apprehend the meaning of St. Cyprian's Silence in his
Writings in relation to Tertullian. This Silence of the Disciple seems to
conceal some Mystery which is not to the advantage of the Master. And if
History as well as Tertullian's own Works, did not sufficiently discover, that
he is not altogether worthy of the great Esteem many Men have for him. I
question whether St. Cyprian's Behavior, his Silence, his Style, and his
Expressions, would not be sufficient to lessen it, and persuade us that this
said Authors Reputation was not very great even in Africa it self, which ought
to have been more favorable to him than so Temperate a Country as ours is.

France and Africa produce very different Minds. The Genius of the French being
Natural, Reasonable, and an Enemy to all forced Expressions, I wonder how there
are Persons among them who are passionately affected with an Author, that
neither studied nor follows Nature; and who, instead of consulting Reason,
suffers himself often to be so much swayed by his Passion, as to use
Expressions that are altogether Obscure, Monstrous, and Extravagant.

But perhaps it is because Imagination has so much Force that it weakens
Reason, and even changes Nature. Indeed a Passionate Man disturbs us, and for
the most part changes the natural Order of our Imagination to conform it to
his. And then all Motions seem natural, all manner of Expressions are
agreeable, all sort of Bombast convinces; for Men examine nothing seriously.
And whereas the Passions justify themselves, and depraved Imaginations delight
only in their irregularities, we can never judge soundly of things, as long as
the Brain preserves the violent Impression it has received. All Passionate Men
are continually solicited to justify the Passion which Animates them: There
is no Distracted Man, but is pleased with his Distraction. For if those who
fancy themselves to be Cocks, Wolves, Oxen, etc. are extremely delighted with
the Actions of those Animals, though they are absolutely contrary to the Nature
of Men; it may very well be concluded that we are far from condemning the
behavior of those, who by the contagion of their Imagination, have in some
measure, made us like themselves; for in condemning them, we feel that we
condemn our selves.

There is a very particular Reason, which makes some Learned Men proud of
appearing Tertullians Proselytes, and obliges them to express a particular
respect for that Author; It is the obscurity which he affects, as one of the
principal Rules of Rhetoric.

Now adays all Expressions that are senseless, and all obscure and perplexed
ways of speaking, go under the name of nonsense; but there have been Men who
looked upon obscurity as one of the greatest secrets of Eloquence; among them
the Art of Persuading did in some measure consist in making themselves
unintelligible.

Had those who speak in public, always clear and distinct Ideas of the Truths
they pretend to persuade; and did they only speak to Persons capable of a
sufficient attention to apprehend them, the Precept of affecting obscurity in
Discourse, would be extravagant in all respects. But though this Precept is
absolutely contrary to Reason, we may say, it is pretty well proportioned to
the Genius of most Men; not only because it cloaks the Ignorance of those who
speak; but also because misterious obscurity excites in many, such Sentiments
as dispose them to submit, and to suffer themselves to be convinced.

Experience sufficiently shows, that most Men esteem what they do not
apprehend; that they revere as Mysteries whatever surpasses them; and that they
admire an Orator, who dazzles them with lofty Expressions, and with a Language
of Imagination, in which Reason has no share.

The Inclination Men have for Greatness, is stronger than that they have for
Truth. Therefore Pompous Nonsense, which persuades by Imagination, is better
received than pure Reasonings, which can only persuade by Evidence. Evidence
prevails only by Reflections, which always costs some Trouble; but sensible
Conviction pours it self into the Soul, and penetrates it after a pleasing
manner.

The good which alone is capable to satisfy us, is at once infinite and
inaccessible, and great and obscure Expressions bear the character of it: So
that obscurity exciting our Desires, as greatness excites our admiration and
esteem; those Expressions prevail upon us by the Motions they produce in us.

When Men understand, or think they understand, a difficult obscure Author,
they think better of themselves than of those who do not understand him; they
look upon them as ignorant Persons. The pains they have been at to understand
him, ingages them in his defense. They justify their study in revering him,
and making others do the same. And as Men delight in justifying themselves;
they never fail to praise and to defend such an Author zealously, and after a
very lively and sensible manner.

These Reasons, and some ethers that are less strong, are sufficient, in my
Opinion, to show that Tertullians Obscurity is no wise disadvantageous to him
in the minds of some Persons; and that probably they would never have admired
him so much; had the Truths which are dispersed through his Works, been reduced
to their plainest and most clear Ideas.

We always reduce Mathematical Relations and Truths to their Exponents; I
mean, to the plainest Terms that can express them; and we disingage them from
whatever might perplex or obscure them: For Geometricians love plain Truth;
they do not desire to convince by Impression, but by Evidence and Light. What
would become of many of Tertullians Thoughts, should any one reduce them to
their Exponents, according to the Rules of Geometricians and Logicians, and
also strip them of that sensible show which dazzles Reason? We ought to try
that Experiment, if we design to judge solidly of that Authors Arguments.

However I do not pretend that Tertullian ought to have written like a
Geometrician. Figures which express our Sentiments and Motions, in relation to
Truths which we expose to others, are absolutely necessary. And I am of
Opinion, that particularly in Discourses of Religion and Morality, we ought to
make use of such Ornaments as are proper to make Men pay that respect to Truth
which is due to it, and of such Motions as are fit to move the Soul, and
incline it to Virtuous Actions. But we ought never to adorn Phantasms which are
without substance or reality We must never excite useless Motions; and if we
would forcibly imprint conviction and certainty on the Minds of those who
hearken to us, that Conviction must have a relation to something that is true
and solid. We must never convince, nor suffer our selves to be convinced,
without knowing evidently, distinctly, and precisely, of what it is we convince
People, or what it is we are convinced of. We must know what we say, and what
we believe. And we must love Truth and Knowledge, and not blind others, after
having suffered our selves to be blinded.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Nature of IDEAS.
In which I Show How we see all things in God, both Eternal Truths, and Laws.
I Was in hopes, that what I have said about the Nature of Ideas, would be
enough to make Men apprehend, that it is God who inlightens us: But I find by
Experience that there are many Persons who are incapable of sufficient
attention to conceive the Reasons I have given of that Principle. Whatever is
abstracted, is incomprehensible to most Men; nothing affects them but that
which is sensible, and fixes and maintains the light of their Mind. They cannot
consider, and consequently cannot apprehend that which falls not under the
apprehension of their Senses nor Imagination. This is what I have often said,
and what I can never respect too much.

It is evident, that Bodies are not visible of themselves; that they cannot act
over our Mind, nor represent themselves to it: This wants no Proof: But is
infinitely more certain, than that Bodies communicate their Motions to each
other, when they meet. But this is only certain to those who silence their
Senses to hearken to their Reason. All Men fancy that Bodies push one another,
because the Senses tell them so: But they do not believe that Bodies are of
themselves absolutely invisible, and incapable to act on the Mind, because the
Senses do not say it, but seem to intimate the contrary.

There are nevertheless some Persons, whose solid and steady Reason elevates it
self to the most abstracted Truths: They contemplate them with attention, and
resist the impression of their Senses, and Imagination with great Courage. But
by degrees the Body stupifying the Mind, they relapse: Those Ideas are
dissipated, and their Imagination exciting others that are more lively and more
sensible; those first are no longer like any thing but Spectors which Men
mistrust, and of which they dread the illusion.

We easily doubt Persons or things that are not familiar to us, or that have
not afforded us some sensible Pleasures: For it is Pleasure that wins the Heart,
and Familiarity removes Trouble and disquiet from the Mind. Therefore those who
are not used to Metaphysical and Abstracted Truths, are very much inclined to
believe, that those have a mind to seduce them, who only study to inform them.
They look with a kind of diffidence and horror on such Ideas as have nothing
that is agreeable or sensible in them; and the love they have for Quiet and
Felicity, soon delivers them from a sight which disturbs them, and which seems
incapable of contenting them.

Were not the present question of the utmost consequence, the Reasons
abovesaid, and some others which are not necessary to be related, would oblige
me to speak no further of it: For I foresee, that whatever I may say upon that
subject, will never enter into the mind of certain Persons. But this Principle,
that there is none but God who inlightens us, and that by the manifestation of
an immutable and necessary Reason, or Wisdom, appears to me so conformable to
Religion, that I think my self indispensibly obliged to explain, and maintain
it as much as I can. I had rather be called a Visionary, a Lunatic, and bear
all the Ridicule that the Imagination (which in little Souls is always
sarcastical) opposes to such Reasons it does not apprehend, or cannot defend it
self against; than to grant that Bodies are capable of inlightning me; that I
am my own Master, Reason, and Light; and that to get a solid knowledge of all
things, I need only consult my self; or Men, who perhaps may make a great deal
of Noise at my Ears, but who certainly cannot inlighten my Mind. Therefore I
yet here advance some Reasons, to maintain the Sentiment I have established in
the Chapters to which this belongs.

Every one agrees, that all Men are capable of knowing Truth; and the
Philosophers, nay even the least among them, own that Man participates of a
certain Reason which they do not determine: Therefore they define him, Animal
RATIONIS particeps; for every one knows at least confusedly, that the Essential
difference of Man consists in the necessary union he has with the Universal
Reason, though it is not commonly known who it is that includes that Reason,
which Men take but little care to discover. I see, for instance, that two and
two make four; Si ambo videmus verum esse quod dicis, and ambo videmns verum
esse quod dico, ubi quaeso id videmus? Nec ego utique in te, nec tu in me, sed
ambo in insa quae supra mentes nostras est incommutabili veritate.
and that we ought to value a Friend more than a Dog; and I am very certain,
that there is no Man in the World, but sees it as well as my self. Now I see
not these Truths in the mind of others, neither do they see them in mine.
Therefore there must needs be an Universal Reason which informs me, and all
Intelligent Beings. For if the Reason which I consult were not the same which
answers the Chinese, Conf. of St. Aug. B. 12. C. 25.
it is evident that I could not be as certain as I am, See St. Aug. de libero
arbitrio, B. 2. C. 8. and the following.
that the Chinese see the same Truths as I do. So that the Reason we consult
when we look within our selves, is an universal Reason; I say, when we look
within our selves; for I speak not in this place of the Reason which is
followed by a Passionate Man. When a Man prefers his Horses Life before his
Coachmans, he has some Reasons for it; but they are particular Reasons which a
Rational Man abominates. They are Reasons which at the bottom are not
Reasonable, because they are not consonant to the sovereign, or universal
Reason which all Men consult.

I am certain that the Ideas of things are immutable, and that Eternal Truths
and Laws are necessary: It is impossible they should be otherwise than they
are. But I see nothing in my self that is immutable or necessary: I might not
be, or not be what I am. There may be Spirits who are not like me, and yet I am
certain there can be no Spirits who see other Truths, and other Laws, than I
do: For all Spirits see of necessity that two and two are four, and that we
ought to prefer our Friend before our Dog. Therefore we must conclude, that the
Reason which all Spirits consult, is an immutable and necessary Reason.

Moreover it is evident, that this same Reason is infinite. The Mind of Man
conceives clearly that there are, or may be an infinite number of intelligible
Triangles, Tetragones, Pentagones, and other the like Figures. He does not only
conceive that he shall never want the Ideas of Figures, and that he shall
always discover new ones, though he should only apply himself to those sort of
Ideas to all Eternity; but he also observes infinity in Extension. The Mind
sees clearly that the Number which multiplied by it self, produces 5, or any of
the Numbers between 4 and and 9, between 9 and 16, between 16 and 25, etc. is a
Quantity, a Relation, a Fraction, whose Terms contain more Figures than can
reach between the two Poles of the World. He sees clearly that it is a relation
which none but God can apprehend, and that it is impossible to express it
exactly, because to express it, requires a Fraction whose two terms must be
infinite. I might give many Examples of this Nature, from whence it may be
concluded, not only that the Mind of Man is bounded; but also the Reason which
he consults is infinite. For the Mind clearly perceives infinity in this
Reason, though it does not comprehend it; since it can compare incommensurable
Numbers with one another, and know their Relations, though it cannot compare
them with unity. Or, to stop only at that which is most sensible, the Reason
which Man consults, is infinite, since it cannot be exhausted, and it has
always something to answer to whatever we demand.

But if it be true, that the Reason whereof all Men participate, is universal;
if it be true that it is infinite; that it is immutable and necessary: It is
certain that it is not different from that of God himself: For nothing but the
Universal and Infinite Being includes in it self an Universal and Infinite
Reason. All Creatures are particular Beings; therefore Universal Reason is not
Created. No Creatures are Infinite; therefore Infinite Reason is not a
Creature. But the Reason which we consult, is not only universal and infinite,
but also necessary and independent, and in one sense we conceive it to be more
independent than God himself. For God can only act according to that Reason: He
has a dependence on it in one sense: He must guide it and follow it. God
consults none but himself; He has no dependence on any thing. Therefore that
Reason is not distinguished from himself: It is Coeternal and Consubstantial
with him. We see clearly that he cannot punish an innocent Person; that he
cannot subject Spirits to Bodies; that he is obliged to follow Order. Therefore
we see the Rule, the Order, the Reason of God: For what Wisdom could we see
besides the Wisdom of God, when we presume to say, that God is obliged to
follow it?

But after all, can we conceive a Wisdom that is not the Wisdom of God? Does
Solomon, who speaks so well of Wisdom, distinguish it into two kinds? Does he
not teach us, that the Wisdom which is Coeternal with God himself, and by which
he has established the Order that we fee in his Works, is the very same which
presides over all Spirits, and which Legislators consult, to make Just and
Reasonable Laws. The Eighth Chapter of the Proverbs is sufficient to convince
us of this Truth. I am sensible the Holy Scripture speaks of a certain Wisdom,
which it calls the Wisdom of the Age, Wisdom of Men. But it is because it
speaks of things according to appearances, or according to the common opinion:
For it teaches us elsewhere, that that Wisdom is but Folly and Abomination, not
only before God, but before all Men who consult Reason.

Certainly, did Eternal Truths and Laws depend on God, had they been
established by the Creators Free Will; in a word, were not the Reason which we
consult necessary and independent: It appears evident to me, that there would
be no true Science, and that we might very well be mistaken in affirming, that
the Arithmetic or Geometry of the Chinese is like ours. For in fine, if it
were not absolutely necessary that 2 times 4 should make 8; or that the three
Angles of a Triangle should be equal to two right ones; what Proofs could we
have that those kind of Truths were not like those which are received in some
Universities, or that only last a certain time? Can we see clearly that God may
not cease to Will what he has Willed once with a Will absolutely free and
indifferent? Or rather, do we see clearly that God might not have Willed
certain things for a certain time, for a certain place, for certain persons, or
for certain kinds of Beings; supposing, as the World will have it, that he was
absolutely free and indifferent in that Will? For my part I can conceive no
necessity in indifference, nor reconcile two things that are so opposite.

Nevertheless I am willing to suppose that Men see clearly, that God by an
absolutely indifferent Will has established Eternal Truths and Laws for all
times and places; and that they are now immutable by his Decree. But where do
they see this Decree? Has God Created any representative Being of that Decree?
Will they say that this Decree is a Modification of their Souls? They see this
Decree clearly; for they have learnt by it, that immutability is annexed to
Eternal Truth and Laws: But where do they see it? Certainly unless they see it
in God, they see it not at all: For that Decree can only be in God; and it is
only to be seen where it is. Therefore Philosophers can be certain, of nothing,
unless they consult God, and unless God answers them. Let them exclaim never so
much at this, they must submit to it, or be silent.

But after all this Decree is an imagination without any foundation. When we
think on Order, on Eternal Truths and Laws, we inquire not Naturally into their
Cause; for indeed they have none. We see not the necessity of that Decree
clearly, we never think immediately on it. On the contrary, we perceive at
first sight, and that with evidence, that the Nature of Numbers, and of
intelligible Ideas is immutable, necessary and independent. We see clearly that
it is absolutely necessary that 2 times 4 should be 8, and that the Square of
the Diagonal of a Square should be the double to that Square. If any question
the absolute necessity of these Truths, it is because they turn their eyes from
them; because they reason upon a false Principle; and look elsewhere, and not
into these Truths, to find their Nature, their Immutability and Independence.
Therefore the Decree of the Immutability of those Truths is a Fiction of the
Mind, which supposing it sees not what it really perceives in the Wisdom of
God, yet knowing that God is the cause of all things, thinks it self obliged to
fancy a Decree to assert an immutability to Truths, which it cannot forbear to
acknowledge immutable. But it is a false supposition which we ought to beware
of. Eternal, immutable and necessary Truths are only seen in the Wisdom of God.
We can see no where but in that Wisdom, the Order which God himself is obliged
to follow as aforesaid. The Mind is only made for that Wisdom, and in one sense
it can see nothing else. For if it can see Creatures, it is because he whom it
sees, though after a very imperfect manner in this Life, comprehends them all
in the Immensity of his Being, after an intelligible manner proportionate, as I
have said elsewhere.

Had we not the Idea of Infinity in our selves, and did not we see all things
by the Natural Union of our Mind with the Universal and Infinite Reason, it
seems evident to me that we should not have the Liberty to think on all things.
For the Mind can never have any desire to apply it self to any thing, but such
as it has some Idea of; and it can never think actually on any thing, but such
to which it can have a desire to apply it self. Thus we deprive Man of the
Liberty of thinking on all things, in separating his Mind from him who includes
all things. Moreover, as we can Love only what we see, if God gave us only
particular Ideas, it is evident he should determine all the Motions of our Will
after such a manner as that we would be necessitated only to Love particular
Beings. For if we had no Notion of Infinity we could not Love it, and if those
who affirm positively that they have no Idea of God, spoke as they thought, I
should not scruple to say, they have never Loved God; for it appears very
certain to me, that we cannot Love what we do not See.

In fine, if Order and the Eternal Laws were not immutable by the necessity of
their Nature; the clearest and strongest proofs of Religion, in my opinion,
would be destroyed in their Principle, as well as Liberty and the most certain
Sciences. For it is most evident, that the Christian Religion, which proposes
Jesus Christ to us as a Mediator and Redeemer, supposes the Corruption of
Nature by Original Sin. Now, what proof can we have of that Corruption? The
Flesh wars against the Mind, some may say, It subdues and enslaves it. I grant
it. But a Libertine will say, this is no Disorder. It is God's pleasure; he has
ordained it so; he is Master of his Decrees; he puts what Order he pleases
among his Creatures. How shall we prove to him that the Mind's being subjected
to the Body is a Disorder, unless we have a clear Idea of Order, and Necessity:
And unless we know that God himself is obliged to follow it by the necessary
Love he has for himself? Besides, if the said Order depends on a free Decree of
God, we shall still be obliged to have recourse to God to be informed of it: We
shall be obliged to consult God notwithstanding the aversion which some of the
Learned have to have recourse to him: We shall be obliged to submit to this
Truth, That we stand in need of God's Assistance to be instructed. But this
free Decree, which has caused Order, is a Fiction of the Mind, for the Reasons
I have already alleged.

If it were nor a necessary Order that Man should be made for his Author, and
that our Will should be subject to the Order which is the Essential and
necessary Rule of the Will of God: If it be not true that Actions are good or
ill, according as they are consonant or contrary to an immutable and necessary
Order, and that this Order requires that the first should be rewarded and the
other punished: In fine, unless Men have naturally a clear Idea of Order, nay of
such an Order as God himself cannot will the contrary of that which this Order
prescribes, certainly I see no longer any thing but Confusion among us. For,
what fault can be found with the most infamous and unjust Actions of the
Heathens, to whom God has given no Laws? What Reason will dare to Judge them,
if there is no Supreme Reason to Condemn them?

Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquam. Lucre. Diog.
A Poet has said, It is impossible to discern what is just from what is unjust.
A Philosopher has said, that it is a Weakness to be concerned at, or ashamed of
infamous Actions. Men often speak those kind of Paradoxes out of a fury of
Imagination, and in the heat of their Passions. But why should those Sentiments
be condemned unless there be an Order, a Rule, a General Reason, which always
presents it self to those who know how to look within themselves? We freely
Judge our selves and others, on many Occasions: But by what Authority do we do
it, if the Reason which Judges within us, when we think we pronounce Judgments
against our selves and against others, be not Supreme, and common to all Men?

But was not that Reason present to those who look within themselves, and had
not the very Heathens naturally had some union with the Order we are speaking
of: What Sin or what Disobedience could they have been guilty of, and according
to what Justice could God punish them? I say this the rather because a Prophet
tells me, That God himself is willing to make Men Judges of the Difference he
has with his People, provided they pass their Judgment according to the
immutable and necessary Order of Justice. Nunc ergo habit atores Jerusalem and
viri Juda Judicate inter me and vidram meam. Esa. 5.3.
Nero killed his Mother, it is true, But wherein has he done ill? He followed
the Natural motion of his Hatred: God gave him no Precept to the contrary: The
Jewish Law was not made for him. Perhaps it may be urged, that the Law of
Nature forbids the like Action, and that the said Law was known to him. But
what proof have we of it? For my part I grant it, because that really and
invincibly proves there is an immutable and necessary Order; and that every
Mind or Spirit has a knowledge of this Order, which is the more clear, in that
it is more united to the universal Reason, and because it is less sensible of
the Impressions of Sense and of the Passions; in a word, because it is more
reasonable. But I must endeavor to explain my Sentiment, concerning Order and
the Divine or Natural Law, as clearly as possible I can: For the Reason why Men
are so backward to subscribe to what I say, is perhaps because they do not
distinctly perceive what I think.

It is certain that God contains within himself, after an intelligible manner,
the perfections of all Beings he has created or can create; and that it is by
these intelligible perfections he knows the Essence of all things, as by his
own Will he knows their Existence. Those perfections are likewise the immediate
Object of the Mind of Man, for the Reasons abovesaid. Therefore the
intelligible Ideas, or the perfections Which are in God, and which represent
unto us that which is out of God, are absolutely necessary and immutable. Now
those Truths are only the relations of equality or inequality which are among
those intelligible Beings; since it is only true that 2 times 2 make 4, or that
2 times 2 are not 5; because there is a relation of equality between 2 times 2
and 4, and one of inequality between 2 times 2 and 5. Therefore Truths are
immutable and necessary as well as their Ideas. It has always been true that 2
and 2 make 4, and it is impossible it should become false. This is evident,
without the least necessity of God's having Established those Truths as Supreme
Lawgiver; as Monsieur Des Carts says in his Answer to the Sixth Objection.

It is easy enough to apprehend what Truth is; but Men have much ado to
conceive what the immutable and necessary Order is; what Natural and Divine Law
is; what God necessarily Wills, as also what the Righteous Will. For that which
makes a Man Just, is that he loves Order, and conforms his Will to it in all
things: As the Sinner is only so, because he does not approve of Order in all
things; and that he would fain have it to be conformable to what he wishes.
Nevertheless there is not so great a Mystery in those things, in my opinion, as
Men imagine: And I fancy, that the reason why they find so many difficulties in
it, proceeds from the difficulty the Mind finds to raise it self to Abstracted
and Metaphisical Thoughts, This is partly what I think of Order.

It is evident, that the Perfections that are in God, which represent created
or possible Beings, are not all alike: That those (for Instance,) which
represent Bodies, are not so Noble as those which represent Spirits: And that
even among those which only represent Bodies or Spirits, some are more perfect
than others ad Infinitum. This is clearly, and without difficulty, conceived;
though it is not easy to reconcile the simplicity of the Divine Being with
that variety of intelligible Ideas which it includes in its Wisdom. For it is
evident, that if all the Ideas of God were alike, he could see no difference
among his Works; since he can only see his Creatures by that which is in him
which represents them; and if the Idea of a Watch which, besides the Hours,
shows all the different Motions of the Planets, were not more perfect than that
of a Watch which only points out the Hours, or than that of a Circle or a
Square, a Watch would not be more perfect than a Circle. For we can only judge
of the perfection of Works by the perfection of the Ideas we have of them: And
if there were no more wisdom or sign of understanding in a Watch than in a
Circle, it would not be more difficult to conceive the most compounded
Machines, than to conceive a Square or a Circle.

If it be true then that God, who is the Universal Being, includes within
himself all Beings after an intelligible manner; and that all these
intelligible Beings which have a necessary Existence in God, are not equally
perfect; it is evident, that there must be an immutable and necessary Order
among them: And that in the same manner as there are Eternal and necessary
Truths, because there are relations of Magnitude amongst intelligible Beings,
there must also be an immutable and necessary Order, by reason of the relations
of Perfection which are among the same Beings. It Is then an immutable Order,
that Spirits should be Nobler than Bodies, as it is a necessary Truth, that 2
times 2 are 4, or that 2 times 2 are not 5.

Hitherto the immutable Order seems rather to be a speculative Truth than a
necessary Law. For if Order be only considered as we have now done it, it is
plain, for Instance, that it is a Truth that Spirits are Nobler than Bodies: But
we do not see that this Truth is at the same time an Order bearing the force of
a Law, and that we are obliged to prefer Spirits before Bodies. Therefore we
must consider, that God loves himself by a necessary Love, and for that Reason
loves that better in himself that includes and represents more Perfection, than
that which includes less. So that if we would suppose that an intelligible
Spirit was a thousand times more perfect than an intelligible Body, the Love by
Which God loves himself, would of necessity be a thousand times greater for
that Spirit, than for this intelligible Body: For the Love of God is
necessarily proportioned to the Order which is between the intelligible Being
he includes. So that Order which is purely speculative has the force of a Law
in relation to God himself; supposing, as it is certain, that God necessarily
loves himself, and cannot love intelligible Bodies more than intelligible
Spirits, though he may love created Bodies more than created Spirits, as I
shall show hereafter.

Now this immutable Order which has the force of a Law in respect to God
himself, has visibly the force of a Law in relation to us. For this Order is
known to us, and our natural Love suits it self to it, when we look into our
selves, and when our Senses and Passions leave us free: In a word, when our
Self-love does not corrupt our natural Love. Being made for God, from whom we
can never be absolutely separated, we see this Order in him, and are naturally
inclined to love him: For it is his Light which lightens us, and his Love which
animates us, though our Senses, and Passions obscure that Light, and determine
against Order the impression which we receive to love according to Order. But
though Concupiscence conceals Order from us, and hinders us from following it,
yet it is still an Essential and Indispensible Law in respect to us: And not
only in respect of us, but to all created Intelligences, and even in respect of
the Damned. For I do not think they are so far removed from God, but that they
still preserve some small Idea of Order, still find some Beauty in it; nay
more, are still ready to conform to it in some particular occasions which do
not oppose their Self-love.

The Corruption of the Heart consists in an opposition to Order. Therefore the
Malice or Corruption of the Will not being equal even among the Damned, it is
evident that they are not equally opposed to Order, nor hate it in all things,
unless in Consequence of the hatred they bear to God, For as no Man can hate
Good, considered barely as such; so none can hate Order, unless it proves
contrary to their Inclinations. But, though it seems contrary to their
Inclinations, nevertheless it is a Law which condemns them, and which even
punishes them everlastingly.

We now see what Order is, and how it has the force of a Law by the necessary
Love God has for himself. We conceive how this Law is General for all Spirits,
and even for God himself: How it is necessary and absolutely indispensible. In
fine, We either do or may easily conceive in general, how it is the principle
of all Divine and Humane Laws, and that it is according to this Law, all
Intelligences are Judged, and all Creatures disposed in their respective
Classes that are proper for them.

I own, it is no easy Task to explain all this in particular, neither will I
venture to undertake it: For should I attempt to show the relation particular
Laws have to the General Law, and the Connection between certain Proceedings
and Order; I should be obliged to enter into such difficulties, as perhaps I
should not be able to solve, and which would also lead me far from my Subject.

Nevertheless, if we consider that God neither has nor can have any Law but his
Wisdom, and the necessary Love he has for it, we shall easily conclude, that
all Divine Laws must be grounded on it. And if we observe, that he has only
made the World in relation to that Wisdom and Love, since he only Acts for
himself; we shall no longer doubt but that all Natural Laws must tend to the
preservation and perfection of this World, according to indispensable Order,
and by their dependence on necessary Love: For all things are governed by the
Wisdom and Will of God.

There is no necessity for me to enlarge any further on this Principle at this
time. What I have said is sufficient to draw this Consequence, That in the
first Institution of Nature, it was impossible that Spirits should have been
subjected to Bodies: For as God can never Act without Knowledge and
involuntarily, so he has made the World according to his Wisdom and by the
Morion of his Love: He has made all things by his Son, and in the Holy Ghost,
as the Scripture teaches us. Now, in the Wisdom of God, Spirits are more
perfect than Bodies, and by the necessary Love which God has for himself, he
prefers the most perfect to the least perfect, Therefore it is impossible that
Spirits should have been subjected to Bodies in the first Institution of
Nature. Otherwise we should be obliged to say, That when God made the World he
followed not the Rules of his Eternal Wisdom, nor the Motions of his natural
and necessary Love: Which is not to be conceived, but rather implies a direct
Contradiction.

It is true, at present a created Mind is subject to a material and sensible
Body; but it is because Order considered as a necessary Law, requires it. It is
because, God loving himself by a necessary Love, which is always his
inviolable Law, cannot love Spirits which are contrary to him; nor consequently
prefer them to Bodies, in which there is no ill, nor any thing that God hates.
See the fifth Dialogue of The Christian Conversations.
For God loves not Sinners in themselves; they only subsist in the Universe by
Jesus Christ. God only preserves and loves them, that they may cease to be
Sinners by Grace in Jesus Christ; Or that if they remain Sinners eternally,
they may eternally be condemned by the immutable and necessary Order, and by
the Judgment of Jesus Christ, through whose Power they subsist, for the Glory
of Divine Justice; for were it not for Jesus Christ they would be annihilated.
I say this by the by, to remove some difficulties which may remain about what I
have said elsewhere concerning Original Sin; or the general Corruption of
Nature.

It is, in my Opinion, very useful to consider that the Mind only knows
External Objects after two manners: By Knowledge and by Sensations. It sees
things by Knowledge, when it has a clear Idea of them, and consulting this
Idea, can discover all the properties they are capable of. It sees things by
Sensation, when it cannot thus discover the properties of them clearly: When it
only knows them by a confused Sensation, without Light and Evidence. It is by
Knowledge and' a clear Idea, the Mind sees the Essences of Things, Numbers and
Extension. It is by a confuted Idea or by Sensation, it judges of the existence
of Creatures, and that it knows its own.

The Mind perceives those things perfectly which it perceives by Knowledge and
a clear Idea; and moreover it sees clearly, that if there be any obscurity or
imperfection in its Knowledge, it proceeds from its weakness and limitation; or
from want of application on its part, and not for want of perfection in the
Idea which it perceives. But what the Mind perceives by Sensation, is never
clearly known to it: Not for want of application on its part, for we always
apply our selves carefully to what we feel, but by the defect of the Idea which
is very obscure and confused.

From hence we may judge, that it is in God, or in an immutable Nature, that we
see whatever we know by Light and a clear Idea; not only because by Knowledge
we see Number, Extension, and the Essence of Beings, which depend not on a
first act of God, as I have already showed; but also because we know those
things after a very perfect manner, and also we should know them after an
infinitely perfect manner, were the capacity we have of thinking, infinite,
since nothing is wanting in the Idea which represents them. We ought also to
conclude, that it is in our selves we see whatever we know by Sensation: Not
that we can produce any new Modification in our selves, or that the Sensations
or Modifications of our Soul can represent objects, by whose means God excites
them in us; but because our Sensations which are not distinct from us, and
consequently can never represent any thing that is distinct from us, may
nevertheless represent the existence of Beings, or make us judge that they do
exist. For, God exciting our Sensation in us at the presence of Objects by an
action which is no wise sensible, we fancy we receive from the Object not only
the Idea which represents its. Essence, but also the Sensation which makes us
judge of its Existence; for there is always a pure Idea and a confused
Sensation in the knowledge we have of the Existence of Beings, if we except
that of God and our Soul. I except the Existence of God; for that is known by a
pure Idea, without Sensation; his Existence not depending on a Cause, and being
included in the Idea of the necessary Being, as the equality of Diameters is
included in the Idea of the Circle. I also except the Existence of our own
Soul; because we know by an Internal Sensation that we think, will, and feel;
and that we have no clear Idea of our Soul; as I have sufficiently explained in
the Seventh Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book, and elsewhere.

These are part of the Reasons that may be added to those I had already given
to prove, that God only inlightens us; and that the immediate and direct object
of our clear and evident Knowledge, is an immutable and necessary Nature. Men
commonly make some Objections against this Opinion: I shall now endeavor to
resolve them.

Against what has been said, That God only Inlightens us, and that we see all
things in Him.
FIRST OBJECTION.
Our Soul thinks, because it is its Nature. God in Creating it has given it the
Faculty of Thinking, there needs no more: Or if there is any thing more
required, let us rely on what Experience teaches us about our Senses: We find
enough by Experience that they occasion our Ideas. It Is ill Philosophizing
against Experience,

ANSWER.

I wonder that the Cartesians, who have so much, and yet so reasonable an
aversion, against the general Expressions of Nature and Faculty, so freely use
them on this occasion. They will not allow Men to say, that Fire burns by its
Nature, and that it turns certain Bodies into Glass by a Natural Faculty: And
yet some of them are not afraid of saying, that the Mind of Man produces in it
self the Ideas of all things by its Nature, and because it has the Faculty of
Thinking. But yet they must give me liberty to say, that these Expressions are
no more significant in their Mouths, than in those of the Peripatetics.

I am sensible the Soul is capable of Thinking; but I know also that Extension
is capable of Figures. The Soul is capable of volition, as well as Matter is of
motion. But, as it is false that Matter, though capable of Figure and Motion,
has in it self a Power, a Faculty, a Nature, by which it can move it self, or
assume sometimes a round Figure, and sometimes a square one; so that the Soul
is Naturally and Essentially capable of Knowledge and of Volition; yet it is
false that it has Faculties by which it can produce its Ideas in its self, or
its tendency toward good. There is a great difference between being Movable,
and Moving. Matter of its Nature is moveable, and capable of Figures: Besides
it cannot subsist without Figure. But it moves not it self; it gives not it
self a Figure; it has no Faculty for all that. The Mind by its Nature is
capable of Motion and Ideas: I grant it: But it moves not it self; it
inlightens not it self: God does all in Spirits as well as in Bodies. Can we
say, that God makes all the alterations which happen in Matter, See the first
Illustration.
and that he makes not those which happen in the Mind? Do we give that unto God
which belongs to him, in abandoning the last of all Beings to his Disposition?
Is he not equally the Master of all things? Is he not the Creator, the
Preserver, the only true Mover of Spirits as well as Bodies? Certainly he makes
all things, Substances, Accidents, Beings, manners of Beings. We take away his
Knowledge, by putting bounds to his Action.

But if Men will needs have it, that Creatures have such Faculties is are
commonly conceived; that we must say that Natural Bodies have a Nature which is
the Author of their Motion and Rest, as Aristotle and his followers say. This
overthrows all my Ideas: But yet I would rather allow it, than say, that the
Mind inlightens it self. Let Men say, the Soul has that power of differently
moving the Members of their Body, and to communicate Sensation and Life to
them: Let them say, if they please, that it gives Heat to the Blood, Motion to
the Spirits, and to the rest of the Body its Magnitude, Disposition, and
Figure: But let them never say, that the Mind gives it self its Motion and
Light. If God does not all, at least let us allow him to do that which is
greatest and most perfect in the World. And if Creatures do something, let them
move their Bodies, and let them order them as they please, but let them not act
upon Minds.

Let us say, that Bodies move one another, after having moved themselves: Or
rather, let us not pretend to understand the different dispositions of Matter,
that little concerns us. But we ought not to suffer our Minds to be ignorant
from whom they receive the Light which lightens them: Let them know from whom
they receive that which can make them happier and more perfect: Let them know
their dependence according to its utmost extent; and that whatever they have
actually, they receive it from God every moment: For as a great Saint says
upon another Subject; It is a very criminal Pride to make use of those things
which God gives us, as if they were Naturally ours. Above all things, let us
not imagine that the Senses instruct our Reason; that the Body directs the
Mind; and that the Soul receives that from the Body which it has not it self.
It were better to fancy our selves independent, than to think we have a real
dependence on the Body. It is better to be our own Master, than to seek out a
Master among the Creatures that is less valuable than we. But it is much better
yet to submit to the Eternal Truth, which assures us in the Gospel, that he is
our only Master, than to give credit to the testimony of our Senses, or of some
Men who dare speak to us as our Masters. Experience, whatever Men may say, does
not countenance Prejudices: For our Senses, as well as our Masters according to
the Flesh, are only occasional causes of the instruction which the Eternal
Wisdom gives us in the most secret part of our Reason. But whereas that Wisdom
teaches us by an operation which is no wise sensible; we fancy that it is our
Eyes, or the Worlds of those who strike the Air at our Ears which produce that
Light, or pronounce that intelligible Voice which instructs us. It Is for that
Reason, as I have said elsewhere, that Jesus Christ was not only satisfied with
instructing us after an intelligible manner by his Divinity; he thought fit
also to instruct us after a sensible one by his Humanity: He would show us that
he was our Master in all things. And because we cannot easily look within our
selves, to consult him as Eternal Truth, Immutable Order, and Intelligible
Light; he has made Truth sensible by his Words, Order lovely by his Example,
Light visible by a Body which diminishes the splendor of it; and yet we are
still so ungrateful, so injust, so stupid and senseless, as to look not only
upon other Men, as our Masters, contrary to his express prohibition, but
perhaps, even upon the most despicable and vile Bodies.

SECOND OBJECTION.
The Soul being more perfect than Bodies, why should it not contain that in it
self which represents them? Why should not the Idea of Extension be one of its
Modifications? God only acts in it, and modifies it: We grant it. But why
should it see Bodies in God, if it can see them in its own substance? It is not
material; it is true. But God, though a pure Spirit, sees Bodies in himself:
Why then should not the Soul see them in beholding it self, though it be
Spiritual?

ANSWER.

Do we not see that there is this difference between God and the Soul of Man,
that God is an Unlimited Universal and Infinite Being, and that the Soul is a
particular Species of Being? It Is one of the Properties of Infinity to be at
once one, and all things, composed as it were of an Infinity of Perfections;
and so simple, that every Perfection it possesses, includes all others without
any real distinction; for as every Divine Perfection is Infinite, it
constitutes the whole Divine Being. But the Soul being a Limited Being, it
cannot have Extension in it self, without becoming Material. Therefore God
includes in himself all Bodies after an intelligible manner: He sees their
Essences or Ideas in his Wisdom, and their Existence in his Love, or in his
Will. It is necessary to say so, since God made Bodies, and knows what he has
made, even before any thing was made. But the Soul cannot see that within it
self, which it does not include: Moreover it cannot clearly see that which it
does include; it can only feel it confusedly. But to explain this.

The Soul does not include intelligible Extension, as one of its manners of
Being; because Extension is not a manner of Being, it is really a Being. We
conceive Extension alone, or without thinking on any thing else; but we cannot
conceive manners of Being, without perceiving the Subject or Being, whereof
they are the manners. We perceive that Extension without thinking on our Mind;
besides we cannot conceive Extension can be a Modification of ones Mind.
Extension being limited makes some figure, and the limits of the Mind cannot be
figured. Extension having parts may be divided, at least in some sense, and we
see nothing in the Soul that is divisible. Therefore Extension which we see, is
not a manner pf the Minds Being; and therefore cannot see it in it self. How is
it possible to see in one kind of Being all sorts of Beings; and in one
particular and finite Being, a Triangle in general and an infinite number of
Triangles? For in fine, the Soul perceives a Triangle or a Circle in general,
though it implies a contradiction, that the Soul could have a Modification in
general. The Sensations of Color which the Soul ascribes to Figures, make them
particular, because none of the Modifications of a particular Being can be
general.

Certainly we may affirm what we conceive clearly. We clearly conceive, that
Extension which we see, is a thing distinct from us. Therefore we may say, that
Extension is no Modification of our Being, and it is really something that is
distinct from us. For we must observe, that the Sun (for instance) which we
see, is not that which we behold. The Sun, and whatever is in the material
World, is not visible in it self; I have proved it elsewhere. The Soul cannot
see the Sun to which it is immediately united. Now we clearly see, and plainly
feel, that the Sun is something distinct from us. Therefore we speak against
our Knowledge and our Conscience, when we say, that the Soul sees all Bodies
which surround it in its own Modifications.

Pleasure, Pain, Taste, Heat, Color, all our Sensations and Passions, are
Modifications of our Soul. But though they are so, do we know them clearly? Can
we compare Heat with Taste, Odor with Color? Can we distinguish the affinity
there is between Red and Green, and even between Green and Green? It is not so
with Figures; we compare them one with another; we exactly know their
proportions; we precisely perceive that the Square of the Diagonal of a Square
is double to that Square. What affinity can there be between those intelligible
Figures, which are very clear Ideas, and the Modifications of our Soul, which
are only confused Sensations? And why should we pretend that those intelligible
Figures cannot be perceived by the Soul, unless they are Modifications of it,
since the Soul knows nothing of what happens to it by clear Ideas, but only by
Conscience or Internal Sensation, as I have proved elsewhere, and shall prove
it again in the following Explanation. If we could only see the Figure of
Bodies in our selves, they would on the contrary be unintelligible to us; for
we know not our selves. We are only darkness to our selves, and must look out
of our selves to see our selves; and we shall never know what we are, until we
consider our selves in him who is our Light, and in whom all things become
Light. For it is only in God that the most material Beings are perfectly
intelligible; but out of him the most Spiritual Substances become absolutely
invisible. The Idea of Extension which we see in God is very clear. But as we
do not see the Idea of our Soul in God, we feel indeed that we are, and what we
actually have: But it is impossible for us to discover what we are, or any of
the Modifications whereof we are capable.

THIRD OBJECTION.
There is nothing in God that is moveable; there is nothing in him that is
Figured; if there be a Sun in the intelligible World, that Sun is always equal
to it self, and the visible Sun appears greater, when it is near the Horizon,
than when it is at a great distance from it. Therefore it is not that
intelligible Sun we see, it is the same with other Creatures. Therefore we see
not the Works of God in God.

ANSWER.

To Answer all this, it is enough to consider only, That God includes in himself
an infinity intelligible Extension; for God knows Extension since he has made
it, and he can only know it in himself. Therefore, as the Mind can perceive
part of that intelligible Extension which God includes, it is certain it may
perceive all Figures in God; for all finite intelligible Extension is
necessarily an intelligible Figure, since Figure is only the Expression of
Extension. Moreover, this Figure of intelligible and general Extension becomes
sensible and particular by Color, or some other sensible Quality which the
Soul fixes to it; for the Soul commonly bestows its Sensation upon the Idea
which strikes it lively. Therefore it is not necessary there should be sensible
Bodies in God, or Figures in intelligible Extensions to see them in God, or to
make God see them, though he only beholds himself.

If we conceive also, that a Figure of intelligible Extension made sensible by
Color, is taken successively from the different parts of this infinite
Extension: Or if we conceive, that a Figure of intelligible Extension may turn
upon its Center, or successively approach to another, we perceive the Motion of
a sensible or intelligible Figure, without any Motion in intelligible
Extension. For God sees not the Motion of Bodies in his Substance, or in the
Idea he has of it himself, but only by the knowledge he has of his Will in
relation to them, Moreover, He only sees their Existence that way, because it
is his Will only which gives a Being to all things. The Will of God changes
nothing in his Substance: It moves it not. Intelligible Extension is immovable
in all respects, even intelligibly. But though we only see this intelligible
Extension, it seems moveable to us by reason of the sensation of Color, or of
the confused image which remains after the sensation, which we affix
successively, to diverse parts of intelligible Extension, which gives us an
Idea when we see or imagine the Motion of some Bodies.

One may easily apprehend, by what I have now said, why we may see the Sun,
sometimes larger, and sometimes smaller, though it be always the same in
relation to God. For to do this, we need only see sometimes a greater part of
intelligible Extension, and sometimes a lesser; and have a more lively
sensation of Light, to affix to that part of Extension. Now as the parts of
intelligible Extension are all of the same nature, they may all represent any
Body whatever.

You must not imagine, that the intelligible World has such an Affinity with
the material and sensible one, as that (for instance) there should be an
intelligible Sun, a Horse, a Tree destined to represent to us a Sun, a Horse, a
Tree: And that all those who see the Sun, do of necessity see this pretended
intelligible Sun. As all intelligible Extensions may be conceived circular, or
have the intelligible Figure of a Horse or a Tree; any intelligible Extension
may serve to represent a Sun, a Horse, a Tree, and consequently be a Sun, a
Horse, a Tree of the intelligible World; and even become a visible and sensible
Sun, Horse, or Tree, if the Soul have any sensation, occasioned by Bodies, to
affix to these Ideas.

Therefore when I said, That we see different Bodies, by the knowledge we have
of the Perfections of God which represent them; I did not mean directly, that
there are certain particular Ideas in God, which represent every Body in
particular; and that we see such an Idea, when we see such a Body: For it is
certain, we could not see that Body sometimes large, and sometimes small,
sometimes round, and sometimes square, if we saw it by a particular Idea, which
would be always the same. But I say, that we see all things in God, by the
application that God makes of intelligible Extent to our Mind, after a thousand
different ways; and thus intelligible Extension contains in it self all
Perfections, or rather all the Differences of Bodies, by means of the different
Sensations which the Soul bestows on the Ideas it has upon the account of those
very Bodies. I have spoken after another manner: But the World may conclude,
that it was only to make some of my Proofs the stronger and more sensible; and
we must not judge, by what I have said now, that those Proofs are no longer
valid. I would here give the Reasons of the different ways I have used to
explain my self, if I thought it necessary.

I dare not engage my self to enlarge further upon this Subject, for fear of
saying things that are too abstruse or extraordinary: Or rather, because I
would not venture to say things which I do not know, and which I am not capable
of discovering; there are only some Passages of Scripture which seem to be
contrary to what I have established here, which I shall endeavor to explain.

OBJECTION.

St. John in his Gospel, and in the first of his Epistles, says, That no Body
has ever seen God. Chapter 1.18. Chapter 4.12.
DEVM nemo vidit unquam, unigenitus qui est in sinu patris ipse enarravit.

ANSWER.

I Answer, We do not properly see God, in seeing Creatures in him. We do not
see his Essence in seeing the Essences of Creatures in his substance: As we see
not Glass, in barely seeing in it the Objects it represents.

Not but that we may say with St. Paul, St. Augustine, To the Corinth. chap. 13.
St. Gregory, and several other Fathers of the Church, that we see God even in
this Life, though after a very imperfect manner. These are St. Gregory's Words
in his Morals upon Job; B. 31. chap. 20.
A luce incorruptibili caligo nos nostrae Corruptionis obscurat; cumque and
videri aliquatenus potest, and tamen videri Lux ipsa sicuti est non potest,
quam long sit indicat. Quam si men's non cerneret Nec quia long esset,
videret. Si autem perfect jam cerneret.
, profecto hanc quasiper caliginem non videret. Igitur quia nec omnino
cernitur, nec rursum omnino non cernitur, recte dictum est, quia a long Deus
videtur. Though St. Gregory, to explain this Passage of Job, Oculi ejus a long
prospiciunt, says, That in this Life we only see God at a distance; it is not
because God is not present: But it is because the Clouds of our Concupiscence
hide him from us: Caligo nos nostrae corruptionis obscurat; for in other Places
he, with St. Augustine, compares the Light of God, which is God himself, to the
Light of the Sun which surrounds us, and which we see not when we are blind, or
shut our Eyes, because its Brightness dazzles us. In sole Oculos clausos
tenemus.

St. Augustine goes farther than St. Gregory his Faithful Disciple. Propinquior
nobis qui fecit, quam multa quae facta sunt. In illo enim vivimus, movemur and
sumus. Istorum autem pleraque remota sunt a mente nostra propter
dissimilitudinem sui generis.
For though he grants, that we only know God at present after a very imperfect
manner; he nevertheless assures us in several places, that God is more known to
us, than those things which we fancy we know best. He that has made all things,
says he, is nearer to us than those things he has made: For it is in him we
have Life, Motion, and Being. Most of the things he has made are not
proportioned to our Mind, because they are Corporeal, and of a Species of Being
distinct from him. And a little lower, Those who have known the Secrets of
Nature, are justly condemned in the Book of Wisdom; Recte culpantur in libro
sapientiae inquisitores hujus saeculi.
for if they have been able to penetrate into these things which are most
concealed from Men, with how much more ease might they have discovered the
Author and Sovereign of the Universe? The Foundations of the Earth are
concealed from our Eyes; but he who has laid those Foundations, is near to our
Mind. It Is for that Reason that holy Doctor believes, Si enim tantum, inquit,
potuerunt valere ut possent aestimare saeculum, quomodo ejus Dominum, non
facilius invenerunt? Ignota enim sunt fundamenta oculis nostris; and qui
fundavit terram, propinquat mentibus nostris. De Genesis ad litt. l. 5. c. 16. De
Trinitate, l. 8. c. 8.
even that he who has Charity, knows God better, than he knows his Brother:
Ecce, says he, jam potest notiorem Deum habere quam fratrem. Plane notiorem,
quia praesentiorem: Notiorem, quia interiorem: Notiorem quia certiorem. I bring
no other Proofs of Saint Augustines Sentiment. If any Man is desirous of them,
he may find them of all sorts in the Learned Collection Ambrose Victor has made
of them, in the Second Volume of Christian Philosophy.

But to return to the passage of St. John; Deum nemo vidit unquam. I believe
the Evangelists design, when he affirms that no Man has ever seen God, is to
make us believe the difference which is between the Old and New Testament;
between Jesus Christ and the Patriarchs and Prophets; of whom it is written,
that they have seen God. For Jacob, Moses, Isaiah, and others, have only seen
God with their Bodily Eyes, and under an unknown Form: They have not seen him
in himself: Deum nemo vidit unquam. But the only Son of the Father who is in
his Bosom, has acquainted us with what he has seen: Vnigenitus qui est in sinu
Patris: ipse enarravit.

OBJECTION.

St. Paul Writing to Timothy, says, That God inhabits inaccessible Light; that
no Man has ever seen him; and moreover, that none can see him. If the Light of
God be inaccessible, we cannot see all things in it.

ANSWER.

St. Paul cannot be contrary to St. John, St. Cyril of Alexandria upon these
words of St. John: Erat Lux vera.
who assures us that Jesus Christ is the true Light which lightens all Men that
come into this World. For the Spirit of Man, which several Fathers In
accessibilem, dixit, sed omni homini humana sapienti Scriptura quippe sacra
omnes carnalium sectatoris humanitatis nomine notare solet. St. Greg. in cap.
28. Job.
call Illuminated or Enlightened Light, St. Aug. Tr. 14. upon St. John.
Lumen Illuminarum, is only enlightened by the Light of Eternal Wisdom, St.
Greg. chapter 27. of Job.
which the said Fathers for that Reason call the Light which inlightens, Lumen
Illuminans. David exhorts us to draw near unto God to be enlightened by him.
Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini. But how can we be enlightened by him, if we
cannot see the Light by which we are to be enlightened? Therefore, when St. Paul
says, that this Light is inaccessible, he means that it is so to Carnal Men,
who never look within themselves to contemplate it: Or, if he speaks of all
Men, it is because they are all diverted from the Contemplation of Truth;
because our Body continually disturbs the attention of our Mind.

OBJECTION.

God answering Moses who was desirous to see him, said, Thou can not see my
Face; for no Man can see me and live. Non videbit me homo and vivit.

ANSWER.

It is evident, That the Literal Sense of this Passage is not contrary to what
I have said hitherto: For I pretend not that we can see God in this Life, in
the manner Moses desired it. I Answer nevertheless, that we must Dye to see
God: For the Soul unites it self to Truth, proportionably as it forsakes the
Body: It Is a Truth which we do not sufficiently think upon. Those who follow
the motions of their Passions, whose Imagination is sullyed by the enjoyment of
Pleasures, who have augmented the Union and Correspondence of their Mind with
their Body; in a word, those who Live, cannot see God: For they cannot look
within themselves there to consult Truth. Sapientia non invenitur in terra
suaviter viventium. Job 18.
Therefore happy are those who have a pure Heart, whose Mind is free, and whose
Imagination is clean, who are not tied to the World, and hardly to their Body;
in a word, happy are those who are Dead, for they shall see God. Wisdom has
declared it publicly upon the Mountain, and it also says it secretly to those
who consult it by looking within themselves.

Those who continually excite Concupiscence and Pride in themselves, who
perpetually form a thousand ambitious designs, who not only unite but subject
their Soul not only to their Body, but to all things which are about them; in a
word; those who live not only a Bodily Life, but also the Life of this World,
cannot see God: For Wisdom inhabits the most secret part of Reason, but those
perpetually incline toward external things.

Yet those who continually mortify the Activity of their Senses, who are
careful to preserve the purity of their Imagination, who courageously resist
the Motions of their Passions; in a word, those who break all the Ties which
make others Slaves to the Body and sensible Greatness, may discover a World of
Truths, and see that Wisdom which is concealed from the Eyes of all Mortals.
Abscondita est ab Oculis omnium viventium, Job 28.2.
They do in some measure cease to live when they look within themselves. They
quiet the Body when they approach to Truth. For the Mind of Man is situate
after such a manner, between God and Bodies, that it cannot leave Bodies
without drawing near unto God; as it cannot run after them without removing
from him. But whereas we cannot quit the Body wholly before Death, I own we
cannot be perfectly united to God before that time. We may now, according to
Saint Paul, see God confusedly, as in a Glass, but we cannot see him Face to
Face: Non videbit me homo, and vivet. Nevertheless we may see him ex part,
that is, confusedly and imperfectly.

We must nor imagine that Life is equal in all Living Men, nor that it consists
in an indivisible Point. Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate, tunc autem,
facie ad faciem. Nunc cognosco ex part, 1 Cor. 15.
The Dominion of the Body over the Mind, which hinders us from uniting our
selves to God by the Knowledge of Truth, is capable of more and less. The Soul
is not equally united to the Body it animates, by its Sensations in all Men,
nor to those toward which it inclines by its Passions; and there are some who
mortify the Concupiscence of Pleasure and Pride in themselves to that degree,
that they hardly any longer have any relation to their Bodies or to the World.
Thus they are as if they were Dead. Saint Paul gives us a great Example of
this. He chastized his Body, and reduced it into subjection; and he had humbled
and lessened himself to that degree, that he thought no more on the World, nor
the World on him: For the World was Dead and Crucified to him, as he was Dead
and Crucified to the World. And it is for that Reason, says Saint Gregory, that
he was so sensible of Truth, and so well disposed to receive the Divine Lights
that are in his Epistles, which as bright as they are, only strike those who
like him mortify their Senses and Passions: For as he says himself, The
carnal and sensible Man cannot apprehend spiritual things; Animalis homo non
percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus Dei, stultitia enim est illi, 1 Cor. 2.14.
because the Wisdom of the World, the Taste of the Age, Wit, Niceness,
Vivacity, the Beauty of Imagination, by which we live to the World, and the
World lives in us, Ad Moysen dicitur, non videbit me homo and vivet; ae si
aperte diceretur; Nullus unquam Deum spiritualiter videt qui Mundo carnaliter
vivit. St. Greg. upon the 28th Chapter of Job.
communicates to our Mind a sad stupidity and insensibility in respect to all
Truths, which we cannot perfectly understand without silencing our Senses and
Passions.

Therefore we must wish for Death which unites us to God, or at least the Image
of that Death, which is the mysterious Sleep, during which all our External
Senses being stupefied, we may listen to the Voice of inward Truth, which is
only heard in the silence of Night, when Darkness conceals sensible Objects
from us, and the World is as it were Dead in relation to us. It Is thus, says
St. Gregory, That the Spouse had hearkened to the Voice of her Beloved in her
Sleep; at if she had said, I sleep, but my Heart wakes. I sleep outwardly, but
my Heart wakes within me; because having no Life, nor Sensation, in reference
to visible Objects, I become extremely sensible to the Voice of inward Truth,
which speaks to me in the most secret part of my Reason. Hinc est quod sponsa
in Canticis Canticorum sponsi vocem quasi per somnium audieret, quae dicebat:
Ego dormio and Cor meum vigilat. Ac si diceret, dum exteriores sensus ab hujus
vitae sollicitudinibus sopio, vacant mente, vivacius interna cognosco. Foris
dormio, sed intus Cor vigilat; quia dum exteriora quasi non sentio, interiora
solerter apprehendo, Been ergo Eliu ait quod per Somnium loquitur Deus. Morals
of St. Gregory upon the 33th Chapter of Job.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Seventh Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book.
In which I prove, That we have no clear Idea of the Nature or Modifications of
our Soul.
I Have said in some places, and also think I have sufficiently proved it in
the Third Book of the Search after Truth, that we have no clear Idea of our
Soul, but only a Conscience or Internal Sensation; and for that reason we know
it far more Imperfectly than Extension. That appeared so evident to me, that I
did not think there was any necessity to prove it more at large. But the
Authority of Des Carts, who says positively, That the Nature of the Mind is
better known than that of all other things, Answer to the fifth Objection
against the second Meditation toward the end.
has prejudiced some of his Disciples so far, that what I have written about it
has had no other effect with them, than to make me pass for a weak Man, and one
that is incapable of reaching and keeping firmly to abstracted Truths, which
are improper to beget and preserve the attention of those who consider them.

I own that I am very weak, sensible and heavy, and that my Mind depends on my
Body in so many respects that I cannot express them. I know it, I feel it, and
I endeavor continually to increase that knowledge I have of my self. For if we
cannot prevent our being miserable, it is necessary at least to know it, and to
feel it; since we must at least humble our selves at the sight of our inward
Miseries, and acknowledge the need we have to be delivered from this Body of
Death, which disperses Trouble and Confusion throughout all the Faculties of
the Soul.

Nevertheless the Question in hand is so much proportioned to the Mind, that I
see not why a great application is required to resolve it: And this is the
reason I did not enlarge upon it. For I think I may presume to say, that the
Ignorance of most Men in relation to their Soul, its distinction from the Body,
its Spirituality, its Immortality, and its other properties, sufficiently prove
that we have no clear or distinct Idea of it.

We may say we have a clear Idea of the Body, because we need only to consult
the Idea which presents it to discover the modifications whereof it is capable.
We see clearly that it may be round, square, at rest, or in motion. We easily
conceive that a Square may be divided into two Triangles, two Parallelograms,
two Trapezias. When any one asks us whether any thing belongs, or belongs not
to Extension, we never hesitate upon an Answer; because the Idea of Extension
being clear, we easily at first sight see what it contains, and what it
excludes.

But I find not that we have any Idea of our Mind, by which we may discover in
consulting it, the modifications whereof it is capable. Had we never felt
Pleasure or Pain we should not be able to know whether the Soul were, or were
not capable of feeling them. If a Man had never eaten Melon, suffered Pain,
seen Red or Blue, he might consult the pretended Idea of his Soul long enough,
and never have distinctly discovered from thence, whether it were capable or
not of such sensations and such modifications. I say further, although he
actually felt Pain, or saw Color, he could not by a simple view discover if
those qualities belonged to the Soul. We imagine that Pain is in the Body, and
that is the reason we suffer it; and that Color is diffused through the
surface of Objects, although we very clearly conceive that these Objects are
distinct from the Soul.

To be well assured whether sensible qualities are, or are not modifications of
the Mind, we never consult this pretended Idea of the Soul: But on the
contrary, the Cartesians themselves consult the Idea of Extension; and argue
after this manner, Heat, Pain, and Color, cannot be the modifications of
Extension; for Extension is only capable of different Figures and different
Motions. And there is but two kinds of Beings, that of Spirits and that of
Bodies; therefore Pain, Heat, Color, and all other sensible qualities belong
to the Mind.

Since we are obliged to consult the Idea we have of Extension, to discover
whether or no sensible qualities are modifications of the Soul; is it not
evident that we have no clear Idea of the Soul? Else we should never bethink
our selves of going so far about. When a Philosopher would discover whether
Roundness belongs to Extension, does he consult the Idea of his Soul, or any
other Idea, than that of Extension? Does he not clearly see in the Idea of
Extension it self, that Roundness is a modification of it: And would it not be
extravagant if he should argue after this manner to explain it; that there is
only two kinds of Beings, that of Spirits, and that of Bodies; but Roundness is
not a modification of a Spirit, therefore it is a modification of a Body.

We discover then by one simple view, without reasoning, by a bare application
of the Mind to the Idea of Extension, that Roundness, and all other Figures
whatever are modifications which belong to the Body; and that Pleasure, Pain,
Heat, and all other sensible qualities are not modifications thereof. No
Question can be proposed about what does or does not belong to Extension, which
cannot be answered easily, quickly, and boldly, by the consideration only of
the Idea which represents it. All Men are agreed upon what ought to be received
about this subject. For those who say that Matter can think, don't imagine it
has this faculty because it is extended; since they acknowledge that Extension,
taken precisely as such, cannot think.

But we are not so well agreed about what we ought to believe of the Soul, and
its modifications: There are some who think Pain, Heat, or Color does not so
much as appertain to it. 'Twould seem very ridiculous amongst some Cartesians,
to say the Soul actually becomes Blew, Red, or Yellow, or receives a tincture
of the Colors of the Rainbow, whilst it contemplates thereon. There are many
persons who doubt, and still more who don't believe, that the Soul becomes
actually stinking when we smell Carrion; and that the taste of Sugar, Pepper,
and Salt, are properties belonging to it. Where is then the clear Idea of the
Soul, that the Cartesians may consult it, and agree all upon the subject, where
Colors, Taste, Odours, etc. ought to center.

Yet if the Cartesians were agreed upon this point, we could not conclude from
thence that they would have a clear Idea of the Soul; for if they should at
last grant, that it is that which is actually Green, or Red, when we see Green
or Red, yet would it be only by long and tedious reasonings that they could
conclude it: They would never discover it by a simple view, nor ever find it by
consulting the pretended Idea of the Soul, but rather by considering that of
the Body. They only affirm that sensible qualities appertain to the Soul,
because they belong not to Extension, whereof they have a clear Idea; nor could
they ever otherwise convince those of it, who having weak Minds, are incapable
of complicated Perceptions or Arguments; or rather those who cannot stay long
on the clear Idea of the Body, but confound all things: There will be always
Peasants, Women, and Children, and perhaps even some Learned Men who will doubt
of it. But Women and Children, Learned and Ignorant, the most Ingenious and
most Stupid, plainly see by the Idea they have of Extension, that it is capable
of all manner of Figures: And as clearly apprehend that Extension is not
capable of Pain, Taste, Smell, nor any Sensation, when they faithfully and with
application consult only the Idea which represents it; for the Idea which
represents Extension includes no sensible quality.

It is true they may doubt whether Bodies are or are not capable of Sensation,
or of receiving any sensible quality: But then by the Body they mean something
else besides Extension, and have no clear Idea of the Body taken in this sense.
But when Des Carts, or the Cartesians to whom I speak, affirm that they know
the Soul better than the Body, only understand Extension by the Body; then how
can they maintain that we have a clearer knowledge of the Nature of the Soul,
than we have of the Body, since the Idea of Body or Extension is so clear that
all the World agrees on what it includes; and that of the Soul so confused,
that the Cartesians themselves every day dispute whether the modifications of
Color, belong to it.

We know, say these Philosophers according to Des Carts, the nature of a
substance so much the more distinctly as we know more of its Attributes: Now
there is nothing whereof we know so many Attributes, as of our Mind; because as
many as we discover in any thing else, we may place to the account of the Mind,
since it knows them: And therefore its Nature is more known than that of any
other thing.

But who is there that don't see a great deal of difference betwixt knowing by
a clear Idea, and knowing by Conscience? When I know that 2 times 2 are 4, I
know it very clearly; but I don't clearly know what it is in me that knows it:
It is true I feel that I know it by Conscience or inward Sensation; but I have
not so clear an Idea of it, as I have of Numbers, whose relations I can clearly
discover. I can reckon three properties in my Mind, that of knowing that 2
times 2 are 4, that of knowing that 3 times 3 are 9, and that of knowing that 4
times 4 are 16. And if you will these three properties shall be different from
one another, and thus I could count an infinite number of properties in my
self: but I deny that we clearly know the Nature of things which we cannot thus
reckon.

We may say that we have the clear idea of a Being, and are acquainted with its
Nature, when we can compare it with others, of which we also have a clear Idea;
or at least when we can compare the modifications whereof it is capable amongst
themselves. We have clear Ideas of Numbers, and the parts of Extension, because
we can compare these things together. As we may compare 2 with 4, 4 with 16,
and each number with any other; so we may compare a Square with a Triangle, a
Circle with an Ellipsis, a Square and a Triangle with any other Square and
Triangle, and by this means clearly discover the relations which these Figures
and Numbers have to one another. But we cannot compare our Mind with other
Beings, to discover clearly any relation of them; nor can we so much as compare
its modifications together. We can never clearly discover the relations between
Pleasure and Pain, Heat and Color, or to speak only of the modifications of
the same kind, we cannot exactly determine the relations between Green and Red,
Yellow and Purple, nor even between Purple and Purple. We see plainly that one
is darker or brighter than the other, yet do we not evidently know either how
much, or what it is to be darker or brighter. We have therefore no clear Idea
of the Soul or its modifications: and although I see or feel Colors, Tastes,
Odours, I may say as I have before, that I know them not by a clear Idea, since
I cannot clearly discover their relations.

It Is true I can discover the exact relation between Sounds; as for instance,
that the Octave is double, a fifth as 3 to 2, a fourth as 4 to 3. but I cannot
know these proportions by the sensations I have of 'em. If I know the Octave is
double it is because I have learnt by experience that the same string sounds an
Octave, when having struck it whole, we strike it again after having divided it
into two equal parts; or that I know the number of vibrations is double in
equal times, or something of the like nature: and this because the tremblings
of the air, the vibration of the string, and even the string it self are such
things as we may compare by clear Ideas: and that we distinctly know the
relations between the string and its parts, as also between the swiftness of
different vibrations. But we cannot compare Sounds amongst themselves, or as
they are sensible Qualities and Modifications of the Soul; nor this way are
their proportions or relations to be discovered. And although Musicians very
well distinguish the different concords, it is not because they distinguish the
proportions of them by clear Ideas* They judge of different Sounds only by the
Ear, Reason has nothing to do in it. But we cannot say that the Ear judges by a
clear Idea, or otherwise than by sensation. Musicians therefore have no clear
Idea of Sounds as they are Sensations and Modifications of the Soul; and
consequently we conceive neither the Soul nor its Modifications by a clear
Idea, but only by Conscience or inward Sensation.

Nay, what is more, we do not so much as know wherein consist those
Dispositions of the Soul, which make it more ready to act and represent Objects
to it self; we cannot so much as discover in what these Dispositions can
consist: Nor can we by Reason possitively affirm, whether the Soul alone
separated from the Body, or considered without relation to the Body, is capable
of Habits and Memory. But how could we be ignorant of these things if the
Nature of the Soul were better known to us than that of the Body? Without any
difficulty we perceive wherein consists the facility that the Animal Spirits
have to flow into the Nerves they have been many times in; or at least we
easily discover that whilst the Conduits of the Nerves are enlarged, and their
Fibers recumbent after a certain manner, the Spirits can easily insinuate
themselves. But what can we conceive to be capable of increasing the facility
the Soul has to act or think? For my part I confess I am wholly ignorant of it,
nor can I instruct my self in it, although I have a very lively sensation of
the facility whereby it excites certain thoughts in me: And if I had no
particular Reasons which inclined me to believe that I really have such
Dispositions although I know them not in me, I should conclude that there was
neither. Habit nor Spiritual Memory in my Soul. But in fine, since we have any
doubt about it, it is a certain mark we are not so well acquainted with it as
is pretended; for Doubts can never attend Evidence and clear Ideas.

It is certain that the most understanding Man does not evidently know, Eccl.
9.1.
whether he deserves Love or Hatred as the Wiseman speaks. Sed neque meipsum
judico. Nihil enim mihi conscius sum: sed non in hoc justificatus sum, qui
autem judicat me, Dominus est, 1 Cor. 4.4. John 13.37.
The inward sensation we have of our selves can give us no assurance of it. St.
Paul says indeed his Conscience reproached him with nothing, yet for all that
he does not say he is justified. On the contrary he affirms, that justifies him
not, and that he durst not judge himself, because he who judges is the Lord.
But as we have a clear Idea of Order, if we had as clear a one of the Soul by
the inward sensation we have of our selves, we should evidently know if it were
conformable to order; we should discover whether we were righteous or not, and
even exactly discern all its inward dispositions to good or evil, whenever we
had any sensation of them. And if we could know our selves as we are, we should
not be so subject to presumption. It Is also very probable that then St. Peter
would not have said to his Master, whom he so soon after denied: Why can I not
follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake: Animam meam pro te
ponam. For having an inward sensation of his Power and Good Will, he would have
been able evidently to have seen whether he had had a sufficient Strength and
Courage in himself to have overcome death, or rather the insults of a silly
Maid, and two or three other Servants.

If the Nature of the Soul is more known than that of any thing else, and the
Idea we have of it, as clear as that we have of the Body; I only demand, what
is the reason that so many Men confound them together? Is it possible to
confound two clear Ideas which are entirely different? Let us do Justice to all
the World. Those who are not of our Opinion are as rational as we, they have
the same Idea of things, and partake of the same Reason. Why therefore do they
confound what we distinguish? Do they ever on other occasions confound such
Things as they have clear Ideas of? Have they ever confounded two different
Numbers? Or ever taken a Square for a Circle? And yet the Soul differs more
from the Body than a Square does from a Circle: for they are two Substances
which agree in nothings and still they confound them. The reason must be then
because there is some difficulty in discovering their difference; and which
cannot be done by a simple view, but some Arguments must be used to prove that
the one is not the other. Wherefore the Idea of Extension must be consulted
with application, and we must discover that it is not a Modification of Body,
but the Body it self, since it is represented to us as a Thing subsisting, and
the principle of whatever we clearly conceive in Bodies: And that as the
Modifications of Body is not capable of having any relations to sensible
Qualities, so it is necessary that the Subject of these Qualities, or rather
the Being whereof these Qualities are Modifications, should be very different
from Body. The like Arguments are necessary to be urged to prevent the
confounding our Souls with our Bodies. But if we had as clear an Idea of the
Soul as we have of the Body, certainly we need not be at all this trouble to
distinguish them; since we should discover their essential difference by one
simple view, and with as much facility as we perceive the difference between a
Square and a Circle.

I shall not stand to prove more at large, that we have no clear Ideas either
of the Soul or its Modifications; for what ever way we consider our selves we
sufficiently discover it. Nor had I added this to what I have already said of
it in the Search after Truth, but that some Cartesians objected against it. If
this does not satisfy them, I shall expect that they discover to me this clear
Idea which I have not been able to find in my self, although I have done what I
could to discover it.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Eighth Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book.
Of Loose and General Terms which signify nothing, how they are distinguished
from others.
TO comprehend what has been said in some places, how such as explain Things by
Logical and General Terms, give no Reason of them, we need only to consider,
that whatever is, may be reduced to Being or Manner of Being, whatever Term
signifies neither of these, signifies nothing at all; and whatever Term
signifies neither of them distinctly and particularly signifies nothing
distinct; this seems to me very clear and evident, but what is so in it self,
is not so to every one. Words are a sort of Coin, wherewith Men pay themselves
and others, all Terms that offend not the Ear are current, and there is so
little Truth in the Business of the World, that those who speak, or hear it,
have commonly no respect to it; The Gift of Speech is the greatest Talent, and
the Language of the Imagination is the surest Means, and a Memory filled with
Unintelligible Terms will always appear advantagiously whatever Cartesians may
say of it.

When Men shall love Truth only, they will be cautious what they say, carefully
examine their Intentions, and scornfully reject Empty Terms, closely adhering
to clear Ideas. But when will this come to pass? Then only when their
dependence upon the Body is broke, when their necessary relation to sensible
Objects ceases, when they shall no longer corrupt one another, but faithfully
consult their Master who instructs them inwardly; but this is not to be
expected in this life.

Yet all are not equally indifferent for Truth; some speak without reflection,
hear without distinction, and attend on that only which affects them; others
industriously labor to inform themselves and convince others of the Truth.
It Is to these chiefly that I address my self; for it was at their Requests I
began these Remarks.

I say then; Whatever is, whether it actually exists or not, and consequently
whatever is intelligible is either Being, or a Manner of Being. By Being I
intend something that is absolute, or that may be conceived alone, independent
of any thing else; by Manner of Being, I mean something relative, or what
cannot be conceived alone. Now there are two Manners of Being, one consists in
the relation of the parts of any Whole to some part of the same Whole, the
other in the relation of one Thing to another which are not parts of the same
Whole. An Instance of the first is Roundness in Wax, which consists in the
Equality of distance that all the Superficial parts have in respect to that at
the Center. The Motion or Situation of the Wax is an Instance of the second:
which consists in the relation which the Wax has to the Bodies that are about
it. By Motion I mean, not a Moving Power; for it is evident that Power neither
is, nor can be, a Manner of a Bodies Existence; for let it be Modified how it
will, we cannot conceive it as a Moving Power.

Whatever then is intelligible is either Being, or a Manner of Being; for it is
certain, that every Expression that signifies neither of these, signifies
nothing at all, and every Term that signifies not this or that particular
Being, or Manner of Being, is obscure and confused: danglam And therefore
whatever we say to one another is unconceivable, if we have no distinct Idea of
Being, or Manner of Being, which respectively answer to the Terms made use of.

However I confess we may, and ought sometimes to use such Words as do not
excite distinct Ideas. We may, because it is not always necessary to put the
Definition instead of the Thing defined, and because we may sometimes
profitably use abridg'd Expressions, though in themselves confused. We must, as
when we are obliged to speak of such Things whereof we have no distinct Idea,
and which we conceive not by an inward sensation, as of the Soul and her
Modifications, only we ought to be careful that we use not obscure and
equivocal Terms, we having clear ones, or even any which may excite false Ideas
in those we speak to. For Instance:

It is more intelligible to say, that God created the World by his Will, than
his Power. This last Word is a Logical Term which stirs up no distinct and
particular Idea, but leaves us at liberty to imagine that the Power of God may
be distinct from the Efficacy of his Will. We speak more intelligibly when we
say, God pardons Sinners through Jesus Christ, than by absolutely saying, He
forgives them through his Clemency and Mercy. These Terms are equivocal, and
may occasion us to think, that the Mercy of God may be contrary to his Justice,
that Sin may go unpunisht, and that the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ is not
necessary, etc.

Men often make use of loose and Indefinite Terms when they speak of the Divine
Perfections, which is not blameable since Philosophical Rigor is not always
necessary; but by a criminal Stupidity and Negligence, they abuse these General
Expressions, and draw so many false Consequences from them, that though they
all have the same Idea of God, and confider him as an infinitely perfect Being,
yet there was scarcely any Imperfection that was not attributed to him in the
Times of Idolatry, and Men often spoke of him after a very unworthy manner, for
want of comparing their Expressions with the Ideas they had of him, or rather
with himself.

But it is chiefly in Phisics that these Loose and General Terms are abused,
which stir up no distinct Idea either of Being, or Manner of Being. For
Instance: When we say, Bodies tend to their Center, they descend by their
Gravity, and ascend by their Levity, that they move naturally, and successively
change their Forms, that they act by their Virtues, Qualities, Faculties, etc.
Such Terms signify nothing, and all these Propositions are absolutely false in
the sense that most Philosophers take them. There is no Center in the Sense
commonly meant, Gravity, Form, Nature, etc. stir up no Idea, either of Being,
or Manner of Being; they are loose impertinent Terms which wise Men should
avoid. The Knowledge of Fools is impertinent Talk, says the Scripture: These
Terms are only proper to cover the Ignorance of the falsely Learned, and to
make the Stupid, and Libertine, believe that God only is not the True Cause of
all Things.

This methinks is certain and easily conceived, yet most Men speak freely
without being at the trouble to examine whether the Terms they use have a clear
and exact signification: And there are many Voluminous Authors, in whom it is
very difficult to find a Passage where they understood what they wrote. Those
therefore who read much, and respectively hearken to the Loose and General
Discourses of the falsely Learned, are grossly ignorant; nor do I see any way
for them to grow wiser, but by making and constantly renewing their Resolution
of believing no Man upon his Word, and before they have joined very distinct
Ideas to the most common Terms which others use. For these Terms are not clear
as is generally thought, but only seem so through Custom; for Men fancy they
understand well what they say and hear, when they say and hear the same Thing a
hundred times over without ever examining it.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Conclusion of the Three First BOOKS.
That Physicians and Spiritual Guides are absolutely necessary for us, but that
it is dangerous to consult and follow them on many Occasions.
CErtainly Man before his Fall, had all things that were necessary to keep his
Mind and Body in a perfect State; he needed neither Physician nor Guide, but
consulted inward Truth as the infallible Rule of his Duty, and his Senses were
so faithful that they never deceived him in the use he was to make of external
Bodies for the preservation of his own.

But since the Fall all things are extremely changed; we consult our own
Passions much more than the Eternal Law or Truth; and our Senses are so
disordered, that by following them we sometimes lose our Health and Life.
Divines and Physicians are absolutely necessary, and those who pretend to know
best how to govern themselves upon all occasions, commonly fall into the
grossest Errors, which too late teaches them that they follow a Master that is
not over-wise.

However I think I may say, it has not so disordered all the Faculties of the
Soul but that we may consult our selves on many occasions; and it often
happens, through the defect of it, that we lose the Life of our Soul and Body:
Of the former, by consulting Casuists that are ignorant in Religion and
Morality, and who do not so thoroughly examine the Consciences as to discover
the engagements and dispositions of those that consult them: Of the latter, by
applying our selves to ignorant Physicians, and such as are unacquainted with
the Constitution of our Bodies.

What I have said as a Conclusion to the three first Books of the Search after
Truth, has occasioned some Persons to imagine that I pretended, that for the
preservation of Life and Health we ought to follow our Senses and Passions in
all things; and that to be instructed in our Duty, it was needless to consult
any one, since Eternal Wisdom is our Master, who speaks clearly to us in the
most secret parts of our Reason. And though I never said nor thought that
Physicians and Guides were useless, yet some Persons that are hasty at judging
and concluding, believe it was my Opinion, because perhaps 'twas theirs; and
because they don't so much consider Man as he is now, as what he was before the
Fall: But to explain my self further upon this Question.

Man may be considered two ways, in Health and Sickness: If in the first, I
think his Senses are much more useful to preserve it, than the Reason and
Experience of the ablest Physicians. There Is no need of consulting the
Physician to know how much a Man must weigh; whether Wood and Stones are proper
Food; whether he may throw himself down a Precipice: His Senses teach him after
a most short and indisputable way what he ought to do upon the like occasions.
And this methinks is sufficient to justify what I have said for a Conclusion
to the three first Books.

But it is not enough to justify what I think, and even what I have said
elsewhere, viz. Book 2. p. 20.
That our Senses admirably well discharge their Duty, and conduct us after so
just and faithful a manner, to the ends they were designed for, that they seem
to be injuriously charged with Corruption and Irregularity. For I always
believed that such a justness, exactness and admirable Order, as is in our
Sensations with reference to the preservation of Life, was no effect of Sin,
but the first institution of Nature.

It Is Objected that this Order is now much subverted, and that if we follow our
Senses we should not only eat Poison, but frequently eat more than we could
digest.

But I think our Senses would never tempt us to eat Poison; and that if by
chance our Eyes should induce us to taste it, we should not find in it that
relish as would prevail with us to swallow it, supposing the Poison was not
disguised: For there is much difference between Poison as Naturally produced,
and poisoned Food; between crude Pepper, and peppered Meats. I confess our
Senses incline us to eat poisoned Meat, but they don't tempt us to eat Poison,
perhaps not to taste it, provided this Poison be in that condition that God
produced it; for our Senses reach only to the Natural Order of things as at
first established by God.

I grant also that at present our Senses tempt us to eat certain Meats to
excess, but it is because they are not in their Natural State. We should perhaps
never overcharge our selves with Corn, if we ground it with Teeth given us for
this end; but it is grounded, sifted, kneaded and baked, and even sometimes with
Milk, Butter and Sugar; it is also eaten with Conserves and Ragoos of several
sorts, which provoke the Appetite; so that we must not be surprised if our
Senses tempt us to excess, when Reason and Experience join to surprise them.

It Is the same in respect of Flesh, which the Senses abhor when Raw and full of
Blood, as is seen in an Animal that dies of it self; but Men have thought upon
killing Beasts, letting out their Blood, boiling the Flesh, seasoning and
disguising it, and after this accuse their Senses of Corruption and Disorder,
because they have used their Reason to prepare other sorts of Diet than Nature
supplies; indeed I confess it necessary that Men should make use of the same
Reason to moderate their Eating. And if Cooks have found out the art of making
us eat old Shoes in a Ragoo, we ought to use our Reason, and distrust these
adulterated Meats, which are not such as God made them; for he gave us our
Senses only in relation to the Order of Natural Things.

We must also observe that our Imagination and Senses are mistrustful when we
take unusual Food. For if a Man had never eaten, nor seen any one eat of a
certain Fruit which he had met with, he would at first have some aversion and
sense of fear in tasting it; his Imagination and Senses would naturally be very
attentive to the relish he tasted: Though never so hungry he would eat but
little the first time; and if this Fruit had any dangerous quality, it would
not fail to excite some surprise in him. Thus his Machine is disposed after
such a manner that he would decline it another time, and the aversion which he
had for it sensibly discovering it self in his looks, would deter others from
eating it. All this would or might be performed in him without the assistance
of his Reason; for I speak not here of those supplies which Reason and
Instruction may afford. But seeing our Friends take bad Nourishments we do the
same, for we live by Opinion, and Example emboldens us. We examine not the
effect these Nourishments produce in us, and we are not afraid to eat to
excess: Thus our Senses do not so much share in the Intemperance as is believed.

It is true, there are possibly such Fruits whose relish may impose upon us,
though we are never so attentive to the admonition of our Senses, but this is
certainly very rare; and we must not conclude from particular Instances that
our Senses are corrupt, and commonly deceive us in reference to the good of the
Body; perhaps they deceive because we have altered our Organ by Unnatural
Nourishment. It Is certain, that high-seasoned Dishes which we feed on, do by
their too penetrating Particles hurt the Fibers of our Tongue, and vitiate its
delicateness and discernment. The Example of such as relish only Ragoos, is a
proof of this; for if we find no savor in Corn and Raw Flesh, it is because
our Tongue is become insensible of their parts, their motions being moderate.

But though we suppose there are Fruits whose taste is capable of beguiling the
most delicate Senses, and which are yet in their Natural Perfection, we must
not believe that this is the effect of Sin, but because it is impossible that
the Sensation of Taste which is formed and perfected according to the most
simple Laws of Nature, should have sufficient discernment for all sorts of
Meats: Besides the defect of this Sense would not be remediless; because when
Mothers have an aversion for dangerous Fruits, they communicate it to their
Children, not only in the Womb, but much more when born into the World; for
Children only eat what is given them by their Mothers, who Machinally, and by
the Air of their Countenance, impress upon them that horror which they
themselves have for Fruits that are dangerous to be eaten. So that God has
sufficiently provided by our Senses for the preservation of Life, and nothing
can be better ordered. For as Order requires that the Laws of the Union of our
Soul and Body should be very simple, they must be very general; and God ought
not to establish particular Laws for cases that happen very seldom; Reason on
such occasions must assist the Senses; for Reason is useful in all things. But
the Senses are determined by some Natural Judgments, which are more useful than
can be conceived, as I have proved in the First Book, yet even these Judgments
are sometimes Erroneous; for it is impossible it should be otherwise, without
multiplying the most simple Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body.

If we consider Man as he is now in a State of Infirmity, we must grant that
his Senses often deceive him, even in things that relate to the Preservation of
Life; for the Economy of his Machine being troubled, it is impossible but in
proportion to that trouble there should be many irregular Motions excited in
his Brain; however his Senses are not so corrupted as is ordinarily believed;
and God has so wisely provided for the Preservation of Life by the Laws of the
Union of the Soul and Body, which although they are very simple are often
sufficient to restore our Health; that it is a much surer way to follow them,
than to use our Reason or such Physicians, who do not carefully study the
Disposition of their Patients; for even as a Wound closes up and heals of it
self when constantly cleansed and licked, as is seen in wounded Animals, so
common Distempers are soon dispersed when we let them alone, and precisely
observe such a state of Life as these Diseases, by a kind of Instinct and
Sensation, dictate to us.

A Man for Example, who has a Fever, finds that Wine is bitter and offensive
to him in that condition; yet this same person finds it agreeable and good when
in Health. It even often happens that Wine is very good for the Sick when they
relish it, provided this relish is not an effect of some previous Habit of
Drinking, but that their desire of it proceed from the present Disposition of
their Body. So that we cannot doubt but that we ought to consult our Senses in
Sickness, what way we should take for the recovery of our Health. And this is
what I believe we ought to do.

The Distempered should be extremely attentive to certain secret Desires which
the actual Disposition of their Body does sometimes excite in them; but above
all, to take heed lest these Desires should proceed from some preceding Habit;
they must let loose their Imagination, and think on nothing that may determine
it; observe their present Inclination, and examine whether; it is the effect of
their Disposition: This done, they ought to follow it, but with much Caution;
for it is extremely, difficult to be assured whether these secret Inclinations
proceed from the Disposition of their Body, and it is sometimes useful to
consult some Experienced Person upon it. But if the Sick, letting loose his
Imagination, as I have said, find nothing presented to his Mind, he must rest
and keep to a sick Diet; for this will probably excite in him some Desire, or
dissipate the Humors that cause the Sickness: For if the Distemper is
increased notwithstanding such a strict Diet and Rest, that it is necessary to
have recourse to Experience and Physicians, he must then exactly tell every
thing to some skilful Physician, who if possible, knows his Constitution; he
must explain clearly to him the beginning and progress of the Distemper, and
the condition he was in before he fell sick, thereby to consult the Experience
and Reason of his Physician; and though the Physician should prescribe bitter
Medicines, and which indeed are kinds of Poison, yet they must be taken; for
it is experienced that these Poisons stay not in the Body, but drive out with
them those ill Humors that are the Cause of the Distemper. Here it is that
Reason, or rather Experience, must command the Senses, provided the horror of
the presented Medicine is not new; for if this horror was as old as the
Disease, it is a sign the Medicine is of the same Nature as the ill Humors that
caused the Distemper, and then perhaps it would only exasperate it.

However I believe, that before we take strong Medicines, to which we are
averse, we ought to begin with such as are more gentle and natural; as by
drinking much Water, or taking an easy Vomit if the Appetite is lost; and if
we have much difficulty to vomit, Water may attenuate the over-thick Humors,
and facilitate the Circulation of the Blood in all the parts of the Body.
Vomits cleanse the Blood, and hinder the received Nourishment from any longer
corrupting and feeding the intermitting Fevers. But I must no further insist
upon these things. I believe that we ought to follow the Counsel of Wise
Physicians, who are not overhasty, nor rely too much upon their Medicines, nor
too quick in prescribing Remedies; for when one is sick, for one Medicine that
does good there are always many that do hurt. The Sick are impatient; and as
it is not for the Honor of Physicians, or the Profit of Apothecaries, to visit
the Sick without prescribing to them, so also Physicians visit too seldom and
prescribe too often; therefore when one is sick, he should pray his Phisician
to hazard nothing, but to follow Nature, and fortify it as much as he can; he
should acquaint him, that he has more Reason and Patience than to take it ill
that he is often visited without Relief; for on these Occasions he sometimes
does a great deal who does no hurt.

I believe then, we should consult Physicians, and not refuse to obey them if
we would be well; for though they cannot assure us a Recovery, yet they may
sometimes contribute much to it, by reason of the repeated Experiments they
make upon different Distempers. They know little of any thing certainly, yet
they know more than we; and if they take the pains to know our Constitutions,
carefully observe all the Accidents of the Distemper, and have much regard to
our own Sensations, we may expect from them all the Assistance that we can
reasonably hope from Men.

What we have said of Phisicians may be also said of Divines; it is absolutely
necessary to consult them on some occasions, and it is commonly profitable: But
it often happens that it is very unprofitable, and sometimes very dangerous to
consult them. For Instance:

It Is commonly said, That Humane Reason is subject to Error; but there is
something equivocal in this which we are not sufficiently aware of; for we must
not imagine, that the Reason which Man consults is depraved, or that it ever
deceives when faithfully consulted. I have said, and still repeat it, That it
is sovereign Reason alone which makes us reasonable; it is sovereign Truth
which enlightens us; and it is God only who speaks clearly to us, and knows how
to instruct us. We have only one True Master, Jesus Christ our Lord, the
Eternal Wisdom, and the Word of the Father, in whom are all the Treasures of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; and it is Impiety to say, that this Eternal
Reason of which all Men participate, and through which they are only
reasonable, should be subject to Error, and capable of deceiving us: For it is
not the Reason of Man but his Heart that deceives him; it is not his Light
which hinders him from seeing his Darkness; it is not the Union he has with God
that deceives him; it is not even in one Sense that he has with his Body: It is
his dependence upon his Body, or rather, it is because he will deceive himself,
because he will enjoy the Pleasure of Judging before he has been at the Trouble
of Examining, because he will rest before he is come to the Place of Truth. I
have more exactly explained the Cause of our Error in many places of the
Search after Truth, and here I suppose what I have there said.

And now I affirm it needless to consult Divines when we are assured that Truth
speaks to us; and it is certain, that Truth speaks to us when we meet with
Evidence in the Answers that are made to our Demands, or the Attention of our
Mind. Therefore when we return into our selves, and in the silence of our
Senses and Passions hear a Voice so clear and intelligible, that it is
impossible to doubt of it let Men think what they please, we must not consider
Custom and secret Inclinations, or have too great a respect for their Answers
who are called Learned. We must not suffer our selves to be seduced with an
appearance of false Piety, nor be dejected through their Oppositions who know
not the Spirit that animates them; but we must patiently suffer their Insults,
without condemning their Intentions, or despising their Persons. We must with
simplicity of Heart rejoice at the Light of Truth which enlightens us, and
although its Answers condemn us, we must prefer them before all the Subtle
Distinctions which the Imagination invents for the Justification of the
Passions.

Every Man (for Instance) who knows how to examine himself, and to still the
Noise of his Senses and Passions, clearly discovers that all the Motion which
God puts into us should be terminated upon himself, and that even God cannot
dispense with the Obligation we have of loving him in all things. It is
evident, that God cannot but act for himself, that he cannot create or preserve
our Will to will any thing but him, or to will any thing besides what he
himself wills; for I cannot see how it is conceivable, that God should will a
Creature to have more love for what is less lovely, or love chiefly, or as its
end, what is not most lovely.

I know well that Men who consult their Passions instead of Order, can easily
imagine, that God has no other Rule of his Wills than the same Wills, and that
if God follows Order, it is surely from this that he has willed it, by a Will
that is absolutely free and indifferent. There are some who think, there is no
Order that is immutable and necessary by its nature, and that the Order or
Wisdom of God according to which he made all Things, although the first of
Creatures is it self a Creature made by a Free Will of God, and not begotten of
his Substance by the necessity of his Being: But this Opinion, which shakes all
the Foundations of Morality by taking away from Order and the Eternal Laws
which depend upon it, their Immutability; and which overturns all the
Superstructure of the Christian Religion, by despoyling Jesus Christ, or the
Word of God, of his Divinity, does not yet so thoroughly darken the Mind as to
hide from it this Truth that God Wills Order. Thus whether the Wills of God
make Order, or suppose it, we clearly see when we examine our selves, that the
God whom we worship cannot do that which evidently appears contrary to Order.
So that Order willing our Time, or duration of Being, should be for him who
preserves us; that all the Motion of our Heart should continually tend toward
him who continually impresses it upon us; that all the Powers of our Soul
should only labor for him by virtue of whom they act. God cannot dispense with
the Commandment which he gave us by Moses in the Law, and which he repeated by
his Son in the Gospel: Mark 12.30.
Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength.

But because Order wills, that every righteous Person should be happy and every
Sinner unhappy, that every Action conformable to Order, and every Motion of
love toward God, be recompensed; and on the contrary, it is evident, that
every one who will be happy, must continually tend toward God, and with
horror reject every thing that would stop his Course, or diminish his Motion
toward his True Good: It Is not necessary that for this he consult a Spiritual
Guide; for when God speaks, Men should be silent; and when we are absolutely
certain, that our Senses and Passions have no part in the Answers which we hear
inwardly, we must always hearken respectively to these Answers and submit to
them.

Would we know, whether we should go to a Ball or a Play? Whether we may in
Conscience spend a great part of the day at Gaming, or unprofitable
Entertainments? Whether certain Businesses, Studies, Employments, are
conformable to our Obligations? Let us enter into our Selves; let us silence
our Passions and Senses, and see the Light of God, if we can for his sake do
such an Action. Let us interrogate him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, to know if the Way we follow does not lead to Death, and whether (God
being essentially Just, and necessarily obliged to punish every Thing that is
contrary to Order, and to recompense every Thing that is conformable thereto)
we have reason to believe we go to increase or assure our felicity by the
Action we are about.

If it be our Love to God that carries us to the Ball, let us go thither; if we
should play to gain Heaven, let us play Day and Night; if we have in sight the
Glory of God in our Employ, let us increase it, let us do all Things with Joy;
for our Recompense will be great in Heaven: But if after having carefully
examined our Essential Obligations, we discover clearly, That neither our Being
nor duration are of us, that we do an Injustice which God cannot but punish,
when we endeavor to spend our Time in vain: If our Master and Lord, Jesus
Christ, who has purchased us by his Blood, reproaches our Infidelity and
Ingratitude, after a very clear and intelligible manner, for living after the
Flesh and the World, for leading a Soft and Voluptuous Life, and for following
Opinion and Custom; let us obey his voice, and not harden our Hearts; let us
not seek for Guides that soften these Reproaches, embolden us against these
Menaces, and who obscure this Light, with agreeable Clouds which hurt and
penetrate our very Soul.

When the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch, says the
Gospel; but if the Blind Man, who suffers himself to be lead, fall with him
that leads him, if God does hot excuse him, will he excuse him who sees
clearly, and yet suffers himself to be lead by the Blind, because this Blind
Person leads him agreeably, and entertains him in the way according to his
inclinations? These voluntary Blind ought to know, that God who never deceives,
does sometimes permit these Seducers to punish corrupted Hearts who seek
Seducers; that Blindness is a punishment of Sin, although it is often the Cause
thereof; and that it is just, that he who would not hearken to Eternal Wisdom,
which only speaks to him for his good, should leave him at length to be
corrupted by Men, who deceive so much the more dangerously, as they flatter him
more agreeably.

It is true, it is difficult to enter into ones self, to silence ones Senses and
Passions, and to discern whether it is God or our Body who speaks to us; for we
often take the Proofs of Sensation for evident Reasons, and then it is necessary
to consult Guides; but it is not always necessary to consult them: For we see
our Duty on many occasions with the utmost evidence and certainty, and then it
is even dangerous to consult them, if it be not done with an entire Sincerity,
and a Spirit of Humility and Obedience; for these Dispositions oblige God not
to permit us to be deceived, or at least in no very dangerous manner.

When it is necessary to consult a Guide, we must choose one who understands
Religion, who reverences the Gospel, and who knows Man. We must take care that
the Converse of the World has not corrupted him, that Friendship has not made
him too Complaisant, so that he may either fear or hope any thing from us. We
must choose one among a thousand, says St. Theresia, who as she relates of her
self, had like to have been lost by the defect: of an ignorant Guide.

The World is full of Deceivers, I say Religious Deceivers as well as others:
Those who love us, seduce us through Complaisance; those who are below us,
flatter us through Respect or Fear; those who are above us, consider not our
Necessities, either through Contempt or Negligence. Besides all Men counsel us
according to the relation we give them of what passes in us, and we are never
wanting to flatter our selves; for we insensibly cover our Sore when we are
ashamed of it. We often deceive those who direct us, that we may deceive our
selves; for we suppose our selves safe when we follow them. They guide us
whither we have a mind to go, and we endeavor to persuade our selves, in
spite of our Light and the secret reproaches of our Reason, that it is our
Obedience which determines us. We deceive our selves, and God permits it; but
we never deceive him who examines our Hearts; and though we shut our Ears as
much as we can against the voice of inward Truth, we sufficiently feel by the
reproaches of this sovereign Truth which leaves us to our selves, that it
inlightens our darkness, and discovers all the subtleties of self-love.

It Is therefore evident that we must consult our Reason for the Health of our
Soul, as our Senses for that of our Body; and when Reason answers not clearly,
we must necessarily have recourse to Guides, as we would to Physicians when our
Senses fail us, but this must be done with discretion; for Guides that are but
a little enlightened may sometimes destroy our Soul, as unexpert Physicians may
our Body.

As I don't thoroughly explain the Rules which might be given in respect of the
choice and use that should be made of Guides and Physicians, I desire my
Sentiments may be equitably interpreted, and that it may not be imagined that I
would hinder any from seeking necessary assistance from others. I know that a
particular Blessing attends our submission to the Opinions of the Wise and
Understanding, and I am willing to believe this General Rule, Let us dye
according to the received Laws of Phisics, to the generality of Men, they are
safer than any other that I could establish for the Preservation of Life.

But because it is always profitable to examine our selves, and consult the
Gospel; to hearken to Jesus Christ whether he speaks immediately to our Mind
and Heart, or by Faith declares himself to our Ears or Eyes, I believe I might
say what I have said; for our Guides themselves deceive us when they speak
contrary to what Faith and Reason teach us. And as it is to give Honor to God
by believing his Works, to have that which is necessary for their preservation,
I thought I should make Men sensible that the Machine of their Body is
contrived after so admirable a manner, that of it self it discovers more easily
what is necessary for its Preservation, than by Science, or even the Experience
of the most able Physicians.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE Third Chapter of the Fifth Book.
That Love is different from Peasure and Joy.
THE Mind commonly confounds things which are very different, when they happen
at the same time, and are not contrary to one another: Of which I have given
many Instances in this Work; because it is therein that our Errors chiefly
consist, in respect to what passes in our selves. As we have no clear Idea of
what constitutes the Nature or Essence of our Mind, nor of the Modifications it
is capable of; it often happens that we confound things absolutely different,
if they happen within us but at the same time; since we easily confound what we
do not know by a clear and distinct Idea.

It is not only impossible clearly to discover wherein the difference of such
things consists as pass within us, but it is also difficult to discern whether
there is any difference between them: For to effect this we must look into our
selves, not to consider what is voluntarily done in reference to Good and Evil,
but to make an abstracted Reflection upon our selves, which cannot be performed
without much Distraction and Pains.

We easily conceive that the Roundness of a Body, is different from its Motion:
And although we know by Experience, that a Bowl upon a Plane cannot be pushed
without being moved; and then Roundness and Motion are found together; however
we don't confound them one with the other, because we know both Motion and
Figure by very distinct and clear Ideas: But it is not so with Pleasure and
Love, for we commonly confound them. Our Mind, if we may so say, becomes
movable by Pleasure, as a Ball does by its Roundness; and because it is never
without an impression toward good, it is immediately put in motion toward the
Object which causes, or seems to cause this Pleasure: So that this motion of
Love happening to the Soul at the same time it feels this Pleasure, it is
enough to make it confound its Pleasure with its Love, because it has not so
clear an Idea either of its Pleasure or its Love, as it has of Figure and
Motion. Wherefore some Persons will believe that Pleasure and Love are not
different, and that I distinguish too many things in each of our Passions.

But to make it plainly appear that Pleasure and Love are very different, I
shall distinguish two sorts of Pleasures, one of which precedes Reason, as
agreeable Sensations, which we commonly call Pleasures of the Body; and the
other sort neither precede Reason nor the Senses, and are generally called the
Pleasures of the Soul: Such as Joy which is excited in us in consequence of a
clear Knowledge, or a confused Sensation which we have, that some good is, or
will happen to us.

For instance: A Man tasting of a Fruit which he knows not, finds some Pleasure
in eating it, if this Fruit be good for his Nourishment. This is a preventing
Pleasure; for since he feels it before he knows whether this Fruit is good or
nor, it is evident that this Pleasure prevents his Reason. An Huntsman when
hungry, expecting or actually finding something to eat, actually feels Joy: Now
this Joy is a Pleasure which follows the knowledge he has of his present or
future good.

It is perhaps evident by this distinction of Pleasure into that which follows
and precedes Reason, that there is neither of them but differs from Love: For
that Pleasure which precedes Reason, certainly precedes Love; since it precedes
all knowledge, which in some degree or other is always supposed by Love. And on
the contrary, Joy or Pleasure which supposes Knowledge, also supposes Love;
since Joy supposes the confused Sensation, or clear Knowledge that we do, or
shall possess what we love; and if we possessed a thing we had no love for, we
should receive no Joy by it. Thus Pleasure is very different from Love; since
the Pleasure which precedes Reason, precedes and causes Love; and the Pleasure
which follows Reason, necessarily supposes Love, as an Effect supposes the
Cause.

Otherwise, if Pleasure and Love were the same thing, there would never be
Pleasure without Love, nor Love without Pleasure; for a thing cannot be without
it self. Yet a Christian loves his Enemy, and a Child well educated, loves his
Father, how unreasonable and unkind soever he may be. The sight of their Duty,
the fear of God, and love of Order and Justice, makes them love not only
without Pleasure, but even with a kind of Horror, such Persons as are not
agreeable to them. I confess they sometimes feel Pleasure or Joy, when they
think they do their Duty; or when they hope to be recompensed according to
their Merit: But besides that, this Pleasure visibly differs very much from the
Love they have to their Father or Enemy, although it be perhaps the Motive of
it; it often happens that it is not even this Motive which makes them act; it is
sometimes only an abstracted view of Order, or notion of Fear, which preserves
their Love. We may even in one sense say they have a Love for these Persons at
the time they think not of them: For Love remains in us during the diversions
of our thoughts, and whilst we sleep; but Pleasure seems to me to subsist no
longer in the Soul, than whilst it is sensible of it. Thus Love or Charity
remaining in us without Pleasure or Delight, it cannot be maintained that
Pleasure and Love is the same thing.

As Pleasure and Pain are two direct contraries: If Pleasure were the same
thing with Love, Pain would not differ from Hatred. Now it is evident that Pain
is different from Hatred, since Pain often subsists without Hatred. A Man, for
instance, who is hurt without observing it, suffers a real and cutting Pain,
but is free from Hatred; for he does not so much as know the Cause of his Pain,
or Object of his Hatred; or rather, the Cause of his Pain not being worthy of
Hatred, it cannot excite it in him. Thus he hates not this Cause of his Pain,
although his Pain inclines him to, or disposes him to hate it. It is true this
Man hates his Pain, for Pain deserves Hatred; but the hatred of Pain is not
Pain, but only supposes it. The hatred of Pain is not worthy of Hatred as Pain:
On the contrary it is very agreeable; for we please our selves in hating Pain,
as we are displeased in suffering it. Pain therefore is not Hatred; nor is
Pleasure, which is opposite to Pain, Love; which is opposite to Hatred:
Consequently the Pleasure which precedes Reason, is not the same thing as Love.
And I likewise prove, that the Joy or Pleasure which follows Reason is also
distinct from Love.

As Joy and Sorrow are directly opposite: If Joy was the same thing as Love,
Sorrow would not differ from Hatred: But it is plain that Sorrow is different
from Hatred; for Sorrow sometimes subsists without Hatred. For instance: A Man
finds himself by chance deprived of such things as he has need of: This is
enough to cause Sorrow, but it cannot excite Hatred in him; either because he
knows not the Cause which deprived him of these necessaries, or else that this
Cause not being worthy of his Hatred, it could not stir it up in him. It is
true this Man hates the privation or the good that he loves; but it is plain
that this kind of Hatred is properly Love: For he hates the privation of good,
only because he loves the good: And since to fly the privation of good, is to
incline toward good; it is evident that the motion of this Man's Hatred differs
not from that of his Love.

Thus his Hatred, if he is possessed of any, not being contrary to his Love, and
Sorrow being always opposite to Joy, it is plain that his Sorrow is not his
Hatred; consequently Joy differs from Love. In fine, it is manifest when we are
sorrowful, it is because of the presence of something we hate, or rather the
absence of something we love. Thus Sorrow supposes Hatred, or rather Love, but
is very different from both these things.

I very well know St. Austin affirms, that Pain is an a version which the Soul
conceives, because the Body is not disposed after such a manner as it wishes;
and that he often confounds Delectation with Charity, Pleasure with Joy, Pain
with Sorrow, Pleasure and Joy with Love, Pain and Sorrow with Aversion or
Hatred. But it is very probable that this Holy Doctor spoke all this according
to the general Language amongst the common sort of Men, who confound the
greatest part of those things which pass within them at the same time: Or it
may be he had not examined these things after a very exact and Philosophical
manner. However I believe I may and ought to say, that it appeared requisite to
me, exactly to distinguish these things, if we would clearly and without
equivocation explain many Questions which St. Austin has treated on: For even
those who have contrary Opinions amongst themselves, have been accustomed to
maintain them from the Authority of this great Man, because of the different
Sense his Expressions may be taken in; which is not always exact enough to
reconcile such Persons, who perhaps have more mind to dispute than agree.

A N EXPLANATION OF THE Third Chapter of the Second Part of the Sixth Book.
Concerning the Efficacy attributed to Second Causes.
EVer since the Fall, the Mind of Man is continually employed upon External
Objects; he even forgets himself, and him who penetrates and inlightens him;
and suffers himself after such a manner to be seduced by his own and the Bodies
about him, that he expects in them to find his Perfection and Happiness. He who
alone is capable of acting in it, now hides himself from our Eyes; nor are his
Operations performed after a sensible manner; and although he produces and
preserves all Beings, the Mind which eagerly seeks the Cause of all things,
finds much difficulty to discover him, although it meets with him every moment.
Some Philosophers have chose rather to imagine a Nature and certain Faculties
as the Causes of those Effects we call Natural, than to give God all the Honor
which is due to his Power. And although they have no Proof, nor so much as a
clear Idea of this Nature and these Faculties, as I hope I have shown, they
choose rather to speak without knowing what they say, and to respect a Power
purely imaginary, than to make any endeavor to discover the hand of him who
performs whatever is done in all things.

I cannot forbear believing that one of the most deplorable consequences of
Original Sin, is our having no more gust nor sensation for God; or that we
perceive him not, or meet him but with a kind of horror and fright. We ought
to acknowledge God in all things; be sensible of his Strength and Power in all
Natural Effects; admire his Wisdom in the mavelous Order of the Creatures;
and in a word, adore, fear, and love only him in all his Works. But there is
now a secret opposition between Man and God; Man finding himself a Sinner hides
himself; flies the Light; is apprehensive of meeting God; and chooses rather to
imagine in the Bodies which are about him, a Power or blind Nature, which he
can make familiar to himself, than to meet there the terrible Power of a Holy
and Just God, who knows and performs all things.

I confess there are many persons, who by a different Principle than that of
the Heathen Philosophers, pursue their Opinion about Nature and Second Causes.
But I hope we shall discover by the consequence of this Discourse, that they
are of this Opinion only through a received prejudice, which it is almost
impossible to deliver themselves from, without the assistance that may be drawn
from the Principles of a Philosophy which has not always been sufficiently
known: For it is probably this which has hindered them from declaring in favor
of an Opinion, which I have thought my Duty to maintain.

There are many Reasons which keep me from ascribing to Second or Natural
Causes, a strength, power, or efficacy to produce any thing whatever; but the
chief is, because I cannot even conceive this Opinion: What endeavors soever I
make to comprehend it, I cannot find in my self an Idea which represents to me,
what this Strength or Power can be, which they attribute to Creatures: And I
believe that I should not make a rash Judgment, if I affirm that those who
maintain that Creatures have in themselves this Strength and Power, advance
what they do not clearly conceive. For if the Heathen Philosophers had a clear
conception that Second Causes have a true Power to act and produce their like;
being a Man as well as they, and with them partaking of the sovereign Reason, I
might probably discover the Idea which represented the Power to them: but what
efforts soever I make, I can find no Strength, Efficacy or Power, but in the
Will of the infinitely perfect Being.

Moreover, when I think of the different Opinions of Philosophers upon this
Subject, I cannot doubt of what I advance. For if they clearly saw what this
Power of the Creatures is, or what there is in them that is really powerful,
they would not differ in their Opinion about it. When persons cannot agree, and
having no interested Reason which hinders them from it, it is a certain mark
they have no clear Idea of what they say, and that they understand not one
another: chiefly if they dispute upon such Subjects as are not complext, or
difficult to be discust; like this Question before us: For we should find no
hard matter to resolve it, if persons had but a clear Idea of a Created Power.
These are therefore some of their Opinions, whereby we may see how little they
agree amongst themselves.

For the most extraordinary of these Opinions, see Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 18.
Sect. 2. Assert, 2, 3. Scot. in 4. sent. did. 12.1. D. 37.2. D. 17. Paludan.
in 4. sent. D. 12. Q. 1. Art. 1. Peter. 8. Phys. Chapter 3. Conimb. upon Aristotle's
Phys. and many others which Suarez cites.
Some Philosophers here affirmed that Second Causes act by their Matter, Figure,
and Motion; and these in one Sense are in the right: Others by a substantial
Form: Many by Accidents or Qualities: Some by Matter and Form: Others by Form
and Accidents: And some again by certain Virtues or distinct Faculties from all
this. There are others amongst them who maintain, that Substantial Forms
produce Forms, and Accidental Forms, Accidents: Others, that Forms produce both
Forms and Accidents: And some again, that Accidents alone are capable of
producing Accidents and Forms too. See the Metaph. of Fonseca, qu. 13. sect. 3.
That of Socin. and Javell. upon the same Question.
But we must not imagine that those, for instance, who say, that Accidents can
produce Forms by virtue of what they have received from the Form they are
joined to, mean the same thing. Some of them will have it, that these Accidents
themselves are only the Power or Virtue of the Substantial Form: Others, that
they receive into themselves the influence of the Form, and so act only by
virtue of it: And in fine, some of them will only have them to be Instrumental
Causes. But these last are not perfectly agreed amongst themselves, either what
must be understood by Instrumental Cause, or what is the virtue they receive
from the Principal Cause. The Philosophers don't so much as agree upon the
action whereby Second Causes produce their Effects. Some amongst them pretend
that Causality ought not to be produced, since that produces it self: Others
will have it, that they act truly by their own action, but find great
difficulties in explaining precisely what this action is; and there are about
this so many different Opinions, that I shall omit the reciting them.

Here is a great variety of different Sentiments, although I have not related
those of the Ancient Philosophers, or of such as were born in very remote
Countries. But we have reason enough to judge that they are not perfectly
agreed amongst themselves upon the Subject of Second Causes, no more than those
we have already mentioned. Avicen. for instance, thought Corporeal Substances
could produce nothing but Accidents. And this is his Hypothesis, as Ruvio
relates it. He supposed that God immediately produced a most perfect Spiritual
Substance, and that this produced another less perfect; and that a third; and
so on to the last, which produced all Corporeal Substances; and these Corporeal
Substances, Accidents. But Avicembrom who could not apprehend how Corporeal
Substances, Ruvio, l. 2. ph. tract. 4. qu. 2.
which cannot penetrate one another, should be capable of Alteration, would
have it that there were Spirits which were capable of acting on Bodies, because
they only could penetrate them. For these Gentlemen not admitting a Void, nor
the Atoms of Democritus, and the Subtle Matter of D' Carts was unknown to
them, they could not think with Gassendus and the Cartesians, That there were
Bodies small enough to enter into the Pores of those which appeared the most
Hard and Solid.

It seems to me, that this diversity of Opinions gives us a Right to judge,
That Men often spoke such Things as they did not understand; and that the Power
of the Creatures being a pure Fiction of the Mind, of which we have no Natural
Idea, each Person imagined it what he pleased.

It is true, in all Ages this Power was acknowledged as Real and True by most
Men: But it is as certain, it was without any Proof; I do not say
Demonstration; but even without such a Proof as was able to make any impression
upon an Attentive Mind. For the Confused Arguments which are maintained only
upon the deceitful Testimony of the Senses and Imagination, ought not to be
received by those who make use of their Reason.

Aristotle, speaking of what they call Nature, says, It is ridiculous to
endeavor to prove, That Natural Bodies have an Inward Principle of their own
Motion and Rest: Because, says he, it is self-evident. He doubts not also, but
a Bowl which hits another, has power to put it in motion. It appears so to the
Eyes, and that is enough for him; for he commonly follows the Testimony of the
Senses, and rarely that of Reason, never troubling himself whether it be
intelligible or not.

Those who oppose the Opinion of some Divines that have writ against Second
Causes, say with Aristotle, That the Senses convince us of their Efficacy: This
is their First and Principal Proof. It is evident, say they, See Fonseca Ruvio,
Suarez, and the rest already cited.
that Fire burns, the Sun shines, Water cools, and he must be a Fool that
doubts it. The Authors of the contrary Opinion, says the Great Averrors, had
their, Brains disturbed. We must (say almost all the Peripatetics) use Sensible
Proofs to convince those who deny this Efficacy, and so oblige them to confess,
They may be moved and hurt by Second Causes: It is the Judgment which Aristotle
has already pronounced against them, and it ought to be executed.

But this pretended Demonstration cannot but produce pity, L. of his Topi. chapter
1.
since it discovers the Weakness of the Humane Mind, and that even Philosophers
themselves are infinitely more Sensible than Rational. It discovers, that those
who glory in the Enquiry after Truth, do not themselves know who they ought to
consult to learn any thing of it: Whether it is the Sovereign Reason which never
deceives them, but always speaks Things as they are in themselves; or the Body
which speaks only out of interest, and in relation either to the preservation
or convenience of Life. For in fine, What Prejudices will not be justified if
we take the Senses for Judges, to whom almost all Prejudices owe their birth?
As I have already shown in the Search after Truth.

When I see one Bowl hit another, my Eyes tell me, or seem to tell me, that it
is truly the Cause of the Motion it impresses: For the true Cause which moves
Bodies does not appear to my Eyes. Bur when I ask my Reason, I see evidently
that Bodies cannot move themselves, and their Moving power depending only upon
the Will of God, which successively preserves them in different places, they
cannot communicate a power which they have not, nor could communicate if they
had it. For it is plain, there is a Wisdom requisite, and one that is infinite
too to regulate the Communication of Motions with the exactness, proportion,
and uniformity that we see. A Body moved cannot know the infinite number of
Bodies it meets at every moment: It is farther clear, That although we should
even suppose knowledge in it, it could not have enough to regulate, in the
instant of the Shock, the distribution of the Moving power it self is carried
with.

If I open but my Eyes, it appears plain to me that the Sun is very gloriously
bright, and seems not only to be visible it self, but makes all the World so
too: It Is that which covers the Earth with Flowers and Fruits, which gives Life
to Animals, and which by its Heat penetrates into the very Bowels of the Earth,
and produces Stones, Marbles, and Metals there. But when I consult Reason, I
see nothing of all this; and if I consult it faithfully, I clearly discover
that my Senses seduce me, and that it is God who performs all in all Things.
For knowing, that whatever changes happen in the Body, they have no other
principle but the different communication of Motion, which occur in visible or
invisible Bodies; I see that it is God who does all Things, since it is his
Will which Causes, and his Wisdom which Regulates all these Communications.

I suppose that Local Motion is the principle of Generations, Corruptions,
Alterations, and generally of all the Changes which happen in the Body; which
is an Opinion that is now sufficiently received amongst the Learned. But
whatever Opinion they have about it signifies little; for it seems much more
easy to conceive, that a Body drives another when it meets it, than to
apprehend, how Fire produces Heat and Light, and draw from the power of Matter
a Substance which was not there before. And if it be necessary to acknowledge,
That God is the True Cause of the different Communications of Motions, by a
much stronger Reason we ought to conclude, That none but he can Create, and
Annihilate, Real Qualities, and Substantial Forms. I say, Create, and
Annihilate, because at least it seems as difficult to me, to draw from Matter a
Substance which was not in it, or to cause it to re-enter again, as to Create
or Annihilate it. But I shall not stand upon Terms; I only make use of them
because there is no other, which I know of, that clearly, and without
Equivocation, express the Changes which the Philosophers suppose every Moment
to happen through the power of Second Causes.

I had some difficulty here, to relate the other Proofs which they commonly
give for the Power and Efficacy of Natural Causes; for they appear so weak to
those who are able to resist Prejudices, and prefer their Reason to their
Senses, that it does not seem likely that reasonable Men should be persuaded by
them. Yet I will produce and Answer them, since there are many Philosophers who
make use of them.

The first Proof.
If Second Causes do effect nothing, we could not (says Suarez, In his Metaph.
Disp. 18. Sect. 1. Assert. 1. In Metaph. Arist. qu. 7. Sect. 2.
Fonseca and some others) distinguish Animate from Inanimate Things; for
neither of them would have an inward principle of their Actions.

ANSWER.

I Answer, That Men would have the same Sensible Proofs that have convinced
them of the distinction they put between Animate and Inanimate Things. They
would always see Animals perform Certain Actions, as Eating, Growing, Crying,
Running, Leaping, etc. Nor would they observe any thing like this in Stones:
And it is this only which makes the common Philosophers believe, that Beasts
live, and Stones do not; for it must not be imagined, that they know by a clear
and distinct View of the Mind what the Life of a Dog is. It is their Senses
which regulate their Decisions upon this Question.

If it were necessary, I could here prove, That the Principal of a Dog's Life
differs very little, if at all, from that of the Motion of a Watch. For the
Life of Bodies, whatever they be, can only consist in the motion of their
parts; and it is not difficult to judge, that the same Subtle Matter which in a
Dog causes the Fermentation of the Blood and Animal Spirits, and is the
principle of his Life, is not more perfect than that which gives Motion to the
Springs of a Watch, or causes Gravitation in the Weights of a Clock, which is
the principle of their Life, or (to speak as others do) of their Motion.

The Peripatetics ought to give to those whom they style Cartesians, a clear
Idea of what they call, The Life of Beasts; Corporeal Soul, Body, which
perceives, desires, sees, feels, wills, and afterward we will clearly resolve
their difficulties, if they continue to propose them.

The Second Proof.
We could not discover the Differences nor Powers of the Elements: So that Fire
might cool as Water does; and the Nature of nothing would be settled and fixed.

ANSWER.

I Answer, That Nature continuing as it is; that is, whilst the Laws of the
communication of Motions remain constantly the same; it is a contradiction that
Fire should not burn; or not separate the parts of certain Bodies. Fire cannot
cool like Water, except it becomes Water: For Fire being only fuel, whose
parts have been agitated with a violent Motion, by an invisible Matter which
incompasses them, as is easy to be demonstrated; it is impossible these parts
should not communicate some of their Motion to the Bodies which they meet. Now
as these Laws are constant; the Nature of Fire, its virtues and qualities
cannot change. But this Nature and these Virtues are only consequences of the
general and efficacious Will of God, who does all in all things; as we learn
from the Scripture. So that the study of Nature is false and vain in every
respect, when we seek for any other true Causes than the Will of the ALMIGHTY.

I own we must not have recourse to God or the Universal Cause, when we inquire
into the reason of particular Effects. For we should make our selves ridiculous
if, for instance, we said that 'twas God who dryes the ways, or freezes the
Water in Rivers. We must say that the Air dryes the Earth, because it agitates
and sucks up the Water which is tempered with it. And that the Air or subtle
Matter freezes Rivers in Winter; because it does not then communicate motion
enough to the parts of which the Water is composed. In a word, we must if we
can, give the Natural and Particular Cause of the Effects produced. But as the
action of these Causes consist only in the Moving Power which acts them, and
that this Moving Power is nothing else but the Will of God who creates them, or
successively preserves them in different places, we must not say that they have
in themselves a Strength or Power to produce any Effects. And when in Reasoning
we are at last come to a general Effect whose Cause we seek, 'twould be a very
ill way of Philosophizing, to imagine any other besides the general one. And to
feign a Certain Nature, a First Moveable, an Universal Soul, or some such like
Chimera, of which we have no clear and distinct Idea, would be to argue like
the Heathen Philosophers. For instance: When we are ask't whence it comes that
some Bodies are in Motion; or how the Air when agitated communicates its Motion
to the Water; or rather from whence it proceeds that Bodies impell one another:
As Motion and its communication is a general Effect whereupon all others
depend; it is necessary, I don't say to be a good Christian, but to be a
Philosopher, to recur to God who is the Universal Cause; since it is his Will
which is the Moving Power of Bodies, and which also regulates the communication
of their Motions. If he had Willed there should be no new production in the
World, he would not have put the parts of it in Motion: And if he should
hereafter Will the incorruptibility of any of the Beings he has Created, he
would cease to Will certain communications of Motions in respect to these
Beings.

The Third Proof.
All Labor would be useless; 'twould be un necessary to water, and to give
certain preparatory dispositions to Bodies, to fit them for what we desire of
them: For God has no need of preparing the subjects upon which he acts.

ANSWER.

Suarez in the same place.
To which I Reply, That God can absolutely do what he pleases, without finding
any dispositions in the subjects he works upon: But he cannot do it without a
Miracle, or by Natural ways; that is, according to the general Laws of the
communication of the Motions he has established, and according to which he
generally acts. God never multiplies his Wills without Reason, but always acts
by the most simple ways; and therefore he makes use of the meeting of Bodies
in giving them Motion; not as their shock is absolutely necessary to move them,
as our Senses tell us; but because that being the occasion of the communication
of Motion, there needs only a few Natural Laws to produce all the admirable
Effects that we see: For by this means we can reduce all the Laws of the
communication of Motion to one only, which is, That Bodies which shock each
other, being looked upon but as one in the moment of their contact, or shock,
the Moving Power is at their separation, divided between them according to the
proportion of their magnitude. But as concuring Bodies are encompassed with an
infinite number of other Bodies, which act upon them by virtue and efficacy of
this Law; how constant and uniform soever it may be, it produces an infinite
number of different communications, because it acts upon infinite Bodies, which
all relate to one another.

See the last Chap. of the Search after Truth.
It is necessary to water a Plant to make it grow; because according to the Laws
of the communication of Motions, there is scarce any other but watery
Particles, which by their Motion and Figure, can insinuate themselves, and
enter the Fibers of the Plants; and by various uniting themselves together,
take the Figure necessary for their Nourishment. The subtle matter which the
Sun continually diffuses, may by agitating the Water draw it up into the
Plants; but it has not Motion enough to raise gross Particles of Earth. However
the Earth, and even the Air, are necessary to the growth of Plants; The Earth
to preserve the Water at their Root; and the Air to excite a moderate
fermentation in the same Water, But the action of the Sun, Air, and Water,
consist only in the Motion of their parts; and to speak properly, none but God
can act. For as I have just said, there is only he, who by the efficacy of his
Will, and infinite extent of his Knowledge, can produce and regulate the
infinite communications or Motions which are made every moment, and according
to an infinite exact and regular proportion.

The Fourth Proof.
Can God oppose or resist himself? Bodies meet, shock, and resist one another;
therefore God acts not in them, except by his concurrence: For if he only
produced and preserved Motion in Bodies, he would divert them before their
meeting, since he knows very well that they are impenetrable. Why should Bodies
be impelled to be thrown back again; or made to advance that they may recoil?
Or wherefore are useless Motions produced and preserved? Is it not extravagant
to say, that God fights against himself, and destroys his own works, when a
Bull opposes a Lion, or a Wolf devours a Sheep, and a Sheep eats the Grass
which he gave growth to? Therefore there are Second Causes.

ANSWER.

Then Second Causes do every thing, and God does nothing at all: For God cannot
act against himself; and to concur is to act. Concurring to contrary actions,
is giving contrary concourses, and consequently a performing contrary actions.
To concur with the action of the Creatures which resist one another, is to act
against himself; and to concur to useless Motions is to act unusefully: Now God
does nothing in vain; he performs no actions contrary to one another: Therefore
he concurs not in the action of the Creatures, who often destroy one another,
and make useless actions and motions. Hither it is that this Proof of Second
Causes conducts us; but let us examine what Reason teaches us about it.

God does all in every thing, and nothing resists him. He performs all things;
since it is by his Wills that all Motions are produced and regulated; and
nothing resists him, because whatever he wills is effected. And thus it ought
to be conceived. He having resolved to produce by the most simple ways, as the
most conformable to order, this infinite variety of Creatures that we admire,
he determined Bodies to move in a right line, because this line is the most
simple. But Bodies being impenetrable, and their Motions inclining to opposite
lines, or such as intersect, they must necessarily meet one another, and
consequently cease to move in the same manner. God foresaw this; and
nevertheless positively willed the meeting or opposition of Bodies; not because
he was pleased to fight against himself, but because he designed to make use of
this shocking of Bodies, as an occasion to establish the general Law of the
communication of Motions, by which he foresaw he might produce an infinite
number of admirable Effects. For I am persuaded that these two Natural Laws
which are the most simple of all: Viz. That all Motion inclines to put it self
in a right Line: And That in the time of concurrence, Motions are communicated
in proportion to the magnitude of the Bodies which are shockt; are sufficient
to produce the World as we see it at this day; I mean, the Heavens, the Stars,
the Planets, Comets, Earth and Water, Air and Fire. In a word, the Elements,
and all inorganized or inanimate Bodies: For organized Bodies depend upon many
other Natural Laws which are wholly unknown to us. It may be also that animate
Bodies are not formed like others, by a certain number of Natural Laws: For
it is very probable, they were all formed at the Creation of the World; and that
by time they only received that growth which was necessary to make them visible
to our eyes. Let it be how it will, it is certain they receive this growth from
the general Laws of Nature, according to which all other Bodies are formed;
upon which account their growth is not always regular.

I say then, that God by the first Natural Law, positively willed, and
consequently produced the Collision of Bodies; and that he afterward made use
of it as an occasion to establish the second Natural Law, which regulates the
communication of Motions; and that thus the actual shock is a Natural or
Occasional Cause of the actual communication of Motions.

If we consider this well, it will be visibly discovered that nothing could be
better ordered. But supposing God had not ordained it thus; and that he had
diverted Bodies when ready to hit each other, as if there were a void to
receive them. First, Bodies would not then have been subject to this continual
vicissitude, which causes the Beauty of the Universe; for the generation of
certain Bodies, is only produced by the corruption of some others: and it is the
contrariety of their Motions which produces their variety. Nor Secondly, Would
God then act by the most simple ways: For that Bodies ready to shock each
other, might continue their Motion without striking, it would be necessary that
they should variously describe an infinite number of Curve-Lines; and
consequently we must admit different Wills in God to determine their Motions.
Lastly, If there was no uniformity in the action of Natural Bodies, and if
their Motion was not performed in a right Line, there would be no certain
Principle for us to Reason upon in Natural Philosophy, nor to guide us in many
Actions of our Lives.

It Is no disorder for Lions to eat Wolves; Wolves, Sheep; and Sheep, the Grass
which God has taken so much care of, that he has given it all things necessary
for its own preservation, and also a Seed to preserve its Kind. Yet this proves
Second Causes no more, than the Plurality of Causes, or contrary Principles of
Good and Evil, which the Manichees invented to give a Reason for these Effects.
But it is a certain Mark of the Wisdom, Greatness, and Magnificence of God; for
he does nothing unbecoming an Infinite Wisdom, and performs all things with
such a Munificence as sufficiently shows his Power and Greatness. Whatever is
destroyed is again repaired by the same Law which destroyed it; so great is the
Wisdom, Power, and Fruitfulness of this Law. God does not prevent the
destruction of Beings by a New Will; not only because the first is sufficient
to repair them, but chiefly because his Wills are much more valuable than the
reparation of these Beings. They are of much more value than all they produce.
And if God made this visible World, although in it self unworthy of the action
whereby it was produced, 'twas for ends unknown to Philosophers, and to Honor
himself in JESUS CHRIST, with such an Honor as the Creatures are incapable of
giving him.

When a House by its fall crushes a good Man to death, a greater Evil happens
than when one Beast devours another; or when one Body is forced to give way by
the shock it receives at the meeting of another: But God multiplies not his
Wills to redress such disorders, real or apparent, as are necessary
consequences of Natural Laws: He ought neither to correct nor change these
Laws, although they should sometimes produce Monsters. He must not confound the
order and simplicity of his ways. He ought to neglect inconsiderable things: I
mean, he should not have particular Wills to produce Effects of no value, or
unworthy the action of him who produces them. God works Miracles only when the
Order he always follows requires it; and this Order wills that he should act by
the most simple ways; and that there should be no exceptions in his Wills, but
when it is absolutely necessary to his designs; or on certain occasions which
are wholly unknown to us. For although we are all united to the Order or Wisdom
of God, we know not all the Rules of it. We see in it what we ought to do; but
comprehend not by it what God ought to Will, nor must we be too solicitous
about it.

We have a great instance of what I have been saying, in the damnation of an
infinite number of persons that God has permitted to perish in times of
Ignorance. God is infinitely good; loves all his works; would have all Men be
saved, and come to this knowledge of the Truth; for he has Created them to
enjoy him: And yet the greatest number are damned. They live and dye in
blindness, and will continue in it to all Eternity. And does not this proceed
from Gods acting by the most simple ways, and from his following Order? We
have shown that according to Order, God ought not by preingaging Pleasures to
have prevented the Will of the First Man; although his Fall caused the disorder
of Nature. See the Explanation of the fourth Chapter of the Second Part: Of
Method.
It was requisite that all Men should descend from one; not only because this
is the most simple way, but for Reasons too Theological and abstracted to be
here explained. See also the First Explanation of the Fifth Chapter.
In fine, We ought to believe that this is conformable to the Order which God
follows, and the Wisdom he always consults in the intention and execution of
his designs. The Sin of the first Man has produced an infinite number of Evils,
it is true; but certainly Order required that God should permit it, and that he
should place Man in an estate wherein he was capable of sinning.

God is willing to repair his work; but rarely gives those victorious Graces
which conquers the Malice of the greatest Sinners. He often gives Graces that
are useless to the Conversion of those who receive them; although in respect to
them he foresees their unserviceableness, he sometimes bestows them in great
number, which nevertheless produces but little Effect. Why all these Ambages
and indirect ways? Would it not have been sufficient for him to have willed
the Conversion of a Sinner, to have effected it after an efficacious and
invincible manner? Is it not plain that it is because he acts by the most simple
ways, and that Order requires it, although we do not always see it. For God
can only act according to Order and Wisdom, although his Order and Wisdom are
often impenetrable abysses to the Mind of Man. There are certain very simple
Laws in the Order of Grace; consonant to which God commonly acts: For this
Order has its Rules as well as that of Narure, although we know them not; as we
see in the Communication of Motions. Let us only follow the Counsel given us in
the Holy Gospel, by him who perfectly knew the Laws of Grace.

I say this to quiet the unjust Complaints of Sinners, who despise the Advice
given them by JESUS CHRIST, and who charge God with their Malice and Disorders.
They would have him to perform Miracles in their Favor; and dispense with the
common Laws of Grace. They live in Pleasure, seek after Honor, and continually
renew those Wounds which sensible Objects have made in their Brain, and often
add more to them; and yet would have God cure them by a Miracle: Like to
wounded Men, who in the excess of their Pain rend their Clothes, tear up their
Wounds, and then at the sight of approaching Death, complain of the Cruelty of
their Surgeons. They would have God save them; because say they, he is Good,
Wise and Powerful; and need but Will it, and we are Happy. He ought not surely
to have made us to Damn us. But they ought to know that God has done all that
could be done by Order and Wisdom, which he consults. We should not believe
that he leaves us, since he has given us his own Son to be our Mediator and
Sacrifice. Yes, God would have us all saved: But by such ways as we ought
carefully to study, and exactly to follow. He consults not our Passions in the
execution of these designs; but only his Wisdom, and follows Order: And Order
requires us to imitate JESUS CHRIST, and to follow his Counsel, that we may be
sanctified and saved. But if God has not predestined all Men to be
conformable to the Image of his Son, who is the Model and Exemplar; it is
because in this he acts by the most simple ways in relation to his designs,
which tend all to his Glory: And God is an Universal Cause, and ought not to
act like Particular Causes, which have particular wills for whatever they do.
It Is also because his Wisdom, which in this respect is an Abyss to our
Understandings, wills it should be so. In fine, It Is because this conduct is
more worthy of God, than any other which would be more favorable to
Reprobates: For even the Order which condemns them is as worthy of our
Adorations, as that whereby the Elect are sanctified and saved. And nothing but
our Ignorance of Order, and our Self-love, could make us condemn such a Conduct
as Angels and Saints will eternally admire. But let us return to the Proofs of
the Efficacy of Second Causes.

The Fifth Proof.
If Bodies had not a certain Nature or Power to act, and if God did all things,
there would be nothing but what was Supernatural in the most Common Effects.
The distinction of Natural and Supernatural, which is so well received in the
World, and established by the universal consent of all the Learned, would be
Chimerical and Extravagant.

ANSWER

I Answer, That this distinction is as ridiculous in the Mouth of Aristotle;
for the Nature that this Philosopher has established is a pure Chimera. I say,
that this distinction is not clear in the mouth of the Vulgar, who judge of
things by the impression they make upon their Senses: For they know not
precisely what they mean, when they say, that Fire burns by its own Nature. I
confess this distinction may pass from the Mouth of Divines; if by Natural
Effects they mean those which are consequences of General Laws that God has
established for the general production and preservation of all things; and that
Supernatural Effects are such as depend not upon these Laws. In this sense this
distinction is true. But the Philosophy of Aristotle, joined to the impression
of the Senses, I think makes it dangerous; because this distinction may turn
those from God, who have too much respect for the Opinions of this wretched
Philosopher; or such as consult their Senses instead of entering within
themselves, to seek the Truth there. So that we ought not to make use of this
distinction without explaining it. St. Austin having used the word Fortune, L.
1. de Retract. 1 Cor. 10.19.
retracted it, although there were few persons who could be deceived by it. St.
Paul speaking of Meats offered to Idols, tells us, That Idols are Nothing. If
the Nature of the Heathen Philosophy is a Chimera, a Nothing, Men ought to be
advertized of it; for there are many Men who will be deceived by it. And more
than we suppose, who inconsiderately attribute the Works of God to it; who are
taken up with this Idol, or Fiction of Man's Mind, and render it Honors, which
are only due to the Divinity. They are willing that God should be the Author of
Miracles, and certain extraordinary Effects, which in one sense are unworthy of
his Greatness and Wisdom; and they refer to the Power of their imaginary
Nature, those constant and regulated Effects, that Wise Men only know how to
admire. They likewise pretend that this wonderful disposition, which all living
Bodies have to preserve themselves, and beget their like, is a production of
Nature: For according to these Philosophers, it is the Sun and Moon which begets
a Man.

We may further distinguish Supernatural from Natural Order, in many respects.
For we may say, that the Supernatural refers to future good; that it is
established in consideration of the Merits of JESUS CHRIST; that it is the
first and chief of all Gods designs; and many other things sufficient to
preserve a distinction, which they are vainly apprehensive should fall to the
ground.

The Sixth Proof.
The Chief Proof that Philosophers bring to prove the Efficacy of Second
Causes, is deducted from the Will and Liberty of Man. Man wills, and determines
of himself, and to will and determine is to act. It is certain, it is Man who
commits sin; God is no more the Author of it, than he is of Concupiscence and
Error. Therefore Man acts.

ANSWER.

In many places of the Search after Truth I have sufficiently explained what
the Will and Liberty of Man is, and principally in the First Chapter of the
First Book, and in the First Explanation upon that Chapter: It is useless to
repeat it here. I confess that Man wills and determines of himself; because God
makes him will, and continually inclines him toward Good, and gives him all
the Ideas and Sensations which determine him. I also acknowledge, that Man of
himself commits sin: But I deny, that in that he does any thing; for Sin,
Error, and even Concupiscence are nothing. Which Point I have sufficiently
cleared in the First Explanation.

Man wills, but his Determinations are weak in themselves, they produce
nothing, nor hinder God from doing all Things; for it is even he who causes our
Wills in us, by the impression he gives us toward God: Man of himself is only
capable of Error and Sin, which are nothing.

There is a great deal of difference between our Minds and the Bodies which are
about us: Our Mind in one sense wills, Nemo habet de suo nisi mendacium and
peccatum. Conc. Araus. 2. Can. 22.
acts, and determines; I grant it. Of which we are convinced by the inward
sensation we have of our selves. To deny our Liberty, would be to take from us
future rewards and punishments; for without Liberty there is neither good nor
bad Actions: So that then Religion would be an Illusion and a Fancy. But that
Bodies have any power to Act, is what we do not clearly see, but appears
incomprehensible; and is also what we deny when we reject Second Causes.

Even the Mind does not act so much as we imagine. I know that I Will, and Will
freely; I have no reason to doubt of it, which is stronger than that inward
sensation I have of my self. I likewise don't deny this. But I deny that my
Will is the True Cause of the Motion of my Arm, the Ideas of my Mind, and other
Things which attend my Determinations; for I see no relation between Things
which differ so much: On the contrary, I clearly discover that there can be no
relation between the Will I have to move my Arm, According to the sense
discussed in the Chapter upon which this Explanation is made.
and between the Agitation of some little Bodies of which I neither know the
Motion nor Figure; which make choice of certain Nervous passages amongst a
Million of others I know not, to cause that Motion in me which I wish, by an
infinite Number of Motions I wish not. I deny that my Will produces my Ideas in
me; for I do not so much as see how it could produce them: For since my Will
cannot Act or Will without knowing, it supposes my Ideas, but does not make
them. Nay, I do not so much as precisely know what an Idea is. I cannot tell
whether they are produced out of nothing, or become nothing again as soon as we
cease to behold them. I speak according to the Opinion of some persons.

I produce, they will tell me, my Ideas by the Faculty God has given me of
Thinking. And move my Arm because of the Union God has placed between my Mind
and Body. But Faculty and Union are Logical Terms; rambling and indeterminate
Words. There is no Being whatever, nor Manner of Being, which is either a
Faculty or an Union: Therefore these Terms must be explained. If they will say,
That the Union of my Mind with my Body consists in Gods Willing, that when I
wish my Arm should be moved, the Animal Spirits are then dispersed into the
Muscles of it, to move it according to my desire. I clearly understand this
Explanation, and receive it: But it is the same Thing which I maintain. For if
my Will determine that of God, it is evident my Arm will be moved, not by my
Will which is impotent in it self, but by that of Gods which can never fail of
its effect.

I always mean a true and efficacious power.
But if it be said, That the Union of my Mind with my Body consists in Gods
having given me the power to move my Arm, as he has given my Body the power of
feeling pleasure and pain, that I might be assiduous about my Body, and
interest my self in its preservation; Certainly by this we should suppose the
Matter in dispute, and make a Circle on it. We have no clear Idea of this power
that the Soul has over the Body, nor of that the Body has over the Soul: Nor
very well know what we say when we positively affirm it. Prejudice first gave
rise to this Opinion; we believed it from Infants, as soon as we were capable
of sensation: But the Understanding, Reason, and Reflection have no share in
it, as sufficiently appears by what I have said in the Search after Truth.

But they will say, I know by the inward sensation of my Action that I truly
have this power: So that I shall not be deceived in believing it. To which I
Answer, When we move our Arm, we have an inward sensation of the Actual Will
whereby we move it, and are not mistaken when we believe we have this Will. And
further, We have an inward sensation of a certain Effort which accompanies this
Will; and we ought likewise to believe, that we make this Effort. In short, I
mean that we have an inward sensation that the Arm is moved in the very instant
of the Effort: Which supposed, I consent to what is said, That the Motion of
the Arm is performed in the same instant we feel this Endeavor; or that we
have a practical Will to move it. It appears evident to me, that the mind does
not so much as know by inward sensation, or Conscience, the Motion of the Arm
which it animates. It knows by Conscience only what it feels or thinks. We
know the sense we have of the Motion of our Arm by inward Sensation or
Conscience: But Conscience does not inform us of the Motion of our Arm, or the
pain we suffer in it, any more than the Colors we see upon Objects.: Or if
this will not be granted, I say that inward sensation is not infallible; for
Error is often found in Complex Sensation, as has been showed in the First
Book of the Search after Truth.
But I deny that this Effort, which is only a Modification or Sensation of the
Soul, given us to make us apprehend our Weakness, and which affords us but an
obscure and weak discovery of our power, should be capable of moving or
determining the Animal Spirits. I deny that there is any relation between our
Thoughts and the Motions of Matter; or that the Soul has the least knowledge of
the Animal Spirits it makes use of to move the Body it Animates. In fine,
although the Soul should exactly know the Animal Spirits, and should be capable
of Moving them, or determining their Motion; I deny that (with all this
advantage) it could be capable of making choice of those Nervous Canals of
which she is wholly ignorant, so as to impel the Spirits into them, that
thereby the Body might be moved with that quickness, exactness, and strength,
as we observe in those who are least acquainted with the Structure of their
Bodies.

For even supposing our Wills were truly the Moving power of Bodies, (although
it appears incomprehensible) how could we conceive that the Soul could move the
Body? The Arm, (for Instance) is only moved by means of the dilatation or
contraction of some of the Muscles which compose it. And that the Motion which
the Soul impresses on the Spirits that are in the Brain, may be communicated to
those in the Nerves, and these to others which are in the Muscles of the Arms,
it is requisite that the Determinations of the Soul should be multiplied or
changed in proportion to the almost infinite Occurrences, or Shocks, which
would be made by the little Bodies which constitute the Spirits. But this
cannot be conceived without admitting in the Soul an infinite number of Wills
at the least Motion of the Body; since to move it, an infinite number of
communications of Motions are necessary: For the Soul being but a particular
Cause, and which cannot exactly know either the greatness, or number, of an
infinite Variety of little Bodies which mutually strike each other when the
Spirits are dispersed into the Muscles, it could neither establish a general
Law for the communication of the Motions of these Spirits, nor exactly follow
it if it were established. So that it is plain, the Soul could not move its
Arm, although it had the power of determining the Motion of the Animal Spirits.
These Things are too clear for us to stand any longer upon them.

It is the same thing with our Faculty of Thinking. By inward sensation we know
that we would think on something and make some effort to that end; and that in
the instant of our Desire and Endeavor the Idea of this Thing presents it self
to the Mind. But we do not discover by inward sensation, that our Will or
Endeavor produces our Idea; nor does Reason tell us it can do it. It is
through Prejudice that we are persuaded that our Desires cause our Ideas;
whilst we prove an hundred times a day, that the latter follows or attends the
former. As God and his Operations have nothing sensible in them, and as we do
not feel any thing else but our Desires which precede the presence of our
Ideas; we think there can be no other Cause of them. But if we observe the
Matter more closely, we shall discover we have no power in our selves to
produce them: For neither Reason, nor the inward sensation we have of our
selves give us any information of it.

I do not think I am obliged to relate all the other Proofs that are made use
of by these Defenders of the Efficacy of Second Causes; because they appear so
weak, that it might be imagined I only intended to render them ridiculous, and
if I should answer them seriously I should become ridiculous my self. An Author
(for Instance) asserts very seriously, in favor of his Opinion, That Created
Beings are True, Material, Formal, Final Causes; and why then should they not
also be Efficient or Efficacious Causes? I believe I should not very well
satisfy the World, if in Answer to the Demand of this Author, I should stay to
explain so gross an Equivocation; and show the difference between an
Efficacious Cause, and that which some Philosophers have been pleased to call a
Material one. So that I shall omit some of the like Proofs, to come to those
they have taken from the Holy Scripture.

The Seventh Proof.
Those who maintain the Efficacy of Second Causes, commonly bring the following
passages to support their Opinion: Let the Earth bring forth Grass: Genesis 1.
Let the Waters bring forth the moving Creatures that has life, and Fowl that
may fly, etc. Therefore the Earth and the Water have from the Word of God,
received Power to produce Plants and Animals. After which God commands the
Fowls and the Fish to multiply: Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the Waters
in the Seas, and let Fowl multiply in the Earth. Therefore he has given them
Power to beget their like.

JESUS CHRIST, in the Fourth Chapter of St. Mark, says, That the Seed which
falls on good ground, shall bring forth an hundred fold; and that the Earth
brings forth fruits of her self; first the blade, then the ear, and
afterward the full corn. Lastly, it is also written in the Book of Wisdom,
That the Fire had as it were forgotten the Power it had of burning, in favor
of the People of God. It Is therefore confirmed by the Old and New Testament,
that Second Causes have a Power to act.

ANSWER.

I Answer, That in the Holy Scripture there is also many passages which
attribute to God the pretended Efficacy of Second Causes: of which these are
some: Ego sum Dominus faciens OMNIA, extendens Coelos SOLVS, stabiliens terram,
and NVLLVS mecum, Isa. 44.24. Manus tuae fecerunt me, and plasmaverunt me TOTVM
in circuitu, Job 10.8. Nescio qualiter in utero meo apparuistis singulorum
membra, NON EGO IPSA COMPEGI, sed enim Mundi Creator qui hominis formavit
nativitatem, etc. Mac. l. 2. c. 7.22, 23. Cum ipse DEVS dat omnibus vitam,
inspirationem, and omnia, Acts 17.25. Producens foenum jumentis and herbam
servituti hominum, ut educas panem de terra, Psalm. 103. and 48. There is an
infinite number of the like passages, but these may suffice.

When an Author seems to contradict himself, and Natural Equity, or some
stronger Reason obliges us to reconcile him to himself: It seems to me that we
have an infallible Rule to discover his true Opinion; since we need but observe
when he speaks according to his own Understanding, and when in compliance with
the common Opinion. When a Man speaks like the rest of the World, it is not
always a certain sign he is of their Opinion: But when he speaks positively
contrary to what we are accustomed to say, although he should say it but once,
we have a great deal of Reason to believe it is what he thinks; provided we know
he speaks seriously, and having first well considered it.

For instance: An Author speaking of the Properties of Animals, if he should in
an hundred places say, that Beasts feel, that Dogs know their Master, love and
fear him; and should only in two or three places say, Beasts are insensible,
and Dogs incapable of knowing, loving, or fearing any thing. How shall we
reconcile this Author, who appears to contradict himself? Must we not collect
all the passages for and against it, and judge of his Opinion by the greatest
number? If so, I don't believe there is any Man to whom, for example, we may
attribute this Opinion, that Animals have no Souls: For the Cartesians
themselves often say, that a Dog feels when he is beaten; and it is very rarely
that they deny him feeling. And although I have incountered an infinite number
of prejudices in this Book, we may draw many passages from thence; whereby if
this Rule I have explained be received, we may prove that I have established
them all; and even that I hold the Opinion of the Efficacy of Second Causes,
which I have just now Refuted: Or perhaps it might be concluded, That The
Search after Truth, is a Book full of visible and gross Contradictions; as some
Persons do, who it may be have not equity or penetration enough to make them
fit Judges of the Works of others.

The Holy Scripture, the Fathers, and most good Men, oftener speak of sensible
Goods, Riches, and Honors, according to the common Opinion, than according to
the true Ideas they have of them. JESUS CHRIST introduces Abraham speaking to
the wicked Rich Man; Fili recepisti BONA in vita tua; Thou have received thy
good things in thy life time; that is, Riches, Honors. What we through
prejudice call good, our good, that is our Gold or our Silver, is in an hundred
places in the Scripture, called our Maintenance, or our Substance, and even our
Honesty, or that which honors us, Pawpertas and honestas a Deo sunt. But must
this manner of speaking, used by the Holy Scripture, Eccl. 11.14.
and most Pious Persons, make us think they contradict themselves; or that they
look upon Riches and Honors as real goods, and that therefore we ought to love
and seek after them? No, without doubt; because these ways of speaking,
complying with prejudices, signify nothing: And we see in other places, JESUS
CHRIST has compared Riches to Thorns; has told us we must renounce them,
because they are deceitful; and that whatsoever is great and alluring in this
World, is an abomination before God. We must not therefore collect the passages
of Scripture, or of the Fathers, to judge of their Opinion by the greatest
number of them, except we would continually attribute the most unreasonable
prejudices to them.

This once supposed, Matthew. 6.28, 29, 30.
we see that the Holy Scripture positively says, That it is God who has Created
every thing, even the grass of the field: That it is he who clothes the Lillies
with such ornaments, as our SAVIOVR prefers before the Glory of Solomon. There
is not only two or three, but an infinite number of passages which ascribe to
God the pretended Efficacy of Second Causes, and which destroy the Nature of
the Peripatetics.

Besides, we are carried by a kind of Natural Prejudice, not to think on God in
common Effects, and to attribute Power and Efficacy to Natural Causes; and
seldom any thing but Miracles induce us to think on him as the Author of them:
And the sensible impression ingages us in favor of Second Causes. Philosophers
hold this Opinion; because say they, the Senses convince us of it; and this is
their strongest Proof. Lastly, This Opinion is received by all those who follow
the Judgments of the Senses. Our common Language is formed from this prejudice;
and we as generally say, that Fire has a power to burn, as we call Gold and
Silver our good. Therefore the passages drawn from the Holy Scriptures, or the
Fathers, for the Efficacy of Second Causes, prove no more than those that an
Ambitious or Covetous Man shall choose to justify his own Conduct. But it is
quite different with those passages we may bring to prove that God does all
things. For this Opinion being contrary to Prejudice, these passages must be
understood in their utmost rigor; for the same Reason that we ought to believe
that it is the Sentiments of the Cartesians, that Beasts are insensible;
although they have said it but two or three times, and continually say to the
contrary in all familiar Discourses, affirming, they feel, see, and understand.

In the First Chapter of Genesis, God commands the Earth to produce Plants and
Animals; and likewise the Waters to bring forth Fish. And consequently says
the Peripatetics, Water and Earth have received a Power capable of producing
these Effects.

I don't see the certainty of this Conclusion: And although we were even
obliged to explain this Chapter by it self, without having any recourse to
other passages of Scripture, there would be no necessity to receive this
consequence. This way of explaining the Creation is accommodated to our
conception of things; therefore it is not necessary to take it literally; nor
ought we to make use of it to maintain Prejudices. As Animals and Plants are
upon the Earth, Fowls live in the Air, and Fish in the Water; so God to make us
apprehend it is by his Order they are in these places, has produced them there.
It Is from the Earth that he formed Animals and Plants; not that the Earth was
capable of generating them, or that God to that end gave it a Power or Virtue
which it still keeps; (for we all agree, that the Earth does not produce Horses
or Oxen) but because from the Earth the Bodies of these Animals, were formed;
as is declared in the following Chapter: Formatis igitur Dominus Deus de humo
cunctis animantibus Terrae, Ver. 19.
and universis volatilibus Coeli. Animals were formed out of the Earth,
formatis de humo, and not produced by the Earth. Also after Moses has related
how Beasts and Fish were produced by virtue of the Command which God gave the
Earth and Water to produce them; he adds, that 'twas God himself who made them,
that we might not attribute their production to the Earth and Water. CREAVIT
quae DEVS cete grandia; and omnem animam viventem atque notabilem quam
PRODVXERVNT aquae in species suas, and omne volatile secundum genus suum. And a
little lower, after having spoken of the formation of Animals, he adds; Et
FECIT DEVS bestias terrae juxta species suas and jumenta, and omne reptile
terrae in genere suo.

We may observe by the by, that where the Vulgar reads it, Producant aquae
reptile animae viventis and volatile super terram; the Hebrew has it, Volatile
VOLITET: For as it clearly appears by the passage I related from the Second
Chapter, this word omitted shows that Fowls were not produced from the Water;
and that the design of Moses is not here to prove that the Waters had received
a true Power to bring forth Fish and Fowl, but only to denote the place
designed for each by the Order of God, whether to live or be produced in: And
volatile VOLITET super terram: For commonly when we say that the Earth produces
Trees and Plants, we only design to show, that it supplied them with the Water
and Salt which is necessary for their Germination and Growth. But I will stay
no longer to explain the other passages of Scripture, which, literally taken,
favor Second Causes; for we are not obliged: Besides 'twould be very dangerous
to understand such expressions literally as are maintained upon common
Opinions, agreeably to which the Language is formed; the Vulgar speaking every
thing according to the impression of the Senses, and prejudices of Infancy.

The same Reason which obliges us to take such passages of the Scripture in the
Letter, as are directly opposite to Prejudices, still gives us just cause to
believe, that the Fathers never designed either to maintain the Efficacy of
Second Causes, or the Nature of Aristotle: For although they often spoke after
such a manner as favored Prejudices and the Judgments of the Senses, Omnia
quippe portenta contra Naturam dicimus esse, sed non sunt quomodo enim est
contra Naturam quod Dei fit voluntate: Cum volantes tanti utique conditorio
conditae rei cujusque Natura sit? Portentum ergo fit non contra Naturam sed
contra quam est nota Natura. St. Aug. de Civitate Dei, l. 21. c. 8.
they sometimes so explained themselves as sufficiently discovered the
disposition of their Mind and Heart. St. Austin, for instance, believed the
Will of God to be the Power or Nature of every thing; as he declares when he
speaks thus; We are wont to say, that Prodigies are against Nature; but it is
not true: For the Will of the Creator being the Nature of all Creatures, how
can what is performed by the Will of God be contrary to Nature? Miracles or
Prodigies therefore are not against Nature, but only against what we know of
Nature.

It Is true St. Austin speaks in many places according to Prejudices: But I
affirm that proves nothing, since we ought to explain literally only such
passages as are opposite to Prejudices; for the Reasons I have already given.

If St. Austin in all his Works had never said any thing against the Efficacy
of Second Causes, but had always favored this Opinion, we might perhaps make
use of his Authority to establish it. Yet if it does not appear that he ever
seriously examined this Question, we should always have had Reason to think,
that his Judgment was not determined upon this Subject; and that 'twas not
impossible but he might be drawn by the impression of his Senses, without
Reflection, to have believed a thing which appeared undoubted, until it was
carefully examined.

It is certain, for instance, that St. Austin always spoke of Beasts as if
they had a Soul; I don't say a Corporeal one; for that Holy Father too well
knew the distinction between the Soul and Body, to believe there were Corporeal
Souls. I say, a Spiritual Soul, for Matter is incapable of Sensation: Yet I
believe it more reasonable to make use of his Authority to prove, that Beasts
have no Souls; than to prove they have any: For from the Principles he has
carefully examined, and strongly established, it manifestly follows they have
none; Some of St. Austins Principles are these; That what has not sinned can
never suffer evil. Now according to him, Pain is the greatest evil, and Beasts
suffer it. That the most noble cannot have the least noble for its end. But
with him the Soul of Beasts is Spiritual, and more noble than the Body; and yet
has no other end than the Body. That what is Spiritual is Immortal; and the
Soul of Beasts that is Spiritual is subject to Death. There are many such like
Principles in the Works of St. Austin; from whence it may be concluded, that
Beasts have no such Spiritual Soul as he admits in them. See c. 22, 23. de
Anima and ejus origin.
as is shown by Ambrose Victor in his Sixth Volume of Christian Philosophy. But
the Sentiment that Beasts have a Soul, or feel Pain when they are beaten, being
agreeable to Prejudices, for there is no Child who does not believe it, we have
always reason to think that St. Austin speaks upon this matter, according to
the general Opinion, and never seriously examined the Question; and that if he
had but begun to doubt and make any reflection upon it, he would not have said
a thing which is so contrary to his Principles.

Thus although the Fathers should always have favored the Efficacy of Second
Causes, perhaps we should not have been obliged to have had any regard to their
Opinion, if it had appeared that they had not carefully examined the matter:
And that what they should have said, had been only a Consequence of the
Language which is formed and established upon Prejudice. But it is certainly the
contrary: For the Fathers, the most Pious Persons, and those who have been best
instructed in Religion, have commonly snown by some places of their Works, what
was the disposition of these Mind and Heart, in respect to this matter.

The most Learned, and also the greatest number of Divines, seeing on one side
that the Holy Scripture was contrary to the Efficacy of Second Causes; and on
the other, that the impression of the Causes; public Laws, and chiefly the
Philosophy of Aristotle established it: For Aristotle thought that God did not
concern himself in Sublunary Affairs, because it was unworthy his grandeur: And
that Nature which he supposed in all Bodies was sufficient to produce what
happened here below. The Divines I say, have found this Medium to reconcile
Faith with the Heathen Philosophy, and Reason with the Senses; that Second
Causes do nothing, except God concurs with them. But because this immediate
concourse, whereby God acts with Second Causes, includes great difficulties,
some Philosophers have rejected it; pretending that in order to their acting,
'twas enough if God preserved them with the same, virtue he at first created
them. And because this Opinion is absolutely conformable to Prejudice, and
because the operation of God in Second Causes is not sensible, it is therefore
commonly received by the Vulgar, and by those who apply themselves more to the
Physics of the Ancients, than to Divinity and the Meditation of the Truth. The
generality of the World believe that God at first Created all things, and gave
them all the necessary qualities or faculties for their preservation: That he
has, for instance, given the first Motions to Matter, and afterward left it to
it self, to produce by the Communication of its Motions this variety of
admirable forms. We commonly suppose that Bodies can move one another, and even
attribute this Opinion to Des Carts, although he expressly speaks against it in
the 36th and 37th Articles of the Second Part of his Philosophical Principles.
Though Man cannot hinder himself from acknowledging that the Creatures depend
upon God, yet he lessens this dependence as much as possible; either through a
secret aversion to God, or a wretched stupidity and insensibility in respect to
his operation. But as this Sentiment is chiefly received by those who have not
much studied Religion, and who often rather follow their Senses, and the
Authority of Aristotle, than their Reason, and that of the Holy Scriptures; we
have not so much reason to fear its establishment in the Minds of those who
have any love for Truth and Religion: For a little Application in the
Examination of this Opinion will easily discover its falsity. But that Notion
of the immediate concourse of God to each action of Second Causes, seems to
agree with those passages of Scripture which often attribute the same effect
both to God and the Creatures.

We must consider then, that there are places in Scripture where God is only
said to act; Ego sum Dominus, says Isaiah, faciens OMNIA extendens Coelos
SOLVS stabiliens terram, chap. 44.24.
and NVLLVS mecum. A Mother animated with the Spirit of God, says to her
Children, that it was not she who formed them. Nescio qualiter in utero meo
aparuistis, singulorum membra NON EGO IPSA COMPEGI; Mac. 7.22, 23.
sed Mundi Creator, etc. She does not say with Aristotle and the Peripatetic
Schools, that 'twas she and the Sun who gave them birth, but the Creator of the
Universe. Now this Opinion, that it is God only who works and forms Children in
the Womb, is neither conformable to Prejudices, or the common Notions.
Therefore according to the Principle I have before established, these passages
must be explained literally. But on the contrary, the Opinion of the Efficacy
of Second Causes being conformable to the common Notion, and impression of the
Senses, Sol and homo generant hominem. Arist. Phys. ausc. l. 2. c. 2. See St.
Th. upon this Text.
although we should find such passages as expressly tell us, that Second Causes
act of themselves alone, they would be of no force when compared with these.
Concourse therefore is not sufficient to reconcile the different passages of
the Scripture; and all Force, Power and Efficacy must be ascribed to God.

But although the immediate concourse of God with Second Causes, should be
proper to reconcile these different Texts, I know not whether it ought to be
admitted after all: For the Sacred Books were not made for the Divines of these
times; but for the Jews. So that if the Jews were not formerly sufficiently
enlightened, or subtle enough to imagine such a concourse as is admitted in our
School Divinity, and to reconcile a thing that the most able Divines have had
much trouble to explain; it follows, methinks, that the Holy Scripture, which
attributed to God, and to him only, the production and preservation of all
things, would have thrown them into Error; and that the Holy Penmen of these
Books, would have spoke to Men, not only in an unknown but deceitful Language.
For by telling them that God does all things, they would only have intended,
that God gives his concourse to all things; and it is probable, the Jews never
so much as thought of this concourse; those amongst them that were not great
Philosophers, believing that God did all things, and not that he concurred to
all.

But that we may make a more certain Judgment about this Concourse, it would be
very proper, carefully to explain the different Hypotheses of the Schools about
it: For besides the impenetrable obscurities which are common to all Opinions,
that we can explain or maintain only upon rambling and indeterminate terms;
there are upon this matter so great a variety of Opinions, that it would not be
very difficult to discover the cause of them. But I will not engage in a
discussion which will be too tiresom both for my self, and the greatest part of
those who will read this Book. I rather choose on the contrary to endeavor to
show, that my Opinions may in some respect be reconciled to the greatest number
of the School Divines, although I must not dissemble, but confess their
Language appears very equivocal and confused to me. I will explain my self.

I believe, as I have already said elsewhere, that Bodies, for instance, have
no power to move themselves, and that their Moving Power is only the action of
God: Or to avoid a term which signifies nothing distinct, their Moving Power is
only the Will of God, always necessarily efficacious, which successively
preserves them in different places. For I don't believe that God creates
certain Beings, to make them the Moving Power of Bodies: Not only because I
have no Idea of this kind of Being, nor see how they could move Bodies; but
also since these Beings would themselves have need of some others to move them,
and so on ad infinitum. For none but God is truly immovable, and sole Mover
together.

Which being supposed; when a Body strikes and moves another, I may say, that
it acts by the Concourse of God, and that this Concourse is not distinct from
its own action. For a Body moves another which it meets, only by its Action or
Moving Power; which at the bottom is nothing but the Will of God, that
successively preserves this Body in many places: The transferring of a Body not
being its Action or Moving Power, but the effect of its Moving Power. Most
Divines likewise say, That the Action of Second Causes differs not from the
Action whereby God concurs with them. For although they understand it
variously, they suppose that God acts in the Greatures, in the same Action with
the Creatures. And they are it seems obliged to speak thus: For if the
Creatures acted by an Action which God did not produce in them, their Action
considered as such, would, as it appears to me, be independent: Now they
believed, as they ought, that the Creatures depended immediately upon God, not
only as to their Being, but also as to their Operation.

So in respect to Free Causes, I believe that God continually gave the Mind an
impression toward Good in general, and that he also determined this impression
toward particular Goods, by the Ideas or Sensations he has given us; as I have
shown in the First Explanation: And it is the same Thing with what the Divines
believe when they say, That God moves and prevents our Wills. So that the power
which puts our Minds in motion, is the Will of God, which animates and inclines
us toward Good: For God created not Beings to make them the Moving power of
Minds, for the same Reason that he did not create any to make them the Moving
power of Bodies. The Wills of God being Efficacious of themselves, it is enough
for him to Will a Thing to have it done: And it is useless unnecessarily to
multiply Beings. Besides, whatever is real in the determinations of our
Motions, likewise proceeds from the Action of God in us, as is clear from the
First Explanation: Now we neither Act or produce any Thing but by our Wills, I
mean by the impression of the Will of God which is our Moving power. For our
Wills are Efficacious no farther than as they proceed from God; even as Bodies
put in motion, impell not others, but in as much as they have a Moving power
which transfer them, and this Moving power is only the Will of God which
creates or successively preserves them in different places. Then we Act only by
the Concourse of God; and our Action considered? as Efficacious and capable of
producing any Effect differs not from that of God's: And is as most Divines
say, the very same Action: Eadem numero Actio.

Now all the Changes which happen in the World, See Suarez l. 1. de concursu
Dei cum voluntate. c. 1.
have no other Natural Cause, than the Motion of Bodies, and Wills of Spirits.
For First, According to the General Laws of the Communication of Motions, the
invisible Bodies which surround the visible ones, by their diverse Motions
produce all these various Effects, the Cause of which does not appear to us.
Secondly, According to the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, when Bodies
which are about us Act upon ours, they produce in our Souls an infinite variety
of Sensations, Ideas, and Passions. Thirdly, Our Mind produces by its Wills a
great many different Ideas in it self: For it is our Wills which apply and
modifie our Minds as Natural Causes, whose Efficacy nevertheless proceeds from
the Laws which God has Established. Lastly, When our Mind Acts upon our Body,
many Changes are therein produced by virtue of the Laws of its Union with it:
And by the means of our Body it also produces in those about it a great Number
of Changes, by virtue of the Laws of the Communication of Motions. Thus all
Natural Effects have no other Natural or Occasional Cause, than the Motions of
Bodies, and Wills of Spirits; which will easily be granted by any who will use
but a little application; supposing he is not already prepossessed by such as
know not what they say, who instantly imagine Beings which they have no clear
Idea of, and pretend to explain Things they understand not, by what is
absolutely incomprehensible. So that God executing by his Concourse, or rather
by his Efficacious Will, whatever the Motions of Bodies, or Determinations of
Spirits perform as Natural or Occasional Causes; it is plain, God does every
Thing by the same Action of the Creature: Not that Creatures of themselves have
any Efficacious Action, but because the Power of God is in some sort
communicated to them by the Natural Laws which God has Established in their
favor.

This is all that I can say to reconcile my Thoughts with the Opinion of those
Divines who maintain the necessity of immediate Concourse, and that God does
All in all Things by the same Action as that of the Creatures: For as to the
rest of the Divines, I believe their Opinions are indesensible every way; and
chiefly that of Durandus, See. Durand. in 2. Did. 1. Qu. 5. and Did. 37. de
Genesi ad Litteram. l. 5. c. 20.
and some Ancients whom St. Austin refutes; who absolutely denied the necessity
of Concourse, and would have Second Causes do every Thing by a Power which God
had given them at the Creation. For although this Opinion be less perplexed
than that of the other Divines, yet it appears to me so opposite to Scripture,
and conformable to Prejudices, to say no more, that I believe it cannot be
maintained.

I confess that the Schoolmen, In 4. Sent. Did. 1. q. De aliaco. ibid.
who say, the immediate Concourse of God is the same Action as that of the
Creatures, do not absolutely understand it according to my Explanation; And
except Biel and Cardinal D' Ailly, all those I have read, think that the
Efficacy which produces Effects, proceeds from the Second Cause as well as the
First. But as I determined with my self not to say any thing but what I
conceive clearly, and always take that Side which best agrees with Religion; I
believe it will not be taken amiss if I forsake an Opinion which to many
persons appears so much the more intricate, as they endeavor more assiduously
to apprehend it: And since I have established another which agrees perfectly,
not only with Reason, but also with the Holiness of Religion and Christian
Morality. It Is a Truth I have already proved in the Chapter upon which I make
these Reflection; but it will be very proper for me to offer yet something more
fully, to Justify what I have already said upon the present Question.

Reason and Religion convinces us than God would be loved and revered by his
Creatures; Loved as good, and Revered as powerful: Which is a Truth we cannot
doubt of without impiety and folly. To love God as he requires and deserves to
be loved, we must according to the First Command both of the Law and Gospel,
and even of Reason, as I have elsewhere shown, do it with all our strength, or
according to the utmost Capacity we have of Loving. It is not enough to prefer
him to all Things, but we must also love him in all Things: Else is not our
Love so perfect as it ought to be; l. 4. chapter 1.
nor do we give to God all the Love he has impressed upon us, and that only for
himself, since all his Actions center in himself. Likewise to render to God all
the Reverence due to him, it is not enough to adore him as the Sovereign Power,
and fear him more than any of his Creatures: We must also fear and adore him in
all his Creatures, and all our Actions must tend toward him; for Honor and
Glory are due only to him. Which is what God has commanded us in these Words:
Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo and ex tota anima tua, Deuteronomy. 6.
and ex tota fortitudine tua: And in these; Dominum Deum tuum timebis, and illi
soli servies. Thus the Philosophy which teaches us, That the Efficacy of Second
Causes is a Fiction of the Mind; that the Nature of Aristotle, and some other
Philosophers, is a Chimera; that God only is strong and powerful enough, not
only to Act in our Souls, but also to give the least Motion to Matter: This
Philosophy, I say agrees perfectly with Religion, the design of which is to
unite us to God after the strictest manner.

We commonly love such Things only as are capable of doing us some good: This
Philosophy therefore only Authorizes the Love of God, and absolutely condemns
the Love of every Thing else. We ought to fear Nothing but what is able to do
us some Evil: This Philosophy therefore only permits us to fear God, and
positively forbids our fearing any Thing else. So that it Justifies all the
Motions of the Soul which are Just and Reasonable; and condemns all those that
are contrary to Reason and Religion. For this Philosophy will never Justify
the Love of Riches, the Desire of Greatness, nor the Extravagance of
Debauchery; since the Love of the Body appears mad and ridiculous, to the
Principles established by this Philosophy.

It Is an Undoubted Truth, a Natural Opinion, and even a common Notion, that we
ought to love the Cause of our Pleasure, and love it in proportion to the
Felicity it does or can make us enjoy. It is not only Just, but it is also very
Necessary, that the Cause of our Happiness should be the Object of our Love.
Thus following the Principles of this Philosophy, we ought only to love God;
for it tells us, that He alone is the True Cause of our Happiness; that the
Bodies which are about us cannot Act upon that which we Animate, consequently
much less upon our Minds. It Is not the Sun which enlightens us, and gives us
Motion and Life; nor is it that which covers the Earth with Fruits and Flowers,
and which supplies us with Food and Nourishment. This Philosophy teaches us
with the Scripture, that it is God only who gives Rain, and regulates the
Seasons; who gives Nourishment to the Body, and fills the Heart with Joy: Acts
14.15, 16. Ergo nihil agis ingratissime Mortalium, qui te negas Deo debere, sed
naturae: quia nec natura sine Deo est, nec Deus sine natura, sed idem est
utrumque, nec distat. Officium si quod a Seneca, accipisses, Annoeo te diceres
debere, vel Lucio; Non creditorem mutares, sed nomen. Seneca, l. 4. Of
Benefits, c. 8. Ego Dominus and non est alter, formans lucem and creans
tenebras, faciens pacem and creans malum: Ego Dominus ficiens omnia haec. Isa.
45.7. Amos 3.6.
That he only is capable of doing us good; and thereby has given us a perpetual
Testimony of what he is, although in Ages passed he has permitted all Nations
to walk in their own ways. According to the Language of this Philosophy, we
must not say, That it is Nature that fills us with Good; nor that it is God and
Nature together: But that it is God alone, speaking thus without Equivocation,
that we may not deceive the Simple. For we must distinctly acknowledge him the
only Cause of our Happiness, if we would make him the only Object of our Love.

It Is likewise an undoubted Truth, That we ought to fear such Things as are
able to hurt us, and fear them in proportion to the Evil they can do us. But
this Philosophy tells us, That it is God alone that can do us Evil; that it is
he, as Isaiah says, who creates Darkness as well as Light: who makes peace, and
creates Evil; and even that no Evil happens but from him, according to the
Prophet. So that it is him alone we ought to fear. We must not fear either
Plague, or War, Famine, our Enemies, nor even Devils themselves; but God alone.
We ought to fly a Sword, when ready to wound us, shun Fire, and avoid a House
that is likely to fall upon us; yet must not fear these Things: We may fly such
Bodies as are Occasional or Natural Causes of Evil: but we must fear only God,
as the True Cause of all Evils and Misfortunes; and only hate Sin, which
necessarily provokes the Cause of all our Happiness, to become the Cause of all
our Evils. And in short, all the Motions of our Minds ought to tend only to
God, since He alone is Superior to tend only to God, since He alone is
Superior to it, and the Motions of our Body may relate to those about it. This
is what we learn from that Philosophy, which admits not the Efficacy of Second
Causes.

But this Efficacy being supposed, I cannot see but we have some reason to fear
and love Bodies: And that to regulate our Love according to Reason, it is
enough to prefer God above every Thing else; the First and Universal, to Second
and Particular Causes. Then it is not necessary to love God with all our
strength; Ex tota mente, ex toto cord, ex tota anima, ex totis viribus, at the
Scripture says.

Yet when we content our selves with preferring God to all other Beings, and
adore him with a Love of Esteem and Preference, without continually
endeavoring to honor and love him in all Things; it often happens that we
deceive our selves, that our Charity is dissipated and lost, and that we are
more taken up with Sensible, than the Sovereign Good: For if the greatest
Sinners, and it may be even Idolaters, were asked, If they preferred not the
universal to particular Causes? They would not perhaps be afraid, in the midst
of their Debauches and Extravagancies, to Answer, That they failed not in so
Essential a Duty, and knew very well what they owed to God. I confess they
would deceive themselves; but take away the Efficacy of Second Causes, and they
will have no probable pretext to Justify their Conduct: And if it be supposed,
they may say this for themselves, when their passions blind them, and they
listen to the Testimony of their Senses. "Since I am made to be happy, I
neither can, nor ought to forbear loving and respecting whaterver may be the
Cause of my Happiness. Why therefore should I not love and respect Sensible
Objects, since they are the True Causes of the Happiness I receive in their
Enjoyment? I acknowledge the Supreme Being is alone worthy of our highest
Adoration, and I prefer him to every Thing; but not seeing that he requires any
Thing of me, I enjoy the Goods he has given me by the means of Second Causes,
to which he has subjected me: and I pay no Acknowledgments to him, which
perhaps would dishonor him. As he does me no good immediately and by himself,
or at least without the Assistance of the Creatures, it is a sign he does not
require my Mind and Heart should be immediately applied to himself; or at least
he is willing, that the Creatures should divide with him the Acknowledgments of
my Heart and Mind: Since he has communicated a part of his Power and Glory to
the Sun, has surrounded him with Brightness and Majesty, Established him
Supreme over all his Works; and it is by the Influence of this Great Luminary
that we receive all the Necessary Goods of Life: Why should we not then employ
a part of this Life in enjoying his Light, and testifying the sense we have of
his Greatness and Benefits? Would it not be the utmost Ingratitude to receive
the Abundance of all Things from this Excellent Creature, and have no Sentiment
of Gratitude for it? And would it not likewise be an unaccountable blindness
and stupidity, to have no Motion of respect and fear for him whose absence
freezes us to death, and who by approaching too near us may burn up and destroy
us? I say it again, that God is preferable to all Things, that we must esteem
and love him infinitely more than the Creatures; but that we must also love and
fear them: For thereby we honor Him who made them; merit his Favors; and
oblige him to bestow New Benefits upon us. It is plain, he approves of the
Honor we pay his Creatures, since he has communicated his Power to them; and
all Power merits Honor. But as Honor ought to be proportioned to Power, and
that the Power of the Sun, and all Sensible Objects, is such, that from them we
receive all sorts of Goods, it is just we should honor them with all our
strength, and next to God consecrate our whole Being to them.

Thus we naturally reason, when we follow the Prejudice we have received from
the Efficacy of Second Causes; it is probably after this manner that the first
Authors of Idolatry reasoned. Here is what he thought of it who is esteemed the
most Learned of the Jews. He thus begins a Treatise he wrote about Idolatry.

In the Days of Enos Men fell into strange Delusions, R. Moses Maimonides.
and the Wise Men of that Time perfectly lost their Sense and Reason. Enos
himself was in the Number of those deceived Persons. These were their Errors.
Since God (said they) has created the Stars and the Heavens to govern the
World, has placed them on high, surrounded them with brightness and glory, and
employes them to exexecute his Orders, it is just that we should honor them,
and pay reverence and homage to them. It Is the Will of our God that we should
honor those whom he has raised and exalted in Glory; even as a Prince requires
we should honor his Ministers in his presence; because the Honor we give to
them redounds to himself. After they had once received this Notion, they began
to build Temples in honor of the Stars, to offer Sacrifices and Praises to
them, and even prostrate themselves before them, thinking thereby to gain the
favor of him who created them. And this was the original of Idolatry.

It is so Natural and Just to have Sentiments of Acknowledgment in proportion
to the Benefits we receive, See Vossius, l. 2. de Idolatria.
that almost all the World have adored the Sun; Ipsi qui irridentur Aegyptii,
nullam belluam nisi ob aliquam utilitatem quam ex ea caperent, consecraverant.
Cic. l. 1. de Natura Deorum.
because they all thought he was the cause of the Happiness they enjoyed. And
if the Egyptians have adored not only the Sun, the Moon, and the River Nilus,
because its overflowings caused the fruitfulness of their Country, but also the
vilest Animals; 'twas, as Cicero relates, because of some benefit they received
from them. So that as we cannot, and indeed ought not to banish out of Men's
Minds, the inclination they Naturally have for the true Causes of their
Happiness; it is evident that there is at least some danger in maintaining the
Efficacy of Second Causes, although we join thereto the necessity of an
immediate concourse, which has I know not what of incomprehensible in it, and
which comes in as an after-game to justify our Prejudices, and Aristotle's
Philosophy.

But there is no danger in speaking only what we know, and atributing Power and
Efficacy to God alone; since we see nothing but his Wills which have an
absolute, necessary, and indispensable connection with Natural Effects. I
confess that Men are now knowing enough to avoid the gross Errors of the
Heathens and Idolaters: But I am not afraid to say, that our Mind is disposed,
or rather that our Heart is often inclined like that of the Heathens; and that
there will always be some kind of Idolatry in the World, until the day that
Jesus Christ shall again deliver up his Kingdom to God his Father; having first
destroyed all Empire, Power, and Dominion, that God may be all in all. Quorum
Deus venture est, Phil. 13.9. Omnis fornicator, aut immundus, aut avarus, quod
est idolorum servitus. Ephesians. 5.5.

In spiritu and veritate oportet adorare. John 4.24.


For is it not a kind of Idolatry, to make a God of our Belly, as St. Paul
speaks? Is it not to idolize the God of Riches, continually to labor after
Worldly Possessions? Is this to render to God the Worship due to him; to adore
him in Spirit and Truth; to have our Hearts filled with some sensible Beauty,
and our Minds dazzled with the brightness of some imaginary Grandeur.

Men believing they receive from the Bodies which are about them the Pleasures
they enjoy by their use, they unite themselves to them with all the Powers of
their Soul: And thus the principal of their disorder proceeds from the sensible
conviction they have of the Efficacy of Second Causes. It Is Reason only that
tells them, there is none but God acts in them. But besides that, Reason speaks
so low that they can scarcely hear it; and the Senses, which oppose it, cry so
loud that it stupifies them; they are still confirmed in their Prejudices by
Arguments which are so much the more dangerous, as they bear external
Characters, and sensible Marks of Truth.

The Philosophers, and chiefly the Christian Philophers, ought continually to
oppose Prejudices, or the Judgments of the Senses, and especially such
dangerous ones as that of the Efficacy of Second Causes: And yet I know not
from what Principle there are some Persons (whom I extremely honor, and that
with reason) who endeavor to confirm this Prejudice, and even to make this
Doctrine pass for superstitious and extravagant, which is so holy, pure, and
solid; and maintains that God alone is the true cause of every thing. They will
not have us love and fear God in all things, but love and fear all things in
relation to God. We ought, say they, to love the Creatures because they are
good; to love and respect our Father; render honor to our Prince and
Superior, since God commands it. I don't deny it; but I deny that we must love
the Creatures as our goods, although they be good or perfect in themselves. I
deny that we are to pay service and respect to Men as to our Masters: For we
must neither serve our Master, obey our Father, or Prince, with any other
design but to serve God, and obey him. This is what St. Paul says, who became
all things to all Men, and complied in all things for the Salvation of those to
whom he Preached: Servi obedite Dominis carnalibus cum timore and tremore in
simplicitate cordis vestri SICVT CHRISTO: Non ad oculum servientes quasi
omnibus placentes, sed ut servi Christi facientes voluntatem Dei ex animo, cum
bona voluntate servientes SICVT DOMINI ET NON HOMINIBVS. And in another
Epistle: Non ad oculum servientes quasi hominibus placentes, sed in
simplicitate cordis DEVM TIMENTES. Quodcumque facitis ex animo operamini SICVT
DOMINO ET NON HOMINIBVS. We must therefore obey our Father, serve our Prince,
and render honor to our Superiors, AS UNTO GOD AND NOT UNTO MAN: Sicut Domini
and non Hominibus. This is clear, and can never have any bad consequences.
Superiors would always be more honored, and better served. But I believe I
may say, that a Master who would be honored and served, as having in himself
another Power than that of God, must be a Devil; and that those who served him
under that Notion, would be Idolaters; for I cannot but believe that all Honor
and Love that tend not toward God, are kinds of Idolatry.

SOLI DEO HONOR ET GLORIA.

AN EXPLANATION Of what I have said in the Fourth Chapter of the Second Part,
Of Method; and elsewhere.
That God acts always with Order, and by the most Simple Ways.
IT seems to some Persons to be too rash a Conjecture, or an abusing of
indeterminate and general Terms, to say, That God acts always with Order, and
by the most simple ways, in the execution of his designs: Therefore 'twill not
be useless for me to prove and explain this Truth; for it is of the greatest
consequence, not only for the knowledge of Nature, but much more for the
knowledge of Religion and Morality.

By the word God, we understand a Being infinitely Perfect, whose Wisdom and
Knowledge have no limits, and who consequently knows all the means whereby he
can execute his designs. This being granted, I say, God acts always by the
shortest means, and most simple ways.

That I may be the better understood, I Will make use of a sensible Example: I
suppole that God wills the Body A, should strike the Body B. Since God knows
every thing, he perfectly knows that A. can go to strike B. by an infinite
number of Curve-Lines, and but by one Right-Line only. Now God only wills the
shock of B. by A.; and we suppose that he only wills the transferring of A. to
B. to effect this shock: Therefore A. must be transferred to B. by the shortest
way, or by a Right-Line. For if the Body A. were transported to B. by a Curve
Line, that would show, either that the Transporter knew no other way; or else
that he not only willed the concurrence of these Bodies, but also the means to
produce it, which is against the supposition.

There Is as much more action requisite to transfer a Body A. to B. by a
Curve-Line, than by a Right-Line, as the Curve is greater than the Right. If
God therefore should transfer A. to B. by a Curve-Line, which is double to a
Right, half the Action of God would be wholly useless; consequently produced
without design or end, as well as without effect.

Moreover, Action in God is Will; therefore there must be more Will in God to
cause A. to be transported circularly, than directly. Now we have already
supposed that God had no Will in respect to the motion of A, but only as it
relates to the shock: Therefore there is not Will enough in God to move A. by a
Curve-Line. And consequently this motion of A. to B. is a contradiction. Thus
it is a contradiction that God should not act by the most simple ways, except
we suppose that God in the choice of ways he makes use of to execute his
designs, has something else in view besides these designs, which is a
contradiction in our supposition.

When I say there is more Will in God to transfer a Body from A. to B. by a
Curve, than by a Right Line; we must from thence conclude nothing against the
simplicity of the Being and Action of God: For it must be confessed that it
cannot be comprehended, either how the simplicity of an Infinite Being,
includes all the different Perfections of Finite Beings; nor how his Will
continuing always the same, and always conformable to Order, changes with
reference to the different Beings it produces and preserves. I speak only
according to our manner of conceiving. It seems to me now that we clearly
conceive when God Wills, and, for instance, creates a Cubic Foot of Matter, he
Wills another thing than if he creates two. For it is evident that God could not
create two different things; nor know whether he had created one or two feet of
Matter; or if he conveyed a Body circularly or directly, if there was not some
difference in his Wills in respect to Matter, or to its Motion; since God sees
only in himself, and in his Wills, the variety of his Creatures. Now whatever
that Action is in God which relates to the different Beings he produces or
preserves; I call it the differences, augmentations, and diminutions of Wills
in God. And according to this manner of conceiving things, I say, God cannot
employ more Will than is necessary to execute his designs: So that God always
acts by the most simple ways in reference to them.

I don't deny however but God may have a great number of ways, equally simple,
to produce the same effects; or that he may produce them by different means;
but he always produces them by the most simple, provided they are all of the
same kind; for it is a contradiction, that a Being infinitely Wise should have
useless and irregular Wills.

If we would apply this Principle to Morality, we shall see that those secure
their Salvation, who so prepare themselves for Grace, by Self-denial,
Repentance, and an exact Obedience to the Commands of our Savior, that God
acting in them by the most simple ways; I mean, by giving them but few New
Graces, operates very much in them. For although God would have all Men be
saved, he will only save those that can be saved by the most simple means,
which have relation to the great design he has of Sanctifying through JESUS
CHRIST, a certain number of the Elect; and he will multiply the Children of Eve
till that number be fulfilled; for it is because God is willing to sanctify us
through the most simple means, that after Sin, it was necessary for him to
multiply the Children of Men to complete the number of his Elect; since there
are many persons who cause their own Damnation by withdrawing themselves from
the Order of God.

Now as God acts not as a particular Cause, we must not imagine, that he has
like us particular Wills for every thing he produces; for if it were so, it
appears evident to me, that the generation of Monsters would be impossible; and
that it would never happen that one work should destroy another. As God cannot
have contrary Wills, we should have recourse to a Principle of Evil, as the
Manichses had, for instance, to freeze the Fruits produced by God. This being
so, we are methinks obliged to suppose, that there are some general Rules
according to which God predestinates and sanctifies the Elect; and that those
Laws are what we call the Order of Grace; as his general Wills, whereby God
produces and preserves whatever is in the World, are the Order of Nature.

I don't know whether I am not mistaken; but methinks from this Principle a
great many Consequences may be drawn, which perhaps would resolve some
Difficulties, about which there has been much Controversy some years since;
but I don't think my self obliged to deduce them; every one may do it according
to his own Capacity: It Is more convenient to be silent, than to say such things
as are not necessary to be known; and which perhaps will one day be more easily
agreed upon, than they would now. I would only have it known, that the most
simple ways of our Sanctification, are Self-denial and Repentance; or that at
least we should continually reflect, that our Blessed LORD distinctly knowing
the Laws of the Order of Grace, we run perpetual dangers when we don't follow
the ways that he has showed us, not only by his Words, but also by his Actions.

But as in the course of our Lives there happens particular Occurrances,
wherein we don't know which way to determine our selves, because of the
contrary Reasons that may be alleged on either side, about certain Opinions;
'twill perhaps be useful to show here by some particular instance, that much
use may be made of the Principle that we have established, viz. That God
always acts by the most simple means.

Let us suppose, for instance, that I am desirous to know whether I ought every
day to take certain stated times to examine my self; to represent to my self my
weakness and miseries; to consider my Duty in the Presence of God, and to
beseech him to assist me in conquering my Passions: Or else, whether I ought to
stay till the Spirit of God, who blows where and when it pleases, should take
me from my self, and from my ordinary employments, to unite me to himself; for
very probable Reasons may be given both for and against these Opinions; and Men
are very often satisfied with Probabilities in such like cases: And this even
makes some Pious Persons to follow different ways, which are not always very
sure.

I consider therefore, that if I stay for the particular Motions of the Spirit
of God, I shall never pray to him; if to that end I don't receive either
particular Revelations, Illuminations, or preventing Delectations. Now these
Illuminations or Delectations being produced by God, by more particular Wills
than are those general Wills, which constitute the Order of Nature, they are
kind of Miracles; so that this is to pretend that God impells Men to Prayer,
through means that are not the most simple. Nay, to expect those Graces which
are not always necessary, is in some measure to tempt God.

But if I accustom my self to appear, or endeavor to present my self before
God at certain Hours, the sound of a Clock will be enough to remember me of my
Duty, without its being necessary that God should have a particular Will of
inspiring me with the thought of Praying: The general Laws only of the Union of
the Soul with the Body, will make me think of my Duty, when the time that I
have chosen shall present it self by some sensible mark.

But as Self-Examination and Prayer is necessary; and as we cannot pray without
having some thoughts of it; nor have these thoughts unless God gives them: It Is
some step toward Salvation to have these thoughts, without obliging God to
give them us by particular Wills, which are kinds of Miracles; or rather, in
consequence of the general Laws of the Order of Grace, whereby God would save
all Men through his Son. Perhaps the want of the first thought of Prayer, and
of considering our obligations before God, is the cause of the blindness of
many Men; consequently of their Eternal Damnation. For God acting always by
the most simple ways, ought not by particular Wills, to give those thoughts
which might be obtained by virtue of his general Wills, if once persons were
accustomed to pray regularly at particular hours. Therefore as God would save
Men by the most simple ways, it is evident that as much as possible, we ought
to make the Order of Nature subservient to that of Grace; and, as I may say, to
reconcile Gods Wills together, by regulating a time which may at least supply
us with the thoughts of Prayer.

'Twas for these Reasons probably, that God formerly commanded the Jews to
write his Commandments upon the Doors of their Houses, and always to have some
sensible Mark which might put them in mind of them: This spared God, if I may
so say, thoughts. For Miracles of Grace were very rare amongst the Jews, the
time being not yet come wherein God designed to ingrave his Law, and infuse his
Spirit and Charity into the Heart of Man.

I confess that whatever we do, by a mere Natural Power, cannot of it self
meritoriously dispose us for Grace; and yet without it, all external Religion
can only serve to maintain our Pride and Self-love. The Pharisees grew vain
from their bearing the sensible Signs and Memorials of the Law of God, as our
Savior reproached them: And Christians often make use of Crucifixes and
Images, out of Curiosity, Hypocrisy, or some other motive of Self-love. Yet
since these things may put us in mind of God, it is requisite to make use of
them; for we must, as much as possible, make Nature subservient to Grace, that
God may save us by the most simple ways.

For although we cannot Naturally fit our selves for Grace, we may often
contribute to the rendering it efficacious; because we can lessen the eagerness
of a Passion, by removing those Objects from us which cause it, or by
presenting to our selves contrary Reasons to those which inspire it. Those who
most carefully watch the purity of their imagination, and suffer it not to be
so much corrupted by the continual use of sensible Pleasures, and Commerce with
the World, make Grace efficacious, by removing that resistance it finds in
others. In this sense, even a Disease, a shower of Rain, or any other accident,
that keeps us at home, may render Grace efficacious; for such a degree of Grace
as would be too weak to make us resist the sensible impression of the presence
of an agreeable Object, is strong enough to make us with horror reject the
impure thought or imagination of this same Object.

This is enough to show clearly, that the Counsels of the Gospel are necessary,
that God may save us by the most simple ways: For it is advantageous to follow
them; not only because when we follow them by the Motion of Gods Spirit they
determine it, by virtue of immutable Order, or of the general Laws of the Order
of Grace, to increase in us our love to him; but also because the practicing
these Counsels may often render Grace efficacious, though we are induced to it
only by Self-love, as it may happen on many occasions.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE AUTHOR OF THE Search after Truth: AGAINST The Accusation OF
Monsieur de la Ville.

Wherein is shown, That if every one was permitted to call in Question the
Faith of others, upon a good or bad deduction of Consequences from their
Principles, none could be secure from the Imputation of Heresy.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.

A DEFENSE OF THE AUTHOR OF THE Search after Truth: Against the ACCUSATION OF
Monsieur de la Ville.
SOmetimes since there was Published a Treatise, whose Title surprised many
Persons, and stirred up their Passions. Several wished I would interest my self
in the Quarrel, which the Author had with the Cartesians; for as on one hand
Monsieur de la Ville (for that was his Name) had done me the honor to list me
among those Philosophers, but with what design I know not; and on the other
hand, diverted himself by Travestying me in Ridicule: They assured me that if I
was willing to pass for a Rash, Ignorant and Extravagant Person, for a
Visionary, nay, even an Heritick; yet I could not in Conscience desert the
Cause of Truth, and leave the Enemies of the Faith the Advantages he granted to
them.

I must be Just to these Gentlemen, and confess their Reasons were very solid;
but I would desire them to believe, that if I did not comply with them, 'twas
because others were of a much different Opinion, which to me appeared also very
reasonable, and for which indeed I had a greater inclination; for I am not
willing to decide about the solidity of their Reasons. Moreover, as Monsieur de
la Ville is not very tender in matters of Faith, I very well foresaw that his
Treatise would make more Noise, than it would do Injury to the Truth; and as
for my self, I believe he did me no Injustice in despising me; I can assure him
I contemn my self more than he desires. It Is true my self-contempt is not
grounded upon the same Ideas that inclined him to treat me so disdainfully as
he did; but I could indeed wish, that the Reasons I have for despising my self
were not true, and I would freely consent that all my ill Qualities were
changed into those which he has been pleased to bestow upon me, provided he
would except that of Heretic, or of a Person of a suspicious Faith.

Since I know there is nothing so dangerous as to stir up Men's Passions,
especially on certain Subjects which defend the most violent and unreasonable
from the Reproofs of Reason; I believed I ought to be silent, lest I should
increase the Passion I saw in some Minds; but since the Heat is abated, and
little Mischief is to be feared, I think I ought to satisfy my Friends, and
please my self. I would not affect a disdainful Silence in respect of Monsieur
de la Ville; I confess sincerely, that he has sensibly offended me; for I am
neither a Stoic nor Stupid; I feel when I am hurt, and am not ashamed to
confess it. Public Accusation of Heresy is not easy to be born, especially
by Ecclesiastics; which however unjust it may be, yet it fails not to make the
Faith of the Accused suspected in this Age, more than any other; and no one can
be prodigal of this kind of disreputation, unless Charity oblige him to it,
which seldom or never happens.

I shall not therefore Answer any thing to the Calumnies wherewith this Author
endeavors to blacken me: I shall not cite him before the Common Magistrate for
Public Reparation; nor will I make use of any other Methods permitted by the
Law of Nature, for the restitution of that which I can in Conscience give up. I
am whatever he pleases, Ignorant, a Visionary, but I am no Heretic; I am not
suspected of Heresy at least by those who know me. I confess I cannot avoid
having my Faith suspected, if a Stranger be permitted to treat me as a Heretic
upon such Consequences as he pleases to draw from my Principles; for its
impossible but the Treatise of Monsieur de la Ville should have deceived
somebody. If at present I am suspected of Heresy, it is an unhappiness which I
cannot help.

But if it be a Crime, it is not I that have committed it, it is he rather who has
drawn such Consequences, from a Principle, as are not in it. As for me, I
disown them; believe them false and Heretical; and if I saw clearly that they
were directly drawn from any one of my Principles, I would abandon it; for this
Principle would be false, Truths being not contrary to one another.

But supposing that Monsieur de la Ville had reasoned justly, and fairly
deduced Heretical Consequences from my Principle, neither I nor many others,
whom he treats unhandsomely, saw not before he had wrote his Book, that these
Consequences were contained in the Principle; so that his Conduct is
unjustifiable, which way soever it be examined: For in fine, the Articles of
Faith depend not upon the Penetration and Extension of the Mind of one
particular Divine, as I am going to show: And though we should be certain, that
some Principles included impious Consequences, yet no one has thereby a right
to treat those as Heretics who maintain these Principles.

I confess I have seen in the Fathers, and especially in St. Angustine, the Ep.
3. Chapter 2.28. Chapter 2.57. contra Epist. Manich. Chap. 16. de Trin. L. 10. etc.
Principle I have Advanced; but I never found there that of Monsieur de la
Ville. It appeared to me that this was a Common Notion, That if God should
Annihilate all Extension in the World, all the Matter whereof the World is
composed would be Annihilated. I consulted several Persons upon this, to see if
they had the same Idea as I had upon the Matter, and their Answers confirmed me
in my Opinion. I judged by Reasons which I shall soon declare, That we could no
longer have any direct and natural Demonstration, that the Soul is distinct
from the Body, or that she is Immortal, if this Principle be given up. I have
said in the Search after Truth, that I believed that no Consequence contrary to
Faith could be drawn from this Principle, which before me was Maintained in
Sorbonne in the Public Theses. I had almost said, that if it were proper, I
could explain how this Opinion might be reconciled with what the Fathers and
Councils have left us as Matter of Faith, upon the Mystery of
Transubstantiation. In sine, I disavowed all Heretical Consequences, and even
the Principle it self, if it included them; which I did not, nor yet do believe.

What should I say more to clear my Faith from the Suspicion of Heresy, even
to the most Malicious? Could I imagine that any one would be bold enough to
place St. Austin, and other Fathers, among the Calvinists, by condemning in the
Persons of the Cartesians and Gassendists, the Opinion of this Holy Doctor, as
contrary to Transubstantiation? No doubtless; nor durst Monsieur de la Ville
himself do it, but after an indirect manner. St. Austin advances the present
Question in an hundred places as an incontestable Principle; he never goes to
prove it, since it appears not that any Man doubted of it in his Time: For
indeed it is a Principle which ought to pass for a Common Notion with all such
whose Minds are not prepossest with False Studies: From thence this Holy Doctor
concludes, That the Soul is Immortal; that it is more Noble than the Body; that
it is distinct from it; and many other Truths of the greatest consequence: Part
2. Chap. 3. Art. 6.
And Monsieur de la Ville advances under Equivocal Terms, That this Principle
is not to be found in St. Augustine: He Answers one place only in the Works of
this Father; and to explain him, makes this Learned Man reason after an
extravagant manner. In fine, he opposes to the Constant Doctrine of St. Austin,
the only Book of Categories; as if he knew not that this Work was none of this
Fathers, and that it belonged rather to Logic than Phisics.

I will not stand to prove this in particular; for I see no necessity of
Answering Monsieur de la Ville's Book. I design to preserve inviolable the
Resolution I have made, and which I have declared at the End of the Preface of
the Second Volume of the Search after Truth; viz. That I would not Answer all
those who should Attacque me without understanding me, or whose Discourse gave
me any reason to believe, that something else besides the Love of Truth was the
Motive of their Writing; as for others, I shall endeavor to satisfy them. I
am unwilling to disturb others, or break my own Repose, by contentious Books,
and Treatises that are wholly useless to a Search after Truth, and which serve
only to violate Charity and scandalize ones Neighbor; and if I now write, it
is because I ought not to suffer my Faith to be made suspected, and because I
would be clearly understood, that no one ought to treat me as an Heretic, upon
Consequences which he can draw from the Principles I have Established.

It is not that I think any Heresy, nor even any Error, may be drawn from the
Book of a Search after Truth; I am ready to Answer with Charity, and respect
all those who shall do me the Honor to Criticize upon me without passion; and
I shall be always ready to follow Truth, as soon as it shall be discovered to
me. I disavow all Principles which may conclude any Error; but I pretend, that
those persons cannot be justly treated as Heretics, who even opinionatively
maintain such Principles from which Divines may draw impious Consequences,
provided the Defenders of these Principles disavow these Consequences; for if
this were true, every one might be treated as an Heretic. These are my
following Proofs, which are drawn even from what passes for Reasonable in the
Common Opinions of Philosophers; and this not to render them odious Or
ridiculous, but that I may prove what I design from Universally-received
Opinions, which Peripatetics insist so much upon, that they continually insult
over their Adversaries.

The First Proof.
Peripatetics, and almost all Men, believe, That Beasts have Souls, and these
Souls are more Noble than the Bodies they Animate. It Is an Opinion Received at
all Times, and in all Nations, That a Dog suffers pain when he is beaten, that
he is capable of the Motions of the Passions, Fear, Desire, Envy, Hatred, Joy,
Sorrow, and that he knows and loves his Master; yet from this Opinion may be
drawn such Consequences as are directly repugnant to what Faith teaches us.

The First Consequence contrary to Faith: That God is unjust.
Beasts suffer pain, and some are more unhappy than others: Now they have never
made an ill use of their Liberty; for they never had any. Then God is unjust
who punishes them; who makes them unhappy, and unequally unhappy, although they
are equally innocent. Then is this Principle false, That under a Just God
nothing can he miserable, without having deserved it. A Principle which
nevertheless St. Augustine makes use of against the Pelagians, to prove
Original Sin.

Moreover there is this difference betwixt Men and Beasts, That Men after Death
may be happy; which recompenses the pains they endure in this Life: But Beasts
lose all at Death; they have been unhappy and innocent, and no Recompense
attends them. Thus an innocent Man may suffer in order to Merit, and yet God be
Just: But if a Beast suffers, God is unjust.

Perhaps it may be said, That God may do whatever he pleases with a Beast,
provided he observes the Rules of Justice in respect of Man; but if an Angel
thought that God could not punish him without having deserved it, and yet might
do what he pleased with Man, should we approve of this Thought? Certainly God
is Just to all his Creatures; and is the most vile are capable of being
miserable, they must needs be capable of becoming criminal.

Second Consequence repugnant to Faith: That God Wills Disorder, and that
Nature is not Corrupted.
The Soul of a Dog is a Substance more Noble than the Body it Animates; for
according to St. De Quantit. Animae chapter 31, 32, etc. lib. 4. de Anima and ejus
Origin, chapter 13. and elsewhere.
Augustine, it is a Spiritual Substance more Noble than the most Noble Bodies:
Besides, Reason shows us, That Bodies can neither Know nor Love; that Pleasure,
Pain, Joy, Sadness, and other Passions, cannot be Modifications of Bodies. It Is
believed, That Dogs know and love their Masters; that they are susceptible of
the Passions of Fear, Desire, Joy, Sadness, and many others. The Soul of Dogs
is not then a Body, but a Substance more Noble than Bodies. Now the Soul of a
Dog is made for his Body; it has no other End or Felicity than the Enjoyment of
Bodies: Then the Nature of Man is not Corrupted, and Concupiscence is no
Disorder; God might make Man for the Enjoyment of Bodies; he might subject him
to the Motions of Cupiscence, etc.

Perhaps it may yet be said, That the Soul of Beasts is made for Man; but this
is a weak Subterfuge: For it is indifferent to me, whether my Dog or Horse has
or has not a Soul: It Is not the Soul of a Horse which carries or draws me; it is
his Body: It Is not the Soul of a Chicken which Nourishes me, but its Flesh. Now
God could, and consequently ought to create Horses, who should do all Things we
have need of, without a Soul; if it be true, That he has made them only for our
use: Moreover, the Soul of a Horse is better than the Noblest Bodies; therefore
God ought not to create it for the Body of Man. Lastly, God ought not to have
given Souls to Flies, which Swallows feed upon: Swallows are but of little use
to Man; they might have fed upon Grain, like other Birds.

Why then must there be an infinite Number of Souls annihilated to preserve the
Bodies of these Birds, since the Soul of a Fly is worth more than the Body of
the most perfect Animals? If then we are assured that Beasts have Souls, (that
is, Substances that are more Noble than Bodies) we take away from God his
Wisdom, and make him Act irregularly; we destroy Original Sin, and consequently
overthrow Religion, by taking away the Necessity of a Mediator.

The Third Consequence contrary to Faith: The Soul of Man is Mortal; or at
least, the Souls of Beasts pass from one Body to another.
The Soul of a Beast is a Substance distinct from its Body: Now it is
Annihilated; then Substances may naturally be Annihilated. Then although the
Soul of Man be a Substance distinct from his Body, it may be Annihilated when
the Body is destroyed. Thus one may demonstrate by Reason, That the Soul of Man
is Immortal: But if we grant as a most Certain Truth, That no Substance can be
naturally Annihilated, the Soul of Beasts will Subsist after Death; and since
they are made for Bodies, the least we can infer is, That they pass from one
Body into another; that they may not be useless in Nature. This is a
Consequence which appears more Reasonable.

Now we believe, That God is Just and Wise; that He loves not Disorder; that
Nature is Corrupted; that the Soul of Man is Immortal, and the Soul of Beasts
is Mortal: Because indeed, it is not a Substance distinct from their Bodies.
Therefore in the Language of Monsieur de la Ville, which condemns Men from
Consequences which he draws from their Principles, the Cartesians may represent
him as criminal, and all Mankind besides; because they believe that Beasts have
Souls.

What would Monsieur de la Ville say, if from his own way of Arguing, we should
accuse him of Impiety; because he maintains Opinions, from whence we deduce,
That God is not Just, Wise, Powerful; Sentiments which overthrow Religion,
which oppose Original Sin, which take away the only Demonstration that Reason
furnishes us with to prove the Immortality of the Soul? What would he say, if
we should treat him as unjust and cruel, for making innocent Souls suffer, and
even Annihilating them, for the Nourishment of Bodies which they Animate? He is
a Sinner; they are innocent. It Is only to nourish his Body, that he kills
Bodies, and Annihilates their Souls, which are of more value than bodies.
Again, If his Body could not subsist but by the Flesh of Animals, or if the
Annihilation of one Soul could make him immortal, this Cruelty, however unjust
it is, might perhaps be pardonable; but how many Substances, wholly innocent,
does he Annihilate, only to preserve for a few days a Body justly condemned to
death for sin.

Would he be so little a Philosopher, as to excuse himself upon the Custom of
the places where he lives? But if his Zeal had carried him to the Indies, where
the Inhabitants build Linsch. chapter 37.
Hospitals for Beasts, where the Philosophers, and many of the best Sort of
Men, are so charitable, even in respect to Flies, that for fear of killing them
by breathing or walking, they wear a fine Cloth before their Mouths, and fan
the Ways in which they pass; would he then be afraid to make innocent Souls
suffer, or Annihilate them for the preservation of a Sinners Body? Would he not
rather choose their Opinion who allow the Soul of a Beast to be no more Noble
than their Body, nor distinct from it; and by publishing this Sentiment acquit
himself of the Crimes of Cruelty and Injustice, whereof these People would
accuse him, if having the same Principles he followed not their Custom.

This Example might be sufficient to show, That we ought not to treat Men as
Heretics and dangerous persons, because we may draw impious Consequences from
their Principles, even when they disavow these Consequences: But be it as it
will, I think it is infinitely more difficult to Answer these Consequences that
I have now drawn, than these of Monsieur de la Ville. The Cartesians would ve
very ridiculous, if they treated Monsieur de la Ville, and other persons who
are not of their Opinion, as Impious and Heretical. It Is only the Authority of
the Church which may decide in Matters of Faith; and the Church has not obliged
us, and probably whatever Consequences shall be drawn from Common Principles,
will not oblige us to believe, That Dogs have a Soul more Noble than their
Bodies; that they know not their Masters; that they neither Fear, Desire, nor
suffer any thing: Because it is not necessary, that Christians should be
instructed in these Truths.

The Second Proof.
Almost all Men are persuaded, that sensible Objects are true Causes of the
Pleasure and Pain which is felt by their means. They believe that Fire
disperses that agreeable Heat which rejoices us. That Nourishments act in us,
and give us the agreeable Sensations of Tastes. They doubt not but it is the Sun
which ripens Fruits that are necessary for Life; and that all Sensible Objects
have a Virtue which is proper to them, by which they can do us much Good or
Evil. Let us see whether we cannot draw from these Principles, such
Consequences as are contrary to what Religion obliges us to believe.

A Consequence impugning the First Principle of Morality; by which we are
obliged to love God with all our Power, and to fear him only.
It Is a Common Notion, according to which all Men act, That we should love or
fear whatever has Power to do us good or hurt; to make us sensible of Pleasure
or Pain; to make us Happy or Unhappy. This is a supposed Principle, we ought
therefore to love and fear them. This is a Reasoning which all the World
Naturally makes, and which is yet a general Principle of the Corruption of
Manners.

It is evident by Reason, and the first of Gods Commandments, that all the
Motions of our Soul, whether Love or Fear, Desire or Joy, should tend toward
God; and that all the Motions of our Body should be regulated and determined by
External Objects. By the Morion of our Body we may approach to Fruit, avoid a
Blow, fly a Beast that would devour us: But we ought to love and fear God only.
All the Motions of our Soul ought to tend toward him alone: We ought to love
him with all our Power: This is an indispensible Law. We can neither love nor
fear what is below us, without being disordered and corrupted. To be afraid of
a Beast ready to devour us, or to fear the Devil, is to do them honor. To love
Fruit, to desire Riches, to rejoice in the Heat of the Sun, as if it were the
true Cause thereof; nay, even to love ones Father, Protector, Friend, as if
they were capable of doing as good; this is to give them that honor which is
due to God only. We must not love any one in this sense. It Is permitted, and we
ought to love our Neighbor, by wishing or procuring for him, as a Natural or
Occasional Cause, whatever may conduce to his Happiness, but not otherwise. We
must love our Brethren, not as capable of doing us good, but as of enjoying
with us the true Good. These Truths appear evident to me, but Men strangely
obscure them, when they suppose that Bodies which are about us can act in us as
true Causes.

Indeed the greatest part of Christian Philosophers, pretend that Creatures can
do nothing, if God did not concur to their Action; and so Sensible Objects
cannot act in us without the Efficacy of the First Cause. We ought neither to
fear nor love them, but God only, on whom all things depend.

This Explication shows, Men condemn the Consequences which I have drawn from
their Principle: But if I should say with Monsieur de la Ville, that it is a
slight of Philosophers to cover their Impiety; if I should charge them with the
crime of maintaining, at the expense of Religion, Aristotle's Opinions, and the
Prejudices of their Senses; if by examining their Heart, I should impute to
them a secret desire of debauching Men's Morals by the defense of a Principle
which justifies all sorts of disorders, and opposes the first Principle of
Christian Morality, by the Consequences which I have drawn: Should I be very
Reasonable thus to be willing to condemn all Men as impious, because of the
Consequences which I might draw from their Principles?

Certainly, Monsieur de la Ville would say my Consequences were not fairly
deduced, and I say the same thing of his. But to destroy all these
Consequences, I need only explain his Equivocations, which I shall sometime or
other do, as I see it necessary.

But how will Monsieur de la Ville justify the Common Opinion about the
Efficaciousness of Second Causes? See the Explanation about Second Causes, in
Vol. 2. of the Search after Truth.
And by what kind of Concourse will he render to God all that is due to him?
Will he show clearly that one and the same Action is wholly of God, and wholly
of the Creature? Will he demonstrate that the Power of the Creature is useless;
though without its Efficacy the sole Action of God would produce the same
Effect? Will he prove that Spirits ought neither to love nor fear Bodies;
although Bodies have a true Power of acting upon them? And will he from hence
convince many whose Mind and Heart is wholly possessed with Sensible Objects;
because they judge these Objects are capable of making them happy or miserable?
Let him confess then, that if it were permitted to treat as Impious and
Heretical, all those who maintain such Principles from which Impious and
Heretical Consequence may be deduced, that then no one can be secure from
having his Faith suspected.

The Third Proof.
The Consequence of a Principle proposed by Monsieur de la Ville, as matter of
Faith, That the Essence of Bodies consists not in Extension. This Negative
Principle overthrows the only demonstrable and direct Proof, of the Souls being
a substance distinct from the Body, and consequently Immortal.
When this Truth is received (which I think I have demonstrated after many
others, and which Monsieur de la Ville attacks nevertheless as a Principle
contrary to the decisions of the Church) That the Essence of Matter consists in
Extension, in length, breadth and depth. It is not difficult to prove, That the
Soul, or that which is capable of thinking, is a distinct substance from the
Body: For it is manifest, the Extension of any matter, conceived as divisible or
movable, can never reason, will, nor even perceive; so that that in us which
thinks, is a substance distinct from our Body. Actual Knowledges, Wills, and
Sensations, are actually manners of the existence of some substance. Now all
divisions that happen to Extension, can produce nothing but Figures; as all
Motions, relations of distance. Extension is incapable of other Modifications.
Therefore our Thought, Desire, Sensations of Pleasure and Pain, are manners of
some substances existence, which is not Body. Therefore the Soul is distinct
from the Body; and this being asserted, we prove likewise that it is Immortal.

No Substance is ever annihilated by the common Power of Nature; for as Nature
cannot produce something out of nothing, so it cannot reduce any thing that is,
to nothing. Manners of Being may be annihilated, Roundness in a Body may be
destroyed; for what is Round may become Square; but this Roundness is not a
Being, a Thing, a Substance; it is only a relation of inequality in the distance
which is between the parts that terminate this Body, and that which is at the
Center. Thus the relations changing, Roundness is no more, but the substance
cannot be annihilated. Now by the Reasons above, the Soul is not a manner of
the Bodies existence, it is therefore Immortal; and although the Body be
dissolved into a thousand parts of different Nature, and the Construction of
the Organs be broken, the Soul consists not in this Construction, nor in any
other Modification of Matter: It Is evident then that a dissolution and even an
annihilation of the substance of Man's Body, if the annihilation were real,
could not annihilate the substance of our Soul. But there is yet another Proof
of the Souls Immortality built upon the same Principle.

Although a Body cannot be reduced to nothing because it is a substance, it may
nevertheless dye, and suffer a dissolution of all its parts; for Extension is
divisible. Now the Soul being a substance distinct from Extension, it cannot be
divided: One can divide a Thought, a Desire, a Sensation of Pain or Pleasure,
as one may divide a Square into two or four Triangles: Then the substance of
the Soul is indissoluble, incorruptible, and consequently Immortal, because
unextended.

But if Monsieur de la Ville supposes, that the Essence of Body consists in
something else besides Extension, how will he convince Libertines that it is
neither Material nor Mortal. They will maintain to him that this something, in
which the Essence of Body consists, is capable of thinking, and that the
substance which thinks, is the same with that that is extended. If Monsieur de
la Ville denies it, they will show him that it is unreasonable; since according
to his Principle, a Body being something else besides Extension, he has no
distinct Idea of what that can be; and therefore cannot know whether this
unknown thing is not capable of thinking. Will he pretend to convince them by
maintaining, as he does in his Book, that the Essence of Body is to have parts
without Extension? Certainly they will not believe him upon his word; for
finding so much difficulty in conceiving parts without Extension, as
indivisible Atoms, and Circles without two Semi-Circles, they must have more
deference for him, than he himself has for the Word of God. For Monsieur de la
Ville in the last Part of his Book, pretends, That even God cannot oblige us to
believe things that are contradictory; such as are the parts of Body without
any actual Extension.

But Libertines will not be wanting on their part for probable Reasons, to
confound the Soul with the Body. Experience (they will say) teaches us, That a
Body is capable of feeling, thinking, and reasoning: That it is the Body which
feels Pleasure and Pain: That it is the Brain which thinks and reasons: The
weight of the Body depresses the Mind: Folly is a true Distemper; and those who
have most Wisdom lose it, when that part of the Brain, in which it resides,
grows infirm. The Essences of Beings are unknown to us, we cannot by Reason
discover of what they are capable; so that Reason wills we should consult
Experience, and Experience confounds the Soul with the Body, and teaches us
that it is capable of thinking. Thus Libertines will reason.

And indeed those who tell us, we know not the Essenees of Beings; and who
quarrel with Philosophers, for demonstrating that Extension is not the Manner
of Being, but the very Essence of Matter; ought to think upon the mischievous
Consequences that are deducible from their Principles, and not go about to
overthrow all the demonstration we have brought about the distinction that is
between the Soul and Body: For in fine, the distinction of these two parts of
our selves, proved by clear Ideas, is the most fruitful and necessary of all
Truths in Philosophy, perhaps even in Divinity and Christian Morality. But this
distinction is more fully shown in many places of the Lib. 4. chapter 2. lib. 6. p.
2. chapter 7. lib. 3. p. 2. chapter 8.
Search after Truth. And I maintain to Monsieur de la Ville, notwithstanding
his Answer, which is full of Equivocations, Figures and Contradictions; or
rather, I maintain to the Libertines; for as for him, I believe him so settled
in his Faith, that he wants not such Proofs: I say, I maintain to Libertines,
that they will never find any Parallogism in my Demonstration; that it is
impossible to conceive it clearly and distinctly, without yielding to it; and
that all the Proofs they bring to confound the Soul with the Body, are drawn
from Sense, that they are confused and obscure Proofs, and will never convince
those who judge of things upon clear and distinct Ideas.

From this Principle, That the Essence of Body consists not in Extension, and
that the Essences of Things are unknown, I might draw yet many Consequences
contrary to Faith; but it is unnecessary: I would rather, if it were possible,
reconcile all true and false Philosophies with Religion; and however Impious
and Heretical the Consequences might be, which I could deduce from the Opinions
of Philosophers, I should think I wanted the Charity I owe them, if I
endeavored to bring their Faith in question; much less would I imitate the
conduct of Monsieur de la Ville, who leaving a Principle fully demonstrated,
and received in all Ages, and busies himself in drawing Heretical Consequences
therefrom, which only serve to confirm the Calvinists, by increasing their
number, and troubling the Faith of the Faithful: I would on the contrary, that
no one should think on these Consequences; or disown them as false, and
unfairly deduced from this Principle.

All Truths agree together. One cannot maintain a false Principle, but every
one that knows but a little of the Art of Reasoning, may infer from thence many
Consequences repugnant to Religion; so that if it were permitted to call in
question the Faith of others upon Consequences drawn from Principles by them
believed, (as there is no one that is not deceived in something) all the World
would soon be Heretical. This would be to open the way to an infinite number of
Quarrels, Schisms, Disturbances, and even Civil Wars; and all Mankind is
concerned to look upon the Abettors of such a Conduct, as Calumniators and
Disturbers of the public Peace: For in short, different Parties in Religion,
which are almost always found upon such like Consequences, produce strange
Events in a State; Histories are full of them; but the liberty of
Philosophizing and Reasoning upon common Notions, ought not to be taken away
from Men; it is a right which is as Natural to them, as it is to breathe. Divines
ought to distinguish between Theology and Divinity; between the Articles of
Faith and Men's Opinions; between the Truths which God teaches to all Christians
by a visible Authority, and those which he discovers to some persons as a
recompense of their attention and pains. They ought not to confound things
which depend upon such different Principles. No doubt, Humane Sciences ought to
be made serviceable to Religion, but with a Spirit of Peace and Charity,
without condemning one another, so long as we agree in Truths which the Church
has decided; for this Truth will shine forth; and by adding new discoveries to
those of the Ancients, all Sciences will be brought more and more to perfection.

But the imagination of the most part of Men is not adapted to new Discoveries,
but Novelties of Opinions never so advantageous to Religion affrightens them,
and they are easily familiarized with the most false and obscure Principles, if
but advanced by the Ancients: But when they are grown familiar with these
Principles, they find them evident though they are never so obscure; they look
upon them as very useful, though they are very dangerous; and they accustom
themselves so much to speak and hear what they understand not, and to pass over
a real difficulty by an imaginary distinction, that they are always well
satisfied with their false Ideas, and can never endure to be spoke to in a
clear and distinct Language: Like persons, who coming out of a dark place, are
too apprehensive of the Light, and cannot endure it, they imagine we blind
them, when we endeavor to dissipate the Darkness which surrounds them.

Thus although I have showed by many Consequences, that it is dangerous, for
example, to maintain, That Beasts have a Soul more noble than their Body; yet
this Opinion is ancient, and most Men are accustomed to believe it; whilst the
contrary is stigmatized with the Character of Novelty. Those who judge of the
harshness of Opinions, rather by the Fear they produce in the imagination, than
by the Evidence and Light which they diffuse through the Mind, will not be
wanting to look upon the Opinion of the Cartesians as dangerous, and condemn
them as rash and presumptuous, rather than those who even maintain, that Beasts
are capable of Reasoning.

Let a Man but say in company with a grave Air; or rather, with such a one as
the Imagination forms when it is frightened by something extraordinary, Indeed
these Cartesians are strange Men, They maintain that Beasts have no Soul: I am
very apprehensive they will soon say as much of Man: And this will be enough to
persuade many that this is a dangerous Opinion. No Reasons can prevent the
effect of this Discourse upon weak imaginations; and if there happens not to be
a brisk Wit, and who by a merry Air reimboldens the Company, and frees them
from the fear they were in, let the Cartesians torment themselves as much as
they please, they shall never efforce by their Reasoning, the Character which
is thus given of them.

Yet there needs no more to show them the extravagance of this Discourse, than
to put the definition in the place of the thing defined: For if a Man said
seriously, These Cartesians are strange Men, They assure us that Beasts neither
think nor feel: I am very apprehensive they will soon say as much of us.
Certainly one would judge, that this Man would have very little ground for his
apprehension; but the greatest part of Men are incapable of extricating the
least difficulty, especially when their Imagination is frightened by the Idea
of some Novelty which is represented as dangerous: Besides, the Air and
Deportment easily, and even pleasantly, persuade us. But Truth is not
discovered without some application of Mind, of which the greatest part of
Mankind is incapable.

Certainly, Men who know most, and whose Opinions are blindly embraced by the
Vulgar, ought not so easily to condemn their Brethren; at least, before they
had examined their Sentiments with a serious attention: They ought not to
inspire those* who respectfully hear them, with disadvantageous Sentiments
against their Neighbor. This is against all Rules of Charity and Justice.

But the Cartesians say they, receive Principles whose Consequences are
dangerous. I grant it, since they will have it so; but they own not these
Consequences. They are perhaps so gross and stupid, that they see them not
included in their Principles, yet they imagine they can separate them, and
think other Philosophers ought not to be believed upon their word. They are not
uncharitable to those who maintain Principles full of dangerous Consequences,
and also contrary to Religion and good Sense. For in fine, we may easily judge
by the mischievous Consequences which I have drawn from these very Principles,
upon which Peripatetics pretend to triumph over their Adversaries, how many I
might draw from others, and even the most mischievous, if I would give my self
the trouble of choosing out of their Body of Philosophy, the most
exceptionable. But what advantage soever there is in Theological Contestations,
as also in public Disputations, I had rather defend my self weakly, than
overcome and triumph as an Agressor. For in fine, I do not comprehend how
these, who submit to all the Decisions of the Church, can be pleased in making
any Men impious and heretical upon Consequences they disavow. Victory seems to
me to be fatal, which spills the Blood of our own Countrymen.

But I believe I have not advanced in the Search after Truth, any Principle of
Philosophy whose Consequences are dangerous. But on the contrary, if I forsake
Monsieur Des Carts in some places, and Aristotle almost every where; it is
because, I cannot reconcile that with Truth, or this either with Truth or
Religion: This I leave to Men of more Judgment and Invention than my self. I
have said the Essence of Matter consists in Extension; because I believe its
evident, that I have demonstrated it; and thereby given clear and incontestable
Proofs, that the Soul is immortal and distinct from the Body. A Truth which is
essential to Religion, and which Philosophers are obliged to prove by the last
Lateran Sess. 8.
Council. But I never thought this Principle, which is so fruitful in Truths
that are serviceable to Religion, was contrary to the Council of Trent.
Monsieur de la Ville ought not to assert it. This can do no good, This is the
Conduct of the Religionaries in Holland, Vitichius Theo. pac. chapter 4.
, Poiret L. 3. chapter 13. cog. not.
, and many others. I say not this to call his Faith in question; but I am much
afraid that his Conduct will give them occasion to assert, that we own in
France, that to be a good Catholic, it is necessary to believe that the parts
of Bodies may exist without any actual Extension; because a Book dedicated to
the Bishops, Published in Form with Approbation and Privilege, treats the
Cartesians as Heretics upon this Point. I fear lest by his Probabilities he
may shake the Faith of many, who know not precisely what is necessary to make
an Article of Faith; but I am yet more apprehensive, lest Libertines should be
fortified in their Sentiments, That the Soul is Corporeal, and consequently
Immortal. That the Subject which he thinks is the same with that which is
extended, because according to them and Monsieur de la Ville, Extension being
only a Manner of Being, whose Essence is unknown to us, we have no Argument
from Reason, that this Being is incapable of striking, and we have many
Arguments from Sense: Arguments however false they are, yet very convincing and
even demonstrative to all persons, that will not be at the pains of Reasoning.

Hence I believe I am obliged to assert, with all the Confidence which a sight
of Truth affords me, that I have demonstrated Extension is not a Search after
Truth. p. 2. chapter
Manner of Being; but a Being, a Thing, a Substance; in a word, a Body: And
there are many Answers in the Search after Truth to these Proofs of Sense, by
which Libertines confound the two Substances whereof Man is composed. I
maintain moreover, that Monsieur de la Ville has not shown, that this Opinion
of the Essence of Matter is contrary to Transubstantiation; that he has
objected only such Answers as are easy to be resolved; that he might more
easily triumph over his Adversaries; that he has only impugned mine, and
probably not so much as understood them; and that in the humor I now find him,
I don't think my self obliged to inform him. Lastly, That he has added to the
It is forbidden by this Bull, under Pain of Excommunication, to give any
Explanation of the Decrees of the Council. Ullum omnino interpretationis genus
super ipsius Consilii decretis quocunque modo edere, etc. This Power is
reserved to the Pope.
Council of Trent more Articles of Faith, or more Explications, than any
private person has a right to do, after the express prohibitions contained in
the Bull, which confirms the same Council.

As for what respects me, I desire the Readers not to believe Monsieur de la
Ville upon his word, but examine him cautiously: Even where he asserts with the
greatest Confidence, he boasts himself upon his Sincerity and Ingenuity; and I
don't desire to dispute those qualities with him, which are indispensable to
every honest Man; but I cannot forbear saying, in defense of Truth, and for my
own Justification, that he has often forgot himself in his Book, of which I
will give one notorious Instance.

In the Frontispiece of his Work, he has inserted an Advertisement which has an
Air of Sincerity; for it is composed only to make me a kind of a Reparation:
It Is in these terms; That there came to his Hands a Copy of the Search after
Truth, of the Strasbourg Edition, Anno 1677, which obliges him to advertise his
dear Reader, that I had retracted an Error in this Edition, which I had
advanced in the first: But it is so true, that I either know little in Divinity,
or am so very presumptuous, that I could not retract one Error without
advancing two others. His whole Advertisement is only to make me a Charitable
Reparation.

However it is false, (1.) That I retracted that pretended Error about Original
Sin; the same Proposition being in the same words in the Edition he cites In
the Edition of Strasbourgh, p. 190. In the 1st Edition at Paris, p. 172. In the
3d, p. 107. In the 4th, p. 95.
, and in all those made at Paris.

(2.) This Proposition is not my particular Opinion, since it is commonly taught
in the Schools: But though it were not taught at present, yet it is certainly no
Error, much less p. 90.
a very pernicious one; as he elsewhere calls it.

(3.) The two Errors which he supposes me to substitute in the room of that
pretended one, are two things which I never said, and which he puts upon me.
Those that read what he has written in relation to the Question, may see that
what I say is Truth; so that I shall not stand to prove it; especially since
some Stranger has sufficiently done it to my hand: And I could only wish,
whoever he was, that he had alleged the Reasons which I had for saying, That
an Infant at the time of Baptism was justified by an Actual Love; as I have
shown in the Explanation upon Original Sin.

Let any one judge then, after having honestly and sincerely examined the
Advertisement of Monsieur de la Ville, if I had not reason to desire the
equitable Readers not to credit him upon his Word; for if we believe him, he is
the most Sincere and Honest Man in the World; but if he be carefully examined,
we find not over many marks of his Sincerity and Honesty. At the end of his
Advertisement, he protests he has endeavored as much as possible, to keep all
the Moderation he ought: That it is only his Adversaries Errors he opposes; but
for their persons he has much esteem and respect, whilst yet one cannot examine
that Advertisement without discovering at least the appearances of a bad Faith,
and of a Malign Temper, which surprises and provokes the Spirit. I pray God to
pardon his Heat, to regulate his Zeal, and inspire him with a Spirit of
Mildness, Charity and Peace, toward his Brethren. I know not whether he is
pleased in treating me so unhandsomely as he does; but I can assure him that I
am much troubled, that the necessity of defending Truth has obliged me to
suspect his Honesty; and on the contrary, I should be glad is he could know how
much I honor, respect and love him sincerely in Him, in whom we are all
Brethren. Noverit quam eum non contemnam and quantum illam in illo Deo timeam
and cogitem caput nostrum in cujus corpore fratres sumus. Aug. ad Fortunianum,
Epist. 111.

FINIS.
Books Printed for S. Manship, at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
MR. Norris's Collection of Miscellanies, in Large 8 vo.

-- His Reason and Religion. The Second Edition, in 8 vo.

-- His Theory and Regulation of Love. The second Edition, in 8 vo.

-- His Reflections upon the Conduct of Humane Life. The second Edition, in 8
vo.

-- His Practical Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Vol. I. The Third Edition, in 8 vo.

-- His Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects* Vol. II. The 2d
Edit. in 8 vo.

-- His Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. III. In 8 vo.

-- His Charge of Schism continued, in 12 mo. Price 1 s.

-- His Two Treatises concerning the Divine Light, in 8 vo. Price 1 s.

-- His Spiritual Counsel: Or, a Fathers Advice to his Children, in 12 mo.
Price 1 s.

-- His Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal
to the Ladies, and Mr. John Norris: Wherein his late Discourse, showing that it
ought to be entire and exclusive of all other Loves, is further cleared and
justified, in 8 vo. These Eleven written by the Reverend Mr. John Norris,
Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, iti Four Books, written by Mr. John
Lock, in Folio.

Malebranch's Search after Truth: Or, A Treatise of the Nature of the Humane
Mind; and of its managements for avoiding Error in the Sciences. Done out of
French from the last Edition. Vol. I. in 8 vo. Price 5 s.

Practical Discourses upon the Parables of our Blessed Savior, with Prayers
annexed to each Discourse, By Fra. Brag, Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.
Large 8 vo.

A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ; showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenanting. With a
Preface, chiefly designed for the satisfaction of Dissenters, and to exhort all
Men to Peace and Unity. The Fourth Edition. Price 2 s.

An Explication of the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer; with
the addition of some Forms of Prayer, in 12 mo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Dialogue betwixt two Protestants (in Answer to a Popish Catechism) in 8 vo.
Price 2 s.

Poetic Miscellanies, in 8 vo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Christian Monitor, containing an Earnest Exhortation to an Holy Life. The
Eighteenth Edition. Price 3 d. Having already sold Seventy Five Thousand; and
those that are Charitably disposed, may have them for 20 s. the Hundred.

The Five foregoing Books were Writ by the Reverend J. Rawled, Author of The
Christian Monitor.

The Present State of Persia; with a Faithful Account of the Manners, Religion,
and Government of that People. By Monsienr Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King* Adorned with Figures. Done into English, in 12 mo.

The Present State of the Empire of Morocco; wherein the Situation of the
Country, the Manners, Customs, Government, Religion, and Politics of that
People are fully described* By Monsieur de St. Olon, the French Kings
Ambassador at the Court of Morocco. To which is added, Audiences given by the
Emperor, with the Answers. Adorned with Sculptures. In 12 mo. Price 3 s.

A Sermon concerning the Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer,
Preached by William Beveridge, D. D. Rector of St. Peter's Cornhil. The Eighth
Edition.

Seneca's Morals, by way of Abstract of Benefits. The Fifth Edition. By Sir
Roger L'Estrange.

A Cap of Gray Hairs for a Green Head: Or, The Fathers Counsel to his Son, an
Apprentice in London; containing wholesome Instructions for the Management of a
Man's Holy Life. The Fourth Edition. Price 1 s.

Plutarchs Lives, Translated from the Greek. In Five Vol. By several Hands.

Plutarchs Morals, Translated from the Greek. In Five Vol. By several hands.

Essays of Micha'l Seigneur de Montaigne, in Three Books, with Marginal Notes
and Quotations of the cited Authors, and an account of the Authors Life: To
which is added, a short Character of the Author and Translator, by way of
Letter; Written by a Person of Honor. Now rendered into English by Charles
Cotton, Esquire. In Three Volumes.


