A MYSTERY OF GODLINESS, AND NO CABALA; Or a sincere Account of the
NON-CONFORMISTS CONVERSATION. From the 24. of August to this time. For the
conviction of Adversaries, the instruction of the ignorant, the confirming of
the weak, and the satisfaction of all. Occasioned by a bitter and malicious
Paper, called the CABALA.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXIII.

A MYSTERY OF GODLINESS AND NO CABALA; Or a sincere Account of the
NON-CONFORMISTS CONVERSATION. From the 24. of August to this time. For the
conviction of Adversaries, the instruction of the ignorant, the confirming of
the weak, and the satisfaction of all. Occasioned by a bitter and malicious
Paper, called the CABALA.
WHen the fears and jealousies of some concerning us are so restless, the
malice of others is so implacable, that we suffer not only for what we have
done, but for what we may do, and we are not only obnoxious to Authority for
those miscarriages the world has seen us guilty of, but unto the Tongues and
pens of men; for those likewise the world may imagine us guilty of: To justify
his Majesty's clemency over us, to give the world a reason of the hope that is
in us, to satisfy all sober men, and to to promote tee peace and settlement of
our native Country, we declare.

1. That it is true indeed, we cannot come up in all things to their judgment
who are over us, as we know they could not come up to ours, when we were
advanced over them; and as we could not allow them any public employment or
encouragement when they could not comply with us, and our Laws and
Constitutions, so we cannot expect any public employment or encouragement from
them, now we dissent from, and cannot close with their Laws and Constitutions:
Yet it is true, that we submit patiently to that Authority which we cannot obey
cheerfully; really we cannot conform in conscience, and really we cannot resist
in conscience; for we must needs be obedient, not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake: we suffer, yet we repine not; we murmur not, we speak no evil
of Dignities; we dare not curse the King, no not in our thoughts: we desire to
fear God, we desire to honor the King; and we would not meddle with them that
are given to change, or to Innovations; they of us pay tribute from whom
tribute is due, custom from whom custom, and fear from whom fear; and his
Majesty has our hearty prayers day and night before the Throne of Grace for a
blessing upon himself and Government; and if we could renounce the whole
Covenant, yet would we not renounce that part of it, wherein we have promised,
sincerely, really, constantly, in our several vocations, to endeavor, with our
Estates and Lives, to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority, that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our
Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intention to diminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness: for indeed we (whatever the world may think of us)
desire to honor his Majesty: 1. For the Lords sake, by whom Kings reign, who
by a special providence has set our gracious King over us. 2. For our own
sakes, who though we are not capable of preferment under his Majesty, yet owe
unto him our lives, which he has pardoned, our liberties and estates, which he
secures to us, and the protection he affords us: It is a mercy that we may live
comfortably as Christians, though we cannot be employed and preferred as
Ministers.

2. It is true we have different apprehensions in many things from other men,
and in many things we are otherwise minded; but we are resolved, in those
things, to which we have already attained, to walk by the same Rule, to mind
the same things, and if we cannot be of one mind, we desire to be of one heart;
and to preserve unity of affections in our differ^^ces of judgment.

We desire heartily, that the small things we differ in should not have so much
power to divide us, as the great things we agree in should have to unite;
however we beg of the Lord heartily, that we may live peaceably with all men;
we desire earnestly to seek truth and peace, and to follow peace and holiness,
without which, we think, we cannot see the Lord: we desire to be just in our
dealing, harmless and innocent in our behavior and carriage, and to have our
conversation honest in the world, that whereas some speak against us as evil
doers, they may by our good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation; and though we are sorry to hear it, that some think it
strange that we run not with them to the same excess of Riot, speaking evil of
us, yet will we sit still, knowing that they shall give an account unto him who
judges righteous judgment.

3. Without all dangerous, offensive, or suspicious designs or complottings,
which we abhor, have, we fince the twenty four of August, held up our private
Devotions in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking bread from
house to house, and in prayers, loving as brethren; at these our Meetings we
plot nothing but the saving of souls, comforting the weak, reclaiming the
erroneous, instructing the ignorant, building poor souls up in their faith, as
helpers of their joy, for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the
Ministry, the edifying of the body of Christ, and helping our brethren in the
public ministry, who since our withdrawing have a great burden lying upon
them; some may preach Christ out of envy, some out of discontent, but Christ is
preached, and we dare boldly say, nothing but Christ crucified is preached
among us: wherefore we rejoice, and we hope they rejoice too, ever since we
hope without offense we have preached the Word, and have been instant in
season* and out of season, reproving, rebuking, and exhorting with all
long-suffering and doctrine: here have we no thoughts of our King and Country,
but thoughts of peace; no words of either, but serious Exhortations to
obedience under the one, and ear^^st prayers for the peace and prosperity of
the other: we ^^sire indeed to converse profitably, to improve our time and
opportunities usefully, to provoke one another to love and to good works. In
obedience to his Majesty's Laws for peace and order, we have no factious
Conventicles; in compliance with his Majesty's good inclination, for serious
holiness, for sober friendship we converse with one another lovingly, we meet
at one another habitations friendly and neighbourly, we open our doubts one to
another sincerely, and endeavor to resolve one another satisfactorily; we pray
unanimously, one reads, another opens what is read, and presses home what is
so opened; and so with prayers, and a hymn, and a little refreshment we
dismiss one another, and take our leave* the Prophets speak, two or three, and
the others judge; if any thing be revealed unto another that sits by, the
first holds his peace, for we all prophecy one by one, that all may learn,
and all may be comforted; but we must needs say, whatever in suggested to the
contrary, that among us the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets; for we own, that God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as
in all the Churches of the Saints: we hope there is so much of the English
genius of Friendship and good nature abroad in the world, that none will
censure us, either for familiar meetings, which are neighbourly, or for making
good use of those meetings which is Christian: Indeed we were unsufferable, if
we set up private meetings in opposition to public Assemblies; but its a
common observation by this time, that we never go together privately the same
hour that others meet publicly; and indeed we are glad when they say unto us,
Let us go up to the House of God. One thing we have desired of the Lord, that
while we seek after, that we may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days
of our lives, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.
And its seldom that we escape any opportunities of joining with the public
Assemblies, for though we cannot administer in the Church, yet we cannot
separate from the Church: we would not partake with the Churches sins, least we
be defiled; we would not remove from the Church, least we be nothing: And
indeed we desire only in private to set home upon our hearts what we have
gained in public; we would second the Ministers at home, whom we cannot assist
abroad: Its true, they of us that fear the Lord, speak often one to another,
but we dare not speak any thing that is amiss, for we know the Lord hearkeneth
and hears us, and a Book of Remembrance is written before, for them that fear
the Lord, and think upon his Name.

4. Forasmuch as there is no well-affected Christian that is not deeply
sensible of the unsetledness, division, animosities, profaneness, decay of
Trade, and other calamities, whereby our Native Country is exposed to the pity
of Neighbors, and the scorn and insultation of Enemies; we do effectually
endeavor to work our hearts to a sound humiliation for our own sins, which
have contributed too much to the common calamities, seeing we are so unhappy as
to add to the measure of public provocations, we cannot but be so
compassionate, as to endeavor to add to the measure of public prayers,
humiliations and intercessions.

5. To prevail with God the more effectually, we zealously stir up our
Neighbors and Friends to be passionately affected with the present Estate of
the Churches and Servants of Christ, that as they helped on their miseries by
their sins, so they may assist in their recovery, by their tears, sighs and
prayers.

6. We endeavor by all means to gain just notice, and a true account of the
estate of our Native Country; that as the men of Issachar, we may be men
understanding the times, and knowing what Israel ought to do; and herein we
observe: First, our sins we allow, to the great dishonor of the Majesty of the
holy God we serve, and the purity of the holy Gospel we profess: And secondly,
the judgments we lie under, by reason of these sins; our great design is to
root up the greatest evil, that is Sin, and draw near the highest good, that is
God, that he would take delight in us to do us good, and would receive us
graciously, and love us freely.

7. We deeply lay to heart, and secretly mourn for the sins of the people,
representing them to our thoughts in their heinous nature and circumstances,
humbly entreating the Lord for their serious repentance of them, and earnestly
deprecating the judgments provoked by them; so that we lay together both the
evils we feel, and those we have too just cause to fear, and in a due sense of
both, we desire to humble our selves, and others, under the mighty hand of God.

8. And therefore whenever we have an opportunity to speak from God to his
people in the public Assemblies, we desire to speak a present truth, and to
lay open and bewail the sins of the time, and to awake the people with all
zealous exhortation to a lively and just sorrow for all the overflowings of
wickedness, and to a vehement and godly striving against the stream thereof by
their prayers and utmost endeavors, day and night constantly pouring out their
hearts in strong cries and servent prayer to our God, that he will be pleased
to visit us in mercy and compassion, and cause the light of his countenance to
shine upon us.

9. And however, privately we set apart one day at least in every week for this
holy end and purpose, wherein we humble our selves in private fasting and
prayer, till it please our God to return to his in his wonted pity and
compassion, and put an end to our sins and miseries, recovering us to that
first state of Innocence, peace and plenty, which we were happy in before our
late miscarriages.

10. We do restrain our wonted pleasure, not allowing the liberty of that mirth
and lawful refreshment which we might formerly make use of, while the hand of
God lies thus heavily upon us.

11. We do not allow our selves the neglect of any good means of prayer,
reading, meditation and conference, whereby the peace and welfare of this
Church and State may be procured and maintained, and shall carefully avoid all
words and actions, ways and means, which may at all tend to the widening of the
unhappy breaches, and the increasing the many and woeful differences among us,
seeking peace, and ensuing it, studying now in our leisure time, to look into
the bottom of Controversies, that we may bring differences to as narrow a
compass as we can, beget a mutual good understanding and satisfaction among
sober men, clearing up things as far as lies in our power for the reuniting of
all honest and faithful hearts in a firm concord of Christian love,
endeavoring to discover and defeat all the devices and machinations of Satan,
and his Engines, against the peace and welfare of the Church in all parts of
the world, especially in these wherein we are interested.

12. And particularly considering our selves, our own miscarriages and
infirmities, we shall not as before fly out upon the weakness, defects, or
excesses of our Fathers or Brethren, aggravating the blame of those their
actions or Opinions, which may be capable of a gentler or milder construction,
resolving to look as charitably upon all their proceedings, who are otherwise
minded in matters of an inferior Nature, bending our whole endeavors against
known sin, and open profaneness, the great Enemies of our peace and settlement:
As we have preached, so we desire to live, that charity that suffers long,
and is kind, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things.

13. And to that purpose we have first of all laid aside all our lesser
Opinions among our selves, and our little separations and divisions, and
resolvedly knit our selves together in an entire affection one to another, that
by this all men may know that we are Christ's Disciples, because we love one
another, and are ready to show all mutual respects of Christian love, and
observance to each other upon all occasion loving as Brethren: As likewise we
shall in all meekness of spirit lovingly converse with, and kindly,
affectionate to, and respectful toward all our Fathers and Brethren in their
places, living without offense, and blameless.

14. We mourn, but not as men without hope; that our gracious God will find out
a way to have mercy upon us, and to cheer up his countenance toward all his
Chosen Ones, wiping (as that holy Bishop said) all tears from their eyes, and
all spots from their faces, and answering the holy desires of their hearts, in
showing them Sion in perfect beauty, and that not by overturning any part of
the Government, but by opening our hearts to see our errors, and close one
with another, by turning the heart of the Father toward the Child, and of the
Child toward the Father, least God come and smite the earth with dicurse.

15. In the mean time we possess our Souls in patience, and we keep silence
before God, waiting upon him that hides his face from Jacob; for his Spirit of
love, unity, peace and concord, resolving to continue thus doing, till we
receive an answer from heaven.

16. Its true, there are many of us whose bodies will not bear that austerity
of fasting and humiliation which our cause may require, yet they that cannot
fast do pray, and they that cannot spare a day in seven, can spare an hour in
twelve, and make up the rest in frequent and servent ejaculations.

17. Whereas some have pretended that we set up a Government within a
Government, and that we have an Authority among our selves, we must let the
world know we are all equal, and we have no formality or Ceremony among us, but
a free and voluntary entrance, left open for all comers into this strict course
of Christian Austerity, without any noise, without the required notice of any,
but God and their own conscience, that all may well know and see, that here is
no design than merely Spiritual, aiming at nothing but Religious Transactions,
between God and our own Souls, and consisting in the performance of the
unquestionable exercises of Piety and holy Devotion.

18. Since we have been incapable of speaking to the people the things that are
of everlasting concernment, we have recommended to them the writings of good
men, pious and peaceable, who being dead yet speak, and poor men we know may
read a good book, when they cannot hear a good man; and we our selves teach
them from house to house, with tears day and night, as the Apostles did,
leaving with them such books as Mr. Baxters Call, his Now or Never, his
Directions for Peace of Conscience, his Saints Everlasting Rest, Mr Bolton, Dr.
Sibbs, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Dod, and Dr. Preston.

19. We settle men's judgments upon most firm and solid principles, leading to
peace and holiness, leading them through that safe and middle way that is
equally distant from all the extremes men have run into in their hearts about
some points of Religion, as particularly in the points now in difference among
us, we teach our people, that though we cannot conform to the Church without
sin, yet they cannot separate from it without sin; we cannot administer
according to the prescribed form, but we and they can hear according to it; we
must join with the Church in our duties, though we are not guilty of her
infirmities; we teach them that it is one thing to hold communion with a Church
that is under some miscarriages, and another thing to act those miscarriages;
what we chiefly insist on, are things much comporting and agreeing with the
spirit of the Scriptures, and things that are most proper to build men up in
their most holy Faith, and to promote the power of godliness in their hearts
and lives.

20. Its true, we desire to settle our peoples hearts upon all occasions, but
always offering them such things as tend to peace and quietness, and godliness
of living, dealing as faithfully with them, as those who must give an account;
and if therefore we have any interest with them, we improve for God our
Sovereign, and the Church of Christ, for whose distressed members we sometimes
solicit them with success, and find them willing above their strength and
ability, and we hope the Lord will not forget their work and labor of love,
and yet we desire not to wrong any Minister in his place, for indeed we stated
the point of Ministers maintenance upon such grounds, that we are persuaded no
sober Christian, with whom we have any interest, will withdraw any thing that
is due from any man that labors in the Word and Doctrine, and watches for
their Souls: And though we are otherwise represented, yet our great endeavor
is, by a discreet interposition to allay and fix the people to a due
temperament (gently guiding some men's well-meaning zeal by such rules of
moderation, as are best to restore and preserve the health and peace of this
Church and Kingdom, much pleasing our selves in that good and firm
understanding which would thence grow between his most Excellent Majesty and
his good people, all jealousies being laid aside, our own and our Posterities
Interest lay before us many strong obligations to seek and preserve the peace
and welfare of the Land of our Nativity; the offense which some men's dangerous
meddling and overbusie interpositions have contracted upon our profession, we
have resolved to expiate by such moderations for the future, as might not only
check the excesses of our practice, but of our Opinions too, no men having a
greater kindness for peace and settlement preserved in truth, unity and order,
then our selves, whom it most concerns, whether we consider our consciences;
callings or interests, as knowing, that nothing undermines to much in our
Authority and Calling, as those dangerous dissentions wherein the people learn
to shake off both.

21. It is true, we cannot own that Episcopacy now established, so as to
undertake it our selves, yet we would submit to it as to every Ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or to those who are sent by
him, whose great charges and care is like enough to betray them to some
errors, and many enemies, whereof they canno but contract good store, while so
eminent and so active, they provoke that envy which improved to a popular
odium, is able to overcast the highest Merit and Integrity; wherefore the
Bishops have our prayers, pity, and assistance; and although we cannot in our
judgment approve all that they do, driven it may be rather by the* temper of
the people and unhappiness of this age, then (...) their own disposition to any
height and rigor of action; yet we allow not that their persons or Government
should be exposed to the malapartness of the loose and irreverent multitude,
who take a bold liberty to despise Dominions, and to speak evil of Dignities,
whereas we have always taught, that men should cheerfully submit to the
Authority, when they cannot in Conscience allow all the practices of those that
are over them in the Lord: Indeed, we never met with a more perplexed
conjuncture of affairs, then the late business of Bishops, when between our
unsatisfiedness in Conscience under that Government, and the woeful necessity if
we shaked off that of being under none, we run head, long to that which we
thought then expedient, rather then we should suffer some inconvenience under
that which, well regulated we must* always approve as just, preferring the
humor of some particular men, before the reason of the Christian World: Well
experience has taught us* that we had better live where nothing is lawful,
then where all things are so; that Anarchy is the greatest oppression,
licentiousness the greatest grievance and an unbounded liberty the greatest
slavery*

22. Indeed we allow it for weaker Christians, who have not their hearts
enlarged with an ability to express their own wants and desires, both lawful
and convenient to help themselves in prayer, the use of a prescribed form,
wherein they may have their own case and condition more pithily and
affectionately then they are able to express it themselves, and if the use of
such a form do prove a means to warm the affections, and enkindle their grace,
we looking not upon it as any quenching of the Spirit, it being not in our
apprehension essential to the nature of prayer, that it be either read, or
rehearsed by memory, or by immediate suggestion, but rather that it be
delivered out of the book, or out of the heart, with understanding and suitable
affections, with humility and confidence, and an inward sense of our condition;
nor is there any great difference betwixt repeating by memory, and reading out
of a book, the memory being but a kind of invisible book for the register of
our thoughts, though in this case it should be especially remembered, that in
the use of such prescript forms, to which a man has been accustomed, he ought
to be narrowly watchful over his own heart, for fear of that lip-service and
formality which in such cases we are more especially exposed unto; but yet for
any one so to fit and satisfy himself with his Prayer Book, as to go no
further, this were still to remain in his Infancy, and never grow in grace or
gifts; and withal, its very hard for a man to find a prescribed form that may
suit with our several emergencies; and therefore indeed we do not tie our
selves so precisely to any particular form of words, though of our own
composing, and fitted to our condition, but that we may either add or alter,
according as our emergent occasion, or some new affection suggested shall
require: Sometimes we feel our hearts more warm, our desires more vigorous, and
our expressions more copious and ready: And in this case we suffer not our
selves to be streightened or confined to any form, but take our liberty to
expatiate more freely, according as we find our inward: in^argements.

23. Amongst all the stratagems of Satan, whereby he would undermine Religion,
and pervert the souls of men, though there cannot be any more unreasonable, yet
there was never any more unhappily successful then the raising and cherishing
fears and jealousies in the world, that Religion in the height and exaltation
of it, is an Enemy to Government; and that to be a through-paced, a sincere and
zealous Christian, is to be dangerous to the State: We therefore, as Ministers
of this Religion, are bold in the evidence and truth of the Gospel, to say that
(whatever the men of the world judge of us) we profess Christian Religion in so
harmless and innocent a way, that we have studied and endeavored to state the
Rights of Civil Government upon the clearest and firmest principles, to secure
them by the most powerful obligation, and to urge them upon men by the most
efficacious motives of rewards and punishments in the world: And we profess
sincerely, that we look upon our late miscarriages as most unhappy scandals to
our Religion, and those engaged in them so for us, to persist still as Enemies
to the Cross of Christ, and men born to bring our holy Christian profession
into jealousy, suspicion, and disgrace with the powers of the earth, and to
stir up the Kings of the earth to stand up, and the Rulers to take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Christ, that they should break their
bonds in sunder, and cast their cords from them: We are so sensible of the
original and institution of Government, of the end and use of it, in respect of
good and evil men, and thereof the necessity of subjection for Conscience sake,
and of the sin and danger of resisting an Ordinance of God, considering that
they who resist privately or openly by word or deed, resist to their own
damnation; that we cannot allow any person upon any pretense whatsoever, in any
manner whatsoever, to vilify, despise, murmr against, disparage, undermine,
or oppose lawful Authority that is set over him, we say upon any pretense
whatsoever, either 1. In respect of the person governing, as Error, Heresy,
Idolatry, harsh Administration, or the like, in which cases the servants of God
in all Ages had no other remedy but patience, and prayer, and crying mightily
to the Lord, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11, 12, 18. as they did under Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudius and Nero, those Monsters of mankind. Or 2. In respect of the persons
governed, be they never so holy seeing, best of men, yea God and Man in this
case obeyed unto the death. 3. In respect of any causes whatsoever, though it
be Religion, whereof we conceive the Magistrate ought to have the greatest
care, so that we are persuaded in our Consciences, that to them who have
embraced Christianity in the true and genuine spirit of it, as we hope we have
all done; and to those who without vile affections, and carnal interests, shall
apply themselves to know the mind of God delivered in Scripture: As we hope we
do with peaceable submission, and patience is a clear duty under any
Government; so that though the Spirit of the Ruler be stirred against them, yet
they cannot stir out of their place.

24. And as we are thus justly affected to Sovereignty, as knowing by whom the
powers are ordained, as we dare not curse the King in our heart, or revile the
Ruler of the people, much less slander the footsteps of Gods Anointed; as we
submit for conscience sake to every Ordinance of God; yea to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, not daring to disobey in regard of the Oath of God; and
pay custom where custom, and tribute where tribute. So indeed whatever
apprehensions men have of us abroad in the world, we desire to fill up every
relation conscionably and faithfully according to the Rule, and as men that
desire to approve our selves to God and men; as 1. to our calling, we desire to
be faithful, neither suppressing nor corrupting the truth, to take heed to our
selves, and to all the flock of God, over which the holy Ghost has made us
overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own
blood: We desire to speak from the heart to the heart, to feel in our selves
what we speak, to others; that we may serve God with our spirit in the Gospel
of his Son, that we may save our selves and those that hear us; that we may
walk from love to God, to the glory of God, and the salvation of our souls, as
able, faithful, resolute, industrious, in preparing for, and exercising of our
Ministry, and as compassionate of souls, preaching the Word purely, plainly,
prude^tly, powerfully and sincerely, administering the Sacraments carefully,
instructing our Flocks, advising, admonishing, and comforting them as we see
occasion; being good examples to Believers, in words in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity and waiting upon God for success: We
desire to be neither too austere in our retiredness, nor too cheap in our
sociablenesse, but carrying so even a hand, that our discreet affableness may
be free from contempt, and that we may win our people with a loving
conversation; as secondly to our Relation, first to our Familier, we desire to
be the mouth of our people to God by constant prayers, and the mouth of God to
our people by wholesome Instructions, and holy Admonitions, loving, tender, and
careful of our nearest Relations, devoting them to Gods service, and committing
them to his care, providing yet for them honest things in the sight of men, and
going before them in good examples of piety and holy conversation, and so
over-looking them, as they that have more then mere bodies committed to our
charge: We desire to be familiar, meek, humble, and courteous toward all, and
helpful one way or other to our neighbor, as they that think our selves born
to do good, maintaining peace and love at home and abroad.

25. We think we have fully informed our selves in all the necessary points of
Religion; and we are so firmly grounded in those fundamental and saving truths,
that we will not be carried about with every wind of doctrine; as for
circumstances, we neither neglect them, nor yet too eagerly pursue after them;
we receive nothing in Religion upon trust: nor dare we absolutely follow any
guide, but such as we are sure cannot err; we have some hours for speculation,
but our Life is to reduce knowledge to practice, and so much we think we know,
as we can live; where we are convinced we we can submit, where we must dissent
we can be silent, and where we dissent from the Church, we desire to examine
thoroughly whether we are deceived; we keep close to those truths which do most
promote the glory and grace of God, the reformation of men, and the salvation
of souls: Whosoever therefore by pride, or faction, or schism, or ambition, or
novel fancies, and arrogance, or ignorance, or sedition, or popularity, or
vainglory, or envy or discontent, or corrospondence, or any other carnal
reason shall cause divisions or offenses by teaching any other doctrine then
what we have received, we look not upon him as the Servant of Christ.

26. We desire we may not be judged for our austere conversation and strict
life; for we desire, so to speak, and so to do, as they that shall be judged by
the Law of Liberty: We would our discourse were grave, discreet, pertinent,
free from vanity, free from offense: We allow our selves no corrupt or
unsavory communication; in worldly affairs we desire nothing may fall from us
but what is seasonable and well advised; in spiritual, such as may minister
grace to the hearers, and such as is sparing and charitable, allowing neither
detraction nor censure; not meddling with any matters of State* but keeping our
selves within compass, only desiring to understand the times, that we might
know what Israel ought to do: In word and actions we desire to walk
circumspectly, to avoid all appearance of evil; to walk as in sincerity, as in
truth, and as in the sight of God; exercising our selves to a good Conscience,
void of offense toward God and toward men; willing in all things to live
honestly, and endeavoring to live without rebuke in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation; and if we are more earnest and serious then
ordinarily, you must know, that we are sensible how short time is, what
eternity is, and what are our immortal souls, and what that God is with whom we
have to do. Our recreation we desire may be safe, inoffensive and moderate in
time and measure, such as may refresh a tired body and mind, and not effeminate
or debauch them, we would indeed rejoice, as if we rejoiced not. We allow our
selves so far creature-enjoyments, as nature requires, and grace moderates, and
our God blesses: we redeem our time, considering it is not our own improving
it to our best advantage; we know a day or a night well spent, makes way for
Eternity. We desire to be very observant of our outward conversation, but we
look chiefly at our inward frame; we live by the precepts, we live upon the
promises, we affect not singularity, we aim at sincerity, our Habits commend us
not to God, yet by our Habits we would not give offense unto men; our devotion
we desire may be with fear and reverence on the one hand, and with Faith and
sincerity on the other, we watch unto prayer, and we watch after prayer; and
indeed we desire always to watch and be sober, fearing in adversity, and
rejoicing in tribulation, knowing that tribulation provokes patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

27. Our endeavors to keep a good understanding at Court by our Friends and
Brethren, is loaded by our enemies (for so some would be still, notwithstanding
his Majesty's endeavors for pacification) with all the obloquies and
exasperations imaginable, and looked upon by some indifferent men with
jealousies and fears; but these men know not the just motives and pregnant
grounds with which we think our selves furnished for those undertakings, God
knows it is not any interest or party we desire to serve there, but we pursue
the peace and good of the Kingdom, and endeavor to prevent future dangers,
which we may foresee will in all likelihood follow some men's activity (if not
restrained) by a moderate Interest; not as if we would stop the course of Law,
or weaken Authority, but that we desire heartily, as many honorable Persons
do, with his Majesty and his Father of blessed memory, That no Party or
Interest be exasperated (and the multitude are easier exasperated then
appeased) by crossnesse, and asperity of some men's passions, humors or private
opinions, grounded only upon differences in lesser matters, which are but the
skirts and subburbs of Religion; wherein (as his late Majesty of renowned
Memory observed, as an Angel of God) a charitable counivance and Christian
toleration of sin dissipates their strength, whom rougher opposition
fortifieth, and puts the despised and oppressed party into such combinations as
may most enable them, yet a full revenge on those they count their persecutors,
who are commonly assisted with that vulgar commiseration, which attends all
that are said to suffer under the notion of Religion.

Indeed we only desire (what that famous Prince wished) viz. That solid piety,
and those fundamental truths (which mend both hearts and lives of men) be kept
up and encouraged with equal justice and impartial favor; and that the outward
circumstances and formalities of Religion devour not all, or the best
encouragement, of learning, industry and piety, but that with an equal eye and
impartial hand favors and rewards he distrited among all men, as they are
found, for their real goodness, both in ability and fidelity worthy and
capable of them: This, says that excellent Prince, will be sure to gain the
hearts of the most, and the best too, who though they be not good themselves,
yet are glad to see the severer ways of virtue at any time sweetened by
temporal rewards.

And though it be suggested, that we are not to be trusted about his Majesty,
although we can make it appear, that since his Majesty was restored we have
passed three years with so much innocence, and so little compliance with any
Interest or Faction, that not one public action we did since, but is capable
of a fair and equitable plea; yet since an Act of Indemnity and Religion is
passed, we think it our duty so for to comply with his Majesty's Intention in
granting that Act, as not to mention any thing, how defensible soever, which he
has commanded should be utterly forgotten, but to give our present sense of
things, we can sincerely profess, that we have not only a Loyal, but a most
affectionate esteem for his Majesty's Person and Government; for since, besides
the general obligation of Subjects, we are bound by our Religion to prize
gratitude above all things; we could not be just, should we not most earnestly
desire the happiness of that Prince, unto whose single endeavors we owe all
our Liberty; for we all acknowledge, that his Majesty's personal and passionate
interposings did confirm our Indemnity, and his most pious and unequalled
Declarations have satisfactorily evidenced, that he is not unwilling to indulge
the utmost extent of sober and Christian Liberty, which, as we have elsewhere
professed, are expressions of so much goodness in the midst of so great power,
and after somany provocations, that he has not the heart of a man, much less
of a Christian, that has not a due sense of them; we are sure they have so
thoroughly possessed us, that if in any public action of ours there be any
Instance that can be wrested to the disparagement of his Majesty's Royal
Authority and Government: we entreat the world to take notice, that we do
hereby utterly disown it, as being directly contrary to our professed
Principles, which lead us to no one point of outward practice more strictly and
powerfully then an exact and punctual obedience to his Majesty's Commands, and
a cheerful submission to his Authority. And once for all, now it has pleased
his Majesty to enjoin an outward conformity, to which we cannot in all things
subscribe, we are resolved, the Lord assisting us, to submit with
cheerfulness, and to suffer with silence, for as there is an active
disobedience, which is to resist, so there is a passive disobedience, that is,
to repine, neither of which can we by any means approve of; since whatever we
cannot conscienciously do, we think our selves obliged to suffer for, with as
much joy, and with as little resistance, as if any other act of obedience were
called for from us. We may perhaps be too partial to our selves; but certainly
in general we may pronounce, that whoever is of this temper, whatever his
judgment be, as touching things indifferent in their own nature, yet he cannot
be supposed incompatible with ways of public safety. And over and above all,
we are not capable of being dangerous to this Government, but by our
Representatives in Parliament, who are now men of such unspotted integrity
toward his Majesty's Person and Government, that it is a wonder if malice it
self can find the least suspicion of danger.

28. It is true (as some say) that by our diligence, good husbandry, and the
blessing of God upon our endeavors, we have got among us a considerable part
of the treasure of this Land; for we are a people that improve our time, and
follow our business, as whose strict profession forbids us those excesses
which swallow up other men's time and estates; Hounds, Hawks, Games, Wine,
Women, Plays, and other vanities, have neither our thoughts nor our purses,
which we reserve for higher advantage, which we constantly watch, and as
constantly meet with (so great an advantage has the sober against the
intemperate) yet out of what we have, are we ready upon all occasions to assist
his Majesty, and support his Government; yea if, as some would have, it should
please his Majesty to impose upon us a Levy for our former miscarriages, his
Indulgence to us, and for the peace and tranquillity we enjoy under him, it
should be parted with as cheerfully as ever we parted with money in the heat of
the late trouble; neither would we so anxiously look upon what is gone of our
estate, as we would thankfully take notice of what remains. It is true, we have
got estates some of us in the late troubles, and now we have places about the
King, and indeed we know not how to expiate former transgression against his
late Majesty, but by endeavoring to be as capable as we can to serve his Son:
Among our many failings we hoped this would have been none, that we used all
means to get into his Majesty's service, no place escaping us that could be had
for love or money; as we have done amiss, not out of malice, but
misinformation, or misapprehension of things, so we hope none shall be more
loyal and faithful then we, who, sensible of our errors and our injuries, do
feel in our own souls most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires
to make some repairations for former defects.

For his Majesty's and his Fathers faithful Soldiers and Subjects, who out of
conscience sunk in the same ruin with their Liege, Lord and Sovereign, we
declare, upon all occasions, when we are called to it, that we think it
necessary for public settlement, that they should be provided for as may be
just and expedient; such valor and gallantry we confess they have showed,
that we heartily wish we may never want such men to serve our Sovereign, to
maintain his Laws and Kingdoms in such a peace, as wherein they may enjoy
their share and proportion as much as any men; and so wish withal, that we did
close so unanimously in one common subjection, that there were no note of
distinction left, and no quarrel remain but this one, viz. who should be most
Loyal and faithful: we would have our fellow Subjects live as strictly and as
warily as we do, and they will see, the very money that is spent upon their
vanities would procure them places as well as ours does us: and as for such of
them as the iniquity of the times, or their own faults have made poor, our very
excesses would support them, and what we throw away idly would relieve them: we
are ready to join in any expedient that may accommodate all grievances, that if
it be possible we may have no more complaining in our streets. In a word, those
that are well inclined on all sides are ready to agree, but that there are some
crafty and subtle men on both sides, that would keep our distances and
animosities to serve their private ends, which they propose sometimes to
themselves out of the public ruin, aggravating all things with the most
odious circumstances, and endeavoring to inflame the vulgar to a temper
incapable of restraint or Government, that now we are at such a distance, we
look upon it as no less a providence, that God keeps the people within the
bound of Law, and the reverence of Authority, then that he keeps the Sea within
its channel, and the waters within their banks. And thus indeed since our
seclusion have we endeavored to approve our selves Gods faithful Children and
Servants by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers,
and yet true.

29. The great discourse of the Nation at this time is their Taxations, from
which some would persuade the world we under our present discontent make some
advantage, in reference to which our sense has been always this: 1. That all
our payments are our advantage, we allow his Majesty a part of our Estate, to
secure the whole; we support his Government, he protects our lives and estates
from that rage and rapine which in a few days may destroy the industry of many
years; we teach men constantly not to be so impertinent, as to complain of any
common charge or burden which seems necessary to the present policy, under
which we may have leave to live peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and
honesty; no safety to us without the restraint of other men's lust and violence,
and no restraint, without a Government that is able to raise a constant guard
to every man that would live securely under his own Vine, and under his own
Fig Tree.

We know that there are four pillars of Government and Order. 1. Religion, that
setleth the heart of men. 2. Justice, that orders their lives. 3. Counsel,
that may apply the Rules of Justice and Religion to particular occasions. 4.
Treasure, which last is so necessary, that without it, Officers will be
corrupted, Counsels betrayed, Armies ill paid and disciplined, Trade
obstructed, and a poor Nation will lie open to the dangerous attempts of an
untoward people at home, and the unneighbourly encroachments of potent Princes
abroad. 2. All payments are of our own imposing, by our consent in Parliament.
3. Our late miscarriages occasion our present grievances. 4. Yet we are not now
under the eighth part of former payments: We tell our people, that our King
affords us Christian protection, and therefore we may very well allow him
dutiful assistance, by our lives, estates and prayers.

30. Here we thought to have concluded, but that there remains two particulars
more, whereof we think fit to give an account, and then we shall set a period
to this importunity.

The first is this; viz. Why we have been so importunate, both a little before
the 24 of August, and ever since, against Popery.

Ans. Its true, that we had verily thought Popery had rendered it self justly
odious, by its own abominations in doctrine, worship, and bloody slaughters,
and that in these days of light and knowledge, to imagine a possibility of its
return upon the Protestant Churches, (which yet has been the Opinion of diverse
eminent for Learning and Godliness among us) was groundless fear, where no fear
was: yet really considering: 1. The vast numbers of Popish Emissaries, Priests
and Jesuits that swarm among us, English Colleges, as we are certified, being
much emptied by the reason of multitudes sent hither, whose ways are subtle and
close, whose industry is indefatigable, whose influence and efficacy upon all
sorts of persons is powerful, whose support from abroad is past finding out. 2.
The printing and vending so many English Popish books, which considering the
Apostasy of some, the indifference of others, distracted by our unhappy
divisions, cannot speak less then a great inclination to a revolt to Popery. 3.
The toleration of Popery publicly by them pleaded for. 4. The Jesuits designs
and models of reducing England to Romes obedience, followed and promoted by
many deluded Protestants. 5. The union of foreign Popish power, which how soon
the Court of Rome (being ever vigilant to improve such occasions for the
propagation of its own greatness) may make use of, for the extirpation of the
Protestant Religion; we need not divine. 6. The whole body of Popery published
by Sectaries, especially Quakers; upon these considerations we were awakened,
to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints; having not the
least thought of any dangerous intimations to the people, as if our Governors
or Government (both which we think in our consciences clear in that matter) had
any inclinations for, or were to give any countenance to that Mystery of
Iniquity: And it was therefore that we recommend to our beloved Congregations:
1. The love of the truth in sincerity. 2. Serious endeavors to heal the sad
breaches and divisions which are among us. 3. To read good books. 4. To make
Conscience of all Family duties. 5. To attend on public Ordinances. 6. To be
well grounded in the principles of Religion, and to watch over their hearts.

2. It was given out, that we the dissembling Party had made an accommodation
among our selves, the naked truth whereof is this; indeed we have endeavored
to follow the things that make for peace, which we have reduced to these heads
following.

1. Peace with God; if our ways please the Lord, our Enemies will be at peace
with us.

1. Of Nature in one common grace, wrought in us by one Spirit; if we had all
one new Nature, we should have all one mind.

2. Of Judgment; 1. In principles of Doctrine which we draw up; which are 1.
Few. 2. Plain. 3. Weighty. 4. Clear. 5. Subservient to godliness. 6.
Universally professed.

2. Principles of obedience of Worship, of government contained in the ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Belief, and the Scripture.

3. Of affections; one heart where there cannot be one mind, kindly
affectionate one to another, loving as Brethren.

4. Of ends; they that agree in the end, will in time agree in the means.

2. Unity; and that Scripture.

3. Uniformity; that every thing be done according to Scripture, decency and
order, that we be one of one way, and of one mind, and walk by the same Rule.

4. Order; none stirring out of his place, all studying to be quiet, and to
follow their own business peaceably and obediently, knowing them that rule over
them.

5. The power of Grace and Religion, which is a wisdom from above; first pure,
then peaceable, and the power of Religion makes for peace. 1. By subduing
lusts, whence come worse. 2. By working that love that bears all things, etc.
1 Cor. 13. 3. By enlightening the mind, difference come from ignorance, if we
have grace to practice what we know, God will reveal other things in due time,
and we shall all agree. 4. By subduing that covetousness, ambition, pride,
envy, etc. that disturb the world. 5. The power of Grace in us will convince
all men, that God is in us of a truth, and so will pacify the world.

The 6th thing that makes for peace, a great care of weak and wilful ignorance,
which is lazy, and will not search for truth; bashful, and is ashamed to do it;
sullen, and will not understand.

7. Take care of interest private or public; keep up a frame of spirit that
looks rather what is just, necessary and true, then what is expedient and
useful.

8. Be humble and teachable, neither proud nor selfconceited pertinacy, nor
think seriously on this obvious truth, a man may err: put on meekness and
long-suffering.

9. Take care of respect of persons, and of prejudice.

10. Be deliberate and sober, proving all things.

11. Have a zeal always guided by knowledge.

12. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory.

13. Prudently suspend your judgment and practice, and if you have faith, have
it to thy self.

14. All lawful condiscention and forbearance one with another, forbearing and
receiving one another, and bearing one another burden.

15. Wait by prayer on the God of peace, for your selves, for your Ministers,
for your Magistrates.

16. Mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them.

17. Give up your selves to your faithful Ministers, whose faith follow,
considering the end of their conversation.

18. Be wise unto sobriety, and rather believe then dispute, avoiding all
unnecessary questions.

19. Take care of an Innovating Spirit, stand in the way, ask which is the good
way, and walk therein, and you will find rest for your Souls.

20. Consider one another, so as to provoke one another to love, and to good
works.

21. Let the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets.

22. Correct and keep down the rising of our knowledge with humility in our
selves, and charity toward others.

23. So long as there is sound agreement in fundamental truths, and in the
simplicity of the Gospel, silence all disputes, in matters merely notional and
curious, which have no necessary influence into faith and godly living.

24. Let there be a joint obedience to the truths wherein all agree, and
pursuance of the end which all profess, whereunto we have already attained; let
us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same things, Phil. 3. 26.

25. Out of a serious and single-hearted love of truth, let us address our
selves to the search of holy Scriptures.

26. A mutual and brotherly love, which is a very great means to work upon the
judgments of one another, and to take off all impediments as usually arise
from personal prejudice in disquisition of truth.

27. Keep your selves to the Analogy of faith, the form of sound words:

28. Labor against the inward grounds of contention, as pride, self-love,
envy, malice and covetousness, and endeavor after a meek, charitable,
yielding, and submissive disposition of heart and frame of spirit, that may let
fall private interest for the public.

29. Meet and converse together for a mutual good, understanding of one another.

30. Wait upon God for further illumination in all truth.

31. Let the grounds of Religion be laid by Catechizing.

32. Suppress the beginning of religious debates, by a fair and amicable
communication among your selves.

Thus we have given a sincere account of our selves, which we beseech the Lord
to bless, to confirm the weak, to direct the doubtful, to convince gainsayers,
and to gain peaceable and sober men favor with God and men.

A SOLEMN VOW That we have taken.
WE the Ministers of the Gospel, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion, having
before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty,
and his Posterity, and the true public liberty, safety, and peace of the
Kingdoms wherein every ones private condition is included, and calling to mind
the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and practices of the
Enemies of God against the true Religion, and Professors thereof in all places,
especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion,
and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of late, and at this time
increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of
England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are
present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after other means of
supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations and sufferings) for the preservation
of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to
the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of
Gods People in other Nations; after mature deliberation resolved and determined
to enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all
subscribe, and each one of us for himself with our hands lifted up to the most
High God, do swear.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocatious against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and Man, to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Bishop HALL'S Holy Order OF THE Mourners in SION.
FOrasmuch as there is no well-affected Christian, that is not deeply sensible
of the woeful calamity of this once glorious Church, now humbled into the dust
of confusion, and exposed to the pity of all those foreign Neighbors, which
heretofore blessed it as a singular pattern of Divine Mercy; and to the scorn
and insultation of Gath and Ascalen: And for as much as it is, and has been
ever the practice of the Enemies of our peace, to range themselves into several
Ranks and Files, under various Forms, Qualities, and Denominations; as on the
one side* the Society of Jesus, the Order of the glorious Virgin, the
Archi-confraternity of the most holy Trinity, and the rest of this kind not
easy to be numbered: On the other side, Seekers, Quakers, Shakers, Dippers, the
holy Family of Love, Ranters, and such other Prodigies of Mis-religion and
Faction; and thereby have found advantage several ways for the promoting of
our ruin: Why should it not b^ found requisite, that we, the professed
Servants of our Lord Jesus Christ, Orthodox and genuine Sons of the Church o^
England (whose hearts are moved by the good Spirit o^ God to a just resentment
of our miseries and dangers) should firmly resolve (for the countermining of
these Engineers of Hell, and Conspirers of our destruction) to ente^ into a
safe, warrantable, Holy Fraternity of Mourners i^ Sion; whose profession and
work shall be a peculiarity o^ Devotion, striving with servent Prayers and
Tears to obtain from Heaven a seasonable redrefse of these our pressing
Calamities, and a prevention of that utter overthrow and final Devastation
which threatens this miserable Church wherein we do yet live: And for this
purpose may it be thought meet to tie ourselves by our secret and silent Vows
to these Rules following.

1. That without all offensive, tumultuous and suspectible Gomplottings and
Conventions, we shall hold up our private Devotions, and perform these our
godly undertakings to that premised end.

2. That there shall be no superiority or subordination in this holy
Fraternity, nor any soul more interessed in i^ then other; and therefore no
Formality or Ceremony of admittance into it, but a free and voluntary entrance,
lest open for all comers into this strict course of Christian austerity;
without any noise, without the required notice of any, but God and their own
Conscience, that the world may well see and know, that here is no other design
then merely spiritual; aiming at nothing but religious transactions between God
and our Souls: and consisting in the performance of the unquestionable
Exercises of Piety and holy Devotion.

3. That we shall zealously excite our Neighbors and Friends to be
passionately affected with this sad Estate of Gods Church, and to be liberal of
their sighs, and tears, and prayers for the happy recovery of it.

4. That we will effectually endeavor to work our hearts to a found
Humiliation for our own sins, which have helped to contribute to the common
stock of our miseries, and daily renew our Vows of a more strict and holy
obedience, and a more close walking with our God.

5. That we shall deeply take to heart, and secretly mourn for, and lament the
sins of our people, representing them to our thoughts in their heinous nature
and quality, humbly begging for their serious repentance of them, and earnestly
deprecating the judgments provoked by them.

6. That for this end we shall do our best endeavor to get just notice of the
sad estate of this distracted Church of ours, and to be truly apprehensive of
the peril wherein it stands, as also of the horrible Blasphemies and damnable
Heresies which have been of late disgoi ged from the mouth of Hell amongst us,
and those hellish practices which have followed thereupon, to the high
dishonor of the Majesty of that holy God whom we pretend to serve, to the
utter shaming of that blessed Gospel which we profess, for as much as we
cannot mourn for what we know not, nor mourn enough for what we do not know to
be so transcendently sinful.

As of the sins, whereby we have moved the fierce anger and wrathful
displeasure of our God against us, so also shall we take full notice of the
judgments, whereby we have smarted from his most just hand; yea (in a larger
comprehension) of the judgments past, present, eminent; amongst which, how can
we but sorrowfully reckon the mutual effusion of so much Christian blood, spilt
by the hands of brethren, (and as the Tribes of Israel did for Benjamin)
bitterly mourn for the slain of our people; of whom so many on both parts have
been swept away from the earth, in the sury of a violent hostility, as might
well have served to store a populous Nation, or might probably have overrun
the professed enemies of Christendom: To these we cannot but add the woeful
disasters and inexpressible miseries which do always inevitably attend an
intestine war.

But of all judgment, none have cause to make so deep an impression in us as
the spiritual; as knowing, that as our God is terrible in all his inflictions,
so most of all where he is least-felt; when he pays us in our own coin; when
he punishes us with our sins, making one sin the revenger and executioner of
another; when he repayes our actual rebellion against him with a senseless
obdurateness, with a plausible security and deadness of spirit. When he
rewards our neglect and contempt of his Ordinances, with giving us up to
spiritual delusions, and to the seductions of the spirits of error, to
prodigious whimsies, and spiritual blasphemies.

We shall then (as we have too just reason) lay together these evils that we
feel, with those which we have no less cause to fear; and under the sense of
both shall find our hearts pierced with sorrow, and resolved into the just
tears of our mourning.

8. That we shall not fail both by night and day constantly to pour out our
hearts in strong eries and fervent prayer to our God, that he will be pleased
now at last to visit this miserable and disconsolate Church in mercy and
compassion, and cause the light of his Countenance to shine upon us once again,

9. That the matter of our Prayers shall be the illumination and reduction of
those our weak Brethren, which ofsend through ignorance, and out of a
well-meant zeal are in the simplicity of their hearts miscarried into erroneous
ways, whether of doctrine or practice; for the merciful conversion of the
not-obdured and wilful opposers of the Truth; for the seasonable confusion of
the desperately malicious enemies of God and his Church; for the settling of
the Church of God in righteousness, order and peace, for the prevailence and
happy success of the Gospel against all Schism, Heresy, errors in Opinion,
and wickedness of life; for the discovery and defeat of all the devices and
machinations of Satan, and all his accursed Instruments, against the Church of
Christ in all parts of the world, and especially in these disjoynted members of
it, wherein we are interessed; for the encouragement and prosperity of all
those that are faithful in the Land, and that are hearty well-wishers to our
Sion; for the averting of those heavy and desolatory judgments which our sins
have thus long and loud called for; and lastly, for the making up of our
deplorable breaches, and reuniting of all honest and faithful hearts in a firm
concord and Christian love.

10. That we shall every week set apart one day for this holy purpose; wherein
we shall humble our selves in private fasting and prayer, till it shall please
our God to return to us in his wonted Compassion, and to put an end to these
deadly distractions under which we labor.

11. That we shall willingly abridge our selves of our wonted pleasure; not
giving our selves leave to enjoy any public meetings of mirth and jollity; nor
take the liberty of those lawful Recreations, which we have formerly made use
of, whiles the Hand of God lies thus heavily upon this Church and Nation.

12. That it shall be the desire of our hearts, that all which shall condescend
to join together in the profession of this holy Fraternity, be knit together in
an entire affection to one another, and be ready to show all mutual respects of
Christian love and observance to each other upon all occasions; being withal
in all mecknesse of spirit charitably affected to, and lovingly conversing with
those their Brethren and Neighbors, which are not yet so sensible of the just
cause of their humiliation.

13. That in the conscience of our own wants and infirmities, we shall make it
our care to spend our main censures upon our selves, and our own enormities:
Not being apt to fly out upon the weaknesses and defects of our Brethren;
bearing with those that are otherwise minded in matters of an inferior nature,
not aggravating the blame of those their Actions, or Opinions, which may be
capable of a gentler and milder construction; and reserving the edge of our
zeal for those foul and gross offenses, which carry open guilt in their faces,
making head against them by all spiritual resistance and godly endeavors of
Reclamation.

14. That whenever we shall be called to deliver the Message of God to his
people in public Auditiories, we shall not fail to lay open and bewail the
sins of the time, and to rouse up our Hearers, with all zealous Exhortations,
to a lively sense of just sorrow for the universal overflowings of wickedness,
and to a vehement and godly striving against the stream thereof, by their
prayers and utmost endeavors.

15. That we shall heartily labor not to be found defective in the use of all
good means, whereby the peace and welfare of Gods Church may be procured and
maintained; and shall carefully avoid all such ways and means, which may in
any sort endanger the widening of the unhappy breaches, and multiplying of the
many and miserable distractions thereof.

These are the Laws, to which we have thought fit in these doleful times to
bind our selves, in the presence of that God, who has graciously wrought in us
a feeling compassion of the public evils; beseeching him, who is the Father
of all mercies, to enable us by the powerful operatio of his good Spirit, to an
effectual performance of all these our holy engagements, that after the short
time of our mourning in this vale of tears, we may be admitted to be the
blessed partakers of that eternal joy which abides for all his in Heaven.

Christian Brethren, of what quality soever; I cannot fear, lest it will seem
too much boldness in me to invite you all to take part with me in this holy
Fraternity; which you shall highly wrong if you look upon it as mine, or any
merely humane institution: No, the Founder of it is in Heaven; it is the charge
of the Holy Ghost himself, by the hand of his chosen Vessel, Weep with them
that weep: If our tears therefore be (as they are) most just, ye are bound to
add yours to them, and shall offend if ye forbear: Neither can you be ignorant
that the Son of God himself whiles he was visibly here upon Earth, did not only
own it as well-pleasing to him, but encouraged it with the promise of an
assured comfort, and crowned it with no less title then Blessedness: And if
ye look for a more ancient precedent, even before the Lord of Life was
manifested in the flesh, ye do apparently find this Fraternity of singular note
in old Jerusalem, Ye know the Man clothed with white Linen, which had the
Writers Inkhorn by his side, had this charge from the mouth of the Lord
himself, Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and
set a mark upon the foreheads of the Men that sigh, and that cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof. Lo here, a company of Mourners
marked out for Mercy; even whiles the Sanctuary is contemptuously defiled, and
all Jerusalem is in blood.

Shall I now need any other motive to win you into the Brotherhood of this
sacred Order?

Know then, that they which sow in tears shall reap in joy; and he that goes
sorth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

Know that they are not Tears, but Pearls, that thus fall from your Eyes,
dearly precious to the Almighty, and carefully reserved in his Casket, for the
decking of your Souls to all Eternity.

Know that even the Lord of Glory was a man of sorrows, and that he bedewed
Jerusalem with his Tears, ere he watered is with his Blood. If therefore ye
will be moved either with the sweet and unfailable promises of a gracious
acceptance, and a blessed remuneration of everlasting comfort, or led by the
Precept, or the Example of that dear Savior, whose Name ye profess to bear,
refuse not, delay not to enter your selves into this so holy, ancient, and
highly privileged Fraternity of Mourners in Sion.

Mourn then, my Brethren, mourn heartily, but (as the Apostle in another case)
Mourn not as men without hope, Be not disheartened, O ye faithful Mourners in
Sion, as if ye were hopelesly condemned to a perpetual darkness, and were
doomed to dwell under a Cloud of endless sorrow. The Almighty will find a time
to have mercy upon his poor Church, and to clear up his countenance toward his
chosen Ones; wiping all tears from their eyes, and all spots from their faces,
and answering the holy desires of their hearts, in showing them his Sion in her
perfect beauty. Could we but weep soundly, he would smile upon us, and
comfortably shine upon his Sanctuary, and make the place of his feet glorious,
even an eternal excellency, the joy of many Generations: Indeed for the
present, O our God, thou have removed our Souls far from peace; thou have most
justly filled us with thine indignation; for we have deserved that thou
should pour out iniquities upon us, and should bring upon us the fruits of
our own thoughts, and measure our works into our bosoms; and cause us to drink
at thy Hand the Cup of thy fury, yea, even to have the dregs of the Cup of
trembling to be wrung out to us, for we have walked every one after the
imagination of his own evil heart; our transgressions are with us, and are
multiplied before thee; and though we have professed to be humbled under thy
mighty hand, we have not cried to thee in our hearts, when we howled upon our
beds; neither have we loathed our selves in our own sight for the evils that we
have committed; so as we do now justly lie down in our shame, and our confusion
covers us, willingly acknowledging that our iniquities have most deservedly
turned away thy blessings from us, and drawn thy judgments upon our heads.

But, O Lord, have thou so smitten us, that there is no healing for us? Have we
put our selves utterly out of the reach of thy boundless mercies? Art not thou
the God that retainest not thine anger for ever, because thou delightest in
mercy? Oh why should thou then be to us as a mighty Man that cannot save? O
thou the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in time of trouble, return,
return to thy people in the tender bowels of thine infinite pity and
compassion; humble our Souls thoroughly under the sense of our many back
slidings and grievous provocations of the Eyes of thy Glory: Oh strike thou our
heart with an unfeigned repentance of all our evil ways, and once again speak
peace unto thy servants: Was there ever a more stiff-necked and rebellious
people, O Lord, then thine Israel? more eminent in abused mercies? more
notorious in all kinds of abominable wickednesses? more exercised with variety
of judgments? Yet when they cried to thee in their distress thou were still
ready to hear, and deliver them, and to renew thy so often forseited blessings
upon them, and would not let loose thy vengeance upon them till there was no
remedy. Behold, we are thy people, though a sinful one; a second Israel both
for sins and mercies: Now, Lord, since it is thy mavelous mercy that we are
not yet consumed, be still pleased to magnify thy infinite goodness in thy
gracious forbearances and our powerful conversion to thee: And though we cannot
but confess that we are a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed
of evil doers, yet, Lord, thou know that thou have thy secret ones amongst
us; a people that prays, and trembles at thy judgments, and waits humbly
at the door-posts of thy Sanctuary; a people that defireth to walk close with
thee their God, and to be approved of thee in all their ways; a people that
figheth and mourns for the abominable sins of the Land of their Nativity; Oh,
for their sakes, be thou entreated to hold off thy revenging hand from this
sinful Nation, and even yet still provoke us by thy goodness to Repentance, O
thou the righteous and merciful Judge of the world, who even for ten righteous
persons would have spared a Sodom and Gomorrah from their fiery execution;
be pleased tenderly to regard the cries of thy many hundred faithful and devout
Souls, that sue to thee for the stay and removal of thy deserved judgments:
Oh do thou look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitations of thy
holiness and thy glory, the unsaigned humiliation of thy servants, who are
prostrate before thee with fasting and weeping, and mourning; turn away thine
heavy displeasure from us, and pity thy. Sanctuary which is desolate; so shall
our mouths be full of the praises of thy Name, and thy Saints shall rejoice
and sing new Songs unto the God of our Salvation.

In the mean time we shall in silence and hope wait upon the Lord, that hides
his face from Jacob, and not cease to pour out our selves in Tears and
Supplications to him that is mighty to save; neither will we suffer our cheeks
to be dry, or our souls to receive comfort, till we shall receive a gracious
answer from Heaven, and shall see that the Lord has been pleased to show mercy
to his Sion.

In this condition, we that are Sions Mourners shall not need to be
distinguished (as other Orders are wont) by Colors, Devises, Abiliments. Our
qualifications will be easily discerned by our sad faces, wet eyes, deep sighs,
mortified carriage, willing neglect of those vanities wherewith others are
transported, our holy retiredness, assiduous Devotions, and strict professions
of Godliness, Carry your selves thus, dear Brethren, and God and his Angels
shall gladly welcome you into that holy Society of Mourners, which shall be
marked out for preservation here, and for eternal comfort hereafter.

Lastly, let none of you discourage himself from entering into this sacred
Fraternity, out of the sense of his bodily infirmity, or the urgent necessity
of outward impediments. There is many an holy Soul that dwells inconveniently,
in a crazy, tottering, ruinous Cottage, ready to drop down daily upon his head,
not able to endure the substraction of one Meals support: There are not a few
well-affected Christians, whom the necessary exigences at their Calling and
Estate, like so many hard Taskmasters hold close to their tale of Bricks, not
allowing them the leisure of our limited Devotion. Let all these of both kinds
know, that they have no cause hereupon, either to hold off, or to think they
shall (in this case) need the dispensation of any superior power; since their
condition does sufficiently dispense with it self. Even the severest Casuists
of the Roman Church (who are wont to be the rigidest Exactors of the outward
exercises of Mortification) do, in these Cases, allow of a just relaxation.

My Brethren; if ye cannot fast, yet ye can pray, if your Stomachs be weak, yet
your zeal may be strong; ye can mourn though ye pine not; and if ye cannot
spare a day in seven, yet ye may spare an hour in twelve, and make up the rest
in your frequent and servent Ejaculations: shortly if you have truly mourning
Souls they will be accepted in the necessary want of the strict terms of
bodily exercises.

Farewell in the Lord.
FINIS.

