A REVIEW OF Mr. M.H's NEW NOTION OF SCHISM, AND THE Vindication OF IT.

IMPRIMATUR,

March 10. 1691/2. Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Henrico Epo. Londin. a Sacris
Domest.

LONDON, Printed for E. Mory at the Bible in St. Paul's Church yard. 1692.

A Review of Mr. M. H's New Notion of Schism, and the Vindication of it.
THE Vindicator begins with a Complaint of the unhappy Flames which have been
kindled amongst us about matters of Church Government, and Worship. And tells
us further, Vindic. p. 1:
That he must be as great an Enemy, that would not contribute his utmost to the
extinguishing of them. And so far I confess we agree with him; but whether Mr.
H. and his Vindicator be the sole Extinguisher, is a Question that may deserve
some further debate. More has been said to the former already, than he is at
leisure to answer; and therefore I shall only add one thing at present, viz.
That those who have learnt out the first occasion of Mr. H's Book, tell me,
That it was to satisfy the Scruples of some particular persons, whom his
Followers would have allured and drawn into his Conventicle. It was not to
reconcile the differences amongst so many learned Men as are engaged in this
Controversy. Neither was it to inform the world concerning that mighty secret,
the true cause of our Animosities, viz. That all other wars and fightings
proceed from our lusts, that war in our minds. Ib. p. 3.
St. James was aware of that, long before Mr. H. And as for his New Notion of
Schism, [the breach of Love] it was calculated for the Ladies, and the great
design of his Book was to make two Female Proselytes. Mr. H's Attempt was
indeed modest, because this was all he aimed at, but this Vindicator abuses
him, by ascribing too much to him. To place him in the Chair of Controversy,
and make him the determining Oracle over those two learned Partles, the
Churchmen and Dissenters, is enough to make any Man's head giddy, if he be not
extremely confident; and is so plain an Abuse upon Mr. M. H. as must needs put
him (if he be not very stupid) quite out of countenance. Especially if he does
but remember what little success his Book had with those for whose sake it was
written. For if it were not able to unsettle the minds of one or two of the
weaker Sex, surely he cannot expect it to control the sentiments of wise and
learned Men. And therefore it was an Abuse upon Mr. H. and an high piece of
Arrogance in the Vindicator, to make so many his Pupils: as if all the
Conformists and Nonconformists understood nothing at all either of the Duty of
Charity, or the Cause of Animosities, or the Nature of Schism, till Mr. H.
first informed them, and showed 'em their mistake.

The Churchmen are absolutely condemned (if this Gentleman be Judge) for
imposing unnecessary suspected terms of Communion mere Trifles, Vindic. p. 1.
and 2.
under fevere Penalties; Fines, Imprisonments, Exile, etc. And certainly they
were extremely to blame, if all this were done* and no body reclaimed; as it
seems his experience has sufficiently convinced him: P. 2.
But other Men's experience makes 'em of a contrary Opinion, who,
notwithstanding all the constancy which this Man boasts of, found the
Dissenters generally so good natured and flexible, that during the little time
the Laws were executed, a dangerous Faction was broken, and more done toward
bringing English Protestants to Uniformity, than ten thousand such little blue
Books as these of Mr. H. and his Vindicator will be able to effect. The good
English Protestents, though a little fond of Novelty; yet when once the Teachers
were suppressed, whose interest it was to bellow against all Establishmets, soon
came into the Church: and without any fear of those Mormos wherewith they had
been formerly terrified, did readily and cheerfully join with us in full
communion. And perhaps the Teachers themselves might have learnt Uniformity by
this time, through the execution of those penal Acts, as well as their
Predecessors and Brethren did before 'em. For the Nonconformists are not such
absolute despisers of the things of this world, as never to look about 'em for
secular advantage, though not so much I hope as to debauch their Consciences, yet
enough to open their Eyes. And therefore when they saw themselves deprived of
those goodly Tythe-Barns which had so plentifully fed them; and that the
Government was firmly settled which turned them out; and withal knew they should
have spoiled one another, if they had all Conventicled: they thought it high
time to make further Inquiry into the terms of our Communion; and finding them
at last to be much better than they imagined, many of the ablest and best
thought fit to comply. Ib. p. 2.
More I am sure they were than either five or six; and therefore he needs not
upbraid us with that number being departed from us: it being no wonder if five
or six Clergymen in all England should be so ill preferred, and so little
deserving; as to find it their interest to go over to the Conventicles, upon
the opening of a Toleration, where less Learning will serve; and they will be
much better paid, and thought of, than we could find them worthy.

Ib.
Nor are the Penal Laws any more the Support of our Trifles, than the Penal
Ordinances formerly were of theirs, (I mean, the Directory*) witness that 23d
of August, 1645. That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall at any time,
or times hereafter, use, or cause the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer to be
used in any Church, or Chapel, or public Place of Worship; or in any private
Place, or Family, within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Port
and Town of Berwick* every such Person so offending therein, shall for the
first Offense, pay the Sum of Five Pounds lawful English Money; for the second
Offense, Ten Pounds; and for the third, shall suffer One whole Years
Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprise. More of this kind may be seen in that
Ordinance, but from this it is evident, 1. That our Ceremoni^s did not fall
into such Contempt, as the Vindicator supposes, p. 2. when the Enforcements
were taken away, that being done by a former Ordinance, Jan. 3d. 1644. for if
they had, there had been no occasion for these severe Penalties. 2. That
Enforcements were necessary to support the Directory. And lastly, That they
were necessary to preserve it from Contempt, for thus it was ordained, Aug. 23d
1645. That what Person soever shall with intent to bring the said Directory
into contempt or neglect, or to raise opposition against it, preach, write,
print, or cause to be written, or printed, any thing in the derogation, or
depraving of the said Book, or any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, shall lose and forfeit for every such Offense, such a Sum of Money, as
shall at the time of his Conviction be thought fit to be imposed upon him, by
those before whom he shall have his Trial: provided it be not less than Five
Pounds, nor exceeding the Sum of Fifty Pounds. In this Act they have an Eye to
those that might preach it into Contempt. So that it was not of such value in
the Eyes of their own Ministers, but several of those who were at that time in
possession of the Pulpits might possibly fall away, and preach against it. And
as for the Service of the Church, Men were so far from totally neglecting it,
that after Ten Years suspension of the Penal Laws, they found it necessary to
discourage it. He that used the Book of Common Prayer was to be adjudged
scandalous, ejected out of his Living, and expelled the whole Parish, for fear
lest he should make an Interest against the new Modes. So that here it seems
Fines, Imprisonments, and Exile, were found as necessary to support the
Presbyterian and Independent Worship, as the Church-Liturgy; and People were
then as true to the latter, as either Mr. H. or his Vindicator can be to the
former.

But why are Penal Laws only the Props of controverted Ceremonies? Vind. p. 2.
The Papists, as well as other Dissenters, were obnoxious to the same Laws, as
this Gentleman may well remember, since they joined their Interest and Malice
to have them repealed; and yet, I hope, he will not say that the Papists were
ever punished for not complying with Ceremonies: nor can it be reasonably
affirmed concerning their Fellow Sufferers, unless frequenting the Church, and
receiving the Sacraments, disturbing Ministers, and holding Conventicles,
Things which the Penal Laws do principally regard, are no more but Ceremonies:
i. e. in the language of this modest Gentleman, all Trifles, page 2. and
Religious Impertinencies, page 13.

I shall not trouble my self with giving further Reasons for the execution of
those Laws, nor to show him that Religion has been preserved by such under most
Christian Emperors; for having shown it to be the practice of their own R.
Parliament, and Oliver, I suppose it is instar omnium; and will go farther with
this Vindicator to make it authentic, than all the examples from Constantine
to our own Age.

It will be more proper for us to enquire into Mr. H's peaceable design, and
how he has managed the Weapon (viz. the Notion of Schism) which he lately
wrested out of the Gladiator's hand, Vind. p. 4. it being certainly a matter of
no small importance; for if his account be so clear as this Gent. makes it, all
Church Discipline is out of doors; their own as well as ours: and a Man may
appeal from the Stool of Repentance, to the Quakers Meeting House, without any
guilt, if breach of Communion be no Schism, as these Gent. allege: But if his
account be not clear, or his Notion defective, or a false signification imposed
upon the word Schism, then he has acquitted no body: the sober, moderate, and
peaceable, must come to Church still; and only the worst sort of Bigotts remain
in the Conventicle. The management of this business being therefore of such
grand importance, upon both accounts, let us see how the little Champion has
weilded his weapon.

We have some reason in the first place to question the peaceableness of his
design: for the Notion it self being contrived to encourage, and justify
Separation; I am afraid the last result, and consequence of it, will not be
Peace. Suppose a Man should introduce the same Doctrine into the State, and
tell People that it is lawful to act in separate Bodies; That they need not own
the present Government, nor submit to King William's Laws; they may govern
themselves by a distinct Polity of their own; they may be for King James, or a
Commonwealth, according to their several apprehensions: The Nature and Rights
of Government are things dark, and obscure; and withal so trivial, and light,
that it is not material what Form of Government, or Person prevails: so that
diversity of Opinion, Judgment, or Apprehension, cannot be called, or looked
upon, in it self, a thing criminal, Mr. H's Enqu. p. 7. provided they still
preserve Charity. King William will never be so cruel as to hang 'em, only
because their heads are not exactly of his size, ib. p. 19. I fancy those who
are at the helm would scarce be persuaded that his designs were peaceable, though
he should second this Discourse with the most earnest persuasions to Charity.
And if Mr. H. or any body else, should attempt to debauch 'em with such
anarchical Principles, he would be reckoned a mover of Sedition, rather than a
healer of Breaches; and perhaps meet with such a Confutation, as the best
Vindicator he has would not know what to say to. And his attempt is not much
better with relation to the Church; it being not easy to conceive, how he that
sets People at liberty to divide and break into Parties, (as Mr. H. does,) can
be a promoter of Peace: for if it be lawful for People to separate, and break
into Parties, there will be no longer any Union, than while their Interests,
and perhaps their Humors, as well as their Principles, oblige them to it. When
the several Religious Interests once come to interfere, the Parties themselves
will fall out; and while they are striving for the mastery, not only ruin the
Ecclesiastical, but likewise endanger the Civil Peace.

Of this we had sufficient experience in the former Confusions, when the
moderate, as well as the fierce, were engaged in the Cause, and every Man lent
a Coal to inflame the Controversy. The moderate and peaceable Presbyterian, one
that had obtained that character among all that knew him, could nevertheless
tell the world in his Epistle, That Churches were not to be owned, after the
independent m^de: for it would lay the foundation of strife and division in the
Kingdom, to have two ways of Church Government, which may agree with some
Machiavilian, but no Christian Policy, etc. And the Parliament was applauded by
another moderate Gent. Because they endeavored to fence the Vineyard with a
settled Militia, and then to gather out the Malignants as Stones, Cotton upon
the first of the Canticles.
and to make a Winepress therein for the squeezing of Delinquents. And the mild
Independent is the very same, when he comes to be uppermost. Good Kings ought
to put upon their People Laws, and strait binding to the Purity of Religion,
and the Worship of God. It is not an Impeachment to their Christian Liberty,
(as the Anabaptists do vainly talk) but an Ornament to their Beauty, making
their Necks comely, as with a Chain of Gold. They were not only to chide the
Money Changers, but to whip them away, and overthrow the very Tables, lest they
should recover their Trade again. Dagon is begun to fall before the Ark, his
Head is off, Mr. Bridge.
but let not so much as the stump remain. And if the like disorders should
happen again, I am very much afraid lest these two charitable Gentlemen, Mr. H.
and his Vindicator, would become as great Incendiaries, as any of the former.
(Mr. H. already is not without grains of malice, too often sprinkled among his
Charity:) And as for the Vindicator he is all over spite, and from the
beginning of his Book throughout, by his false and malicious Suggestions, he
breaks the Laws of Charity, and shows himself a Schismatic, according to his
own Notion. Nay, at last, when he draws toward a Conclusion, lest his Readers
should not have noted his many spiteful Reflections, he takes care to put them
in mind, with a great deal of boasting Insolence, how roughly, i. e. how
maliciously he has treated T. W. p. 90. From such Men who are so uncharitable,
even while they pretend the contrary, and such Notions which introduce Anarchy,
Confusion, and Licentiousness, little Peace is to be expected, whatever is
designed. We know it is too much the custom of Politicians, to cry Peace,
Peace, even when they mean nothing less: and every Man that has but the sense
of the Kid in the Fable, will easily perceive in the present Case, that although
it may be the voice of the Goat which we hear, yet it is really the Wolf that
stands at the door.

Nor is Mr. H. more unfortunate in his Methods of peace, than he is in the
description of Schism. It is certainly the latest that has been coined, and
perhaps the wildest that ever any man fathered upon the Scriptures, or offered
to set up in contradiction to the received opinion of Sixteen hundred years.

He tells us p. 15. that Schism is an uncharitable distance, division, or
alienation of affections, among those who are called Christians; and agree in
the fundamentals of Religion, occasioned by their different apprehensions about
little things. From which description of Schism (if I understand it right)
these following particulars may be regularly drawn. First of all, That he that
was never truly admitted into the Christian Church, may be guilty of Schism if
he be called a Christian. For Mr. H. tells us that Schism is among those who
are called Christians. Secondly, Tha^ Heretics in fundamentals are no
Schismatics, for Mr. H. supposes that where there is a Schism both parties
must agree in the fundamentals of Religion. So that the grossest Heretics are
excused from Schism, which falls heaviest upon those who differ about the
smallest things, which is all one as if he should have said, the less the
fault, is the greater the crime. For instance, If people divi^e from the Church
because they will not own the divinity of our Savior, or the doctrine of the
Trinity; these people are no Schismatics, because they differ in fundamentals*
but if two Gentlewomen of his own Congregation should happen to fall out, and
carry at a distance because they could not agree about the upper end of a Seat
in Mr. H's Meeting House, this would be the horrid crime of Schism, the Arch
rebel against God, according to every branch of the aforesaid description.
Thirdly, Another inference to be made from it is, that alienation of affections
is Schism, but a division, and alienation of Communion, is not. And
consequently no one can charge another with Schism, except he be able to look
into his heart; It being impossible to know according to this description, that
people are really Schismatics, if they profess themselves to be in charity,
except we could make enquiry into the secrets of their hearts, and discover
every thing transacted there. And on the contrary, people may be the greatest
Schismatics under the outward professions of Charity, and yet no body can
accuse them with that fault. If these propositions be duly inferred from Mr.
H's description, I believe he will not find many that will join with the
Vindicator in his commendation of it.

And as for the clearness he talks of, there are so many ambiguities still
remaining, as perhaps may trouble another inquirer to explain to us. As 1st,
Whether the uncharitable distance must really be among those who are
Christians, or them that are none? for people many times call things by wrong
names. Secondly, What he means by fundamentals of Religion? Whether, salutis,
or theologicae veritatis? Whether those that are so to every man in his private
capacity? Or those which are the fundamentals of Church Communion? Thirdly,
What he means by little things? Whether division of affection about all manner
of little things be Schism? Or only about Ecclesiastical little things, the
trifles and Religious impertinencies which the Vindicator so frequently
despises? The clearing of these particulars had been of no small importance in
this controversy, and therefore if the describer had been pleased to have
explained them to us, his notion might have been abundantly clearer than it is.

But perhaps the Vindicator does not take this description for the clear
account; and that may be the reason why he minces and alters it himself, p. 80.
Whether for the better or the worse I shall not say. Perhaps the signification
of (...), and (...)* does the business; and the import of those words is the
only thing of which he has given us a clear account. Vind. p. 4. Let us
therefore take a review of that enquiry; and see whether there be any just
occasion for such mighty boasting.

Mr. H. tells us, p. 4. that there is but one Scripture in the old Testament,
relating to this affair, viz. Numb. 11.26. When I observe that if this Text be
nothing to the purpose, then there is none, and consequently either the Jewish
Church was in no danger of Schism, at least wise not infested with it: Or else
the inspired writings are seemingly defective; that have not one word relating
to it. And furthermore it is to be noted that in this text there is no mention
of any division or alienation of affections; and therefore unless it is to be
found in some other place, (which, Mr. H. denies) there is not one old
Testament Schismatic in the whole Bible. Or lastly, if there were any such
guilt among them, it could not be of the same nature with that which Mr. H.
determines to be the only Schism among Christians. But if all or most of these
consequences be false, or absurd; they will give us some occasion to suspect
the ingenuity, and truth of his first account.

As to the instance he gives us about Eldad and Medad prophesying in the Camp;
it is methinks extremely foreign to this controversy. They were to bear the
weight of government with Moses under God, and to assure both Moses and the
people of their Commission from Heaven, had the miraculous impulse of prophecy
before the Congregation, as a full and certain evidence of their newly received
authority. This prophesying was intended for a sign, as appears v. 23, 24. and
therefore how either the Enquirer or Vindicator can make it a repraesentutive
of their preachings, I cannot imagine. These Theodoretus ad quaestionem undenam
evenirit Septuaginta statui ut praefecti sunt prophetasse postea vero minime
(juxta Graecam scilicet versionem) respondet (...) -- hoc autem seu
Gubernationis judican^ique munere inquit Theod. ornati sunt Septuag. illi and
ut constaret populo divinum munus illos and consecutos quaedam statim
praedix^runt. Quod quidem receptior. Magistrorum sensui per quam consonum.
Seldom. de Synod. l. 2. c. 4.
Prophets were inspired to be the Rulers of the Nation, which I hope these
Gentlemen will not as yet pretend to. They were all acted by a constraining
impulse which surely is not the case of our Nonconformists. If the Spirit
should so rest upon them, that they could not forbear preaching; he were
abundantly worse than Joshua that should complain to my Lord Moses, tho it were
in the Camp, or the stable. Eldad and Medad were two of the Seventy designed
for government, (I wish these Gentlemen could afford as good a proof of their
Authority to preach.

They were left behind in the Duo remanent Eld. and Medad non imperii
negligentes sed humilitate submissi dum se honor arbitrantur indignos Hieron.
Ep. ad Fabiol.
Camp, and there the Spirit rested upon them; which was a sufficient proof to
Moses, that God had admitted them to the government, although absent from the
Tabernacle: Especially considering that they were of them that were written, so
that he might not exclude them. And therefore Mr. H. does impertinently allege
in this case, 1 Cor. 14.32. That the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Theod. quaerit. Eldad. and Medad. (...); ipseque respondet eos fuisse (...).
Prophets. Neither can he find that any of them scrupled, or refused, that
Religious impertinence of coming to the Tabernacle; or to join with the rest in
full communion, which had been the most eminent circumstance in the whole
affair to his purpose. Nay lastly, the business was chiefly secular, and
distinct from that which did more peculiarly belong to the Ecclesiastical body:
and therefore there could be nothing in this case to illustrate the business of
Schism.

But why is this the only Text that occurs in the old Testament? Persons of far
greater learning, and authority in the Church, have made use of several others;
I hope you will say not impertinently when I give you their names. That of
Aaron and Miriam has been thought by some not wholly unfit to illustrate the
nature of Schism: they taking occasion from the infirmity of Moses, to lessen
his authority, Ains. in loc.
and to raise their own; (as Mr. Ainsworth) intending no doubt to draw the
people from him. And therefore their sin is called Aemulation by Clemens
Romanus, and by him applied to the latter Schism of the Corinthians, as Schism
is usually the child and companion of Aemulation, which made the Corinthians
Schismatics, and their Leaders to break communion with, and to rebel against
their lawful Presbyters, as Aaron and Miriam did against Moses, and the people
of Israel themselves are taught subjection to the Priests, and Levites; lest
God should do to them as he did to Miriam, Deuteronomy. 24.8, 9. inflict the same
punishment for the like fault. From which reasoning in St. Clemens, it is plain
he reckoned Schism in the Church, to be like Sedition in the State, something
more than barely a breach of Charity. Vid. opt. l. 7.
That of Jannes and Jambres, was urged by the Donatists your Predecessors
against the Catholics, who did not disown the way of arguing, but only set the
instances right by comparing Jannes and Jambres with the Donatiss, and the
Church with Moses whom they withstood. And St. Paul did not think so slightly
of this instance, when he alleged it in his 2d. Epistle to Timothy, against
the Gnostic Schismatics; who led captive silly women laden with sins, Vid.
Hammon^ in loc. Clem. Romans p. 120. Optat. cont. Parm. l. 6. p. 167.
who did not only break charity, but resisted the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8. That
of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, is thought fit to be used by St. Jude, v. 11.
concerning the Gnostic Separatists, v. 9. By St. Clemens against the
Corinthians. By Optatus against the Donatists, calling 'em their wretched
Masters, the dividers of the people, the Masters of the first Schism, the
Schismatics, viz. your Masters, etc. And yet to Mr. M. H. it does not occur.
These instances and many more of the like sort produced by St. Clemens, and
others, as that of Cain and Abel, Jacob and Esau, Joseph and his Brethren,
Moses and the quarrelling Hebrew, etc. tho not all of them designed to run upon
all four, as the Vindicator speaks p. 40. Yet being alleged against
Schismatics, are intended some to show the mischiefs of Aemulation and faction,
which are always the ingredients of Schism; Others more nearly to signify the
pernicious nature and heinous guilt, of making parties, in opposition to lawful
authority; or to contend with them that are truly our Superiors in the Church,
and by this way of arguing we may learn, that according to the sentiments of
those primitive worthies, Schismatics are guilty of Aemulation, which must
necessarily be betwixt divided parties, and Interests, and consequently where
there is Schism there is likewise a breach of Communion. And secondly that it
is in opposition to our Ecclesiastical Governors. This must necessarily be the
Sense of those who use this way of reasoning* but neither of these things could
be imputed to Eldad and Medad; and therefore their notion of Schism could not
be the same with Mr. M. H's. and that is (I suppose) the reason why he neither
makes use of their Instances, nor they of his.

By his exception against those Texts, which obliged the Jews to worship, (as
he says) only in one place, viz. at Jerusalem. Mod. Enq. p. 3.
And to offer only upon that Altar; a man will be apt to conclude him extremely
ignorant in the Religion of the Jews, and the mystical reasonings upon which it
was built. To say nothing as yet of our own, how far it has any relation to it.
He supposes first of all, that the Jews were bound to worship at one place, viz
at Jerusalem, and secondly, that this obligation is vacated by that Gospel rule
which wills us to pray every where, Enq. p. 3. Which two things if they be true
(as he supposes) then the Male Jews never prayed at all, but when they came to
Jerusalem, Ibid.
viz. 3 times a Year, at the Feast of Unleavened bread, the Feast of Weeks, and
the Feast of Tabernacles; which methinks is a very scandalous account of the
Jewish devotion, but the whole assertion is false. The Jews had their
Proseuchae every where without the Cities, their Synagogues within, the
Tabernacle was at Shiloh, there was an Altar at Mount Ebal; Samuel sacrificed
at Mispeh, and in Zuph, in Gilgal, and in Bethlehem; Elijah at Mount Carmel.
They had their daily Sacrifices of the Sabbaths, and of the new Moons. Nor is
it easy to imagine that they should all go once a week from the most distant
places to Jerusalem, unless they had very little business at home, or were
extraordinary Travelers. They had their Proseuchae and Synagogues for public
worship, and their private devotions which might be said any where. All
inferior Altars and places of worship were in communion with the supreme one;
and the persons who did legally and regularly communicate at them, were
likewise understood to partake thereby of that one Altar, and therefore if the
Synagogues be certainly the patterns of our Christian Assemblies, Ibid.
pray Sir assign us an Altar with which we must hold communion, which will
surely be that of the Bishop according to the sentiments of the primitive
Church.

Nor was the precept of offering only upon one Altar so purely ceremonial, but
that it was founded upon very rational, tho mystical principles; according to
tne sense and interpretation of the Hellenistical Jews, the end of it was to
distinguish the Segullah, or peculiar people; those that were in special Union,
and Covenant with the Deity, from those that were not or had broken off from it.

The principle and archetypal head of that Union was God himself, to whom none
but the Segullah were united. The Segullah were united by Sacraments, which
were the legal Symbols and Ratifications of that Union* the High Priest was the
representative of the Archetypal head, so that none could be in Union with God,
unless united to the High Priest: None united to the High Priest unless they
did partake of that Altar where he offered, and those which were dependant upon
it. And therefore the Sacraments belonging to Schismatical Altars, viz. that of
Samaria and its dependents, erected in opposition to that of the true High
Priest, did not unite them to God, neither consequently were the Worshippers at
that Altar to be reckoned of the Segullah, or peculiar people; but rather as
the Altar of Samariah was against the Altar of Jerusalem, so were the Samaritan
worshippers against the true Israelites.

Now the Christians I hope are as well united to the Father and the Son as ever
the Jews were. They are as truly the Segullah, or peculiar people, and the ways
of transacting that Union by the Evangelical Sacraments and Priesthood as
certain. And therefore have been maintained by the Primitive Fathers and Mr.
Dodwell, upon the same manner of reasonings which the Jews used. See his one
Altar.


And if this way of reasoning be good, there are two other Texts in the old
Testament, which will help to discover the notion of Schism; one relating to
that Altar of the Tribes beyond Jordan, Joshuah 22. the other to those of
Jeroboam, 2 Kings 17.

Nor is any thing in this foolish paragraph conclusive against these
reasonings, which it was either designed to Answer, or else it is very
impertinent. No man ever denied that Christians might pray every where, in any
Kingdom, City, or place wheresoever they come, only we desire it may be
remembered that the Jews had the same liberty. And if private Christians may pay
their devotion to Almighty God any where, in the Church, in their Families, in
their Closets, in the Fields, and any other place; they certainly have the
liberty to pray every where: and yet this cannot vacate the obligation of
holding communion with one Altar, for the Jews themselves had the very same
liberty while they were under that obligation. If Christians have a liberty to
build their Oratories, and Churches for the public service of Almighty God,
wheresoever they please, without being excluded, or confined to any place; they
may certainly fulfill the Gospel rule of praying every where, and yet this will
be no prejudice to their holding Communion with the Bishop of the Diocese.

For if Uniting our Selves to a Congregation in communion with the Bishop, be
any violation of that Gospel rule; because they meet in a particular Church and
the Bishop lives in a particular City; I cannot see how Mr. H. and his
Vindicator, will acquit themselves from the same guilt, whose Congregations are
confined to a particular house, or a particular stable. Their people must be
with their Teacher where ever he assembles, ours with their Priest at the place
of public worship: And if we are to be condemned for breaking this Gospel
rule, I can see no reason why Mr. H. and his followers should plead not guilty.

It Is true we are not confined to that one Altar at Jerusalem, the obligation
was taken away by the authority of our Savior, Joh. 4.21. in his answer to the
woman of Samaria. The hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: Not that it was forbidden to worship at
either of those places, in the times of the Gospel; but the true* Evangelical
worship should not be confined to either, the Jewish dispensation was to be
laid aside, and a more spiritual one introduced; the literal to be exchanged
for the mystical Israel. The hour comes and now is when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father, in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such
to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit, and in truth. v. 23, 24. That which under the Gospel was to answer the
High Priesthood, should not be confined to one City, or one Mountain, and that
which corresponded to the worship she then discoursed of, namely the sharing in
the same Sacrifices, should be henceforth so spiritual, and free, that all
people might partake and communicate in it, however distant their residences
were, which they could not do before. This, as it is the genuine sense of our
Saviors discourse, so methinks these following observations may be drawn from
it. 1st, That there is something under the Gospel, which does really correspond
to that solemn worship at Jerusalem, for it being that only which the woman
discoursed of to our Savior; his answer must necessarily bear a relation to
it. And therefore the worship at Jerusalem, and the spiritual worship, were a
type, and antitype one of another. So that as all the Jews did communicate at
one Altar, in the like manner Christians must partake in the same spiritual
Sacrifices. 2dly, That as the design of those anniversaries was to keep 'em in
the same Communion; so that spiritual worship here spoken of is for the very
same end. 3dly, That as the Priesthood and Altar were the principles of unity
amongst them, so there is a mystical Priesthood and Altar, which do the same
thing among us. 4thly, That as he who broke the communion with that Altar, was
off from the Church of the Jews; So he who separates from ours is divided from
the body of Christians. And 5thly, That as in one case they forfeited the
Jewish privileges, so they do likewise the Christian in another. These two
last observations were included in the discourse, as is plain from our Saviors
confining Salvation to the Jews: For the conclusion bearing a relation to all
the premises, the true worshippers under the Gospel, are parallel with those
under the Law. And therefore as Salvation was of the Jews, and belonged only to
those who did worship at Jerusalem; so likewise Salvation under the Gospel,
must for the same reason, be confined to the spiritual Worshippers; that is to
those who are united to the one Christian Altar, as the Jews were to that of
Jerusalem, and by the same parity of reason all others excluded. So that I can
see no cause why Mr. H. should conclude, that the binding of the Jews to
communicate at one Altar, is nothing to us. For if we are under a parallel
obligation to do the same thing, to preserve that unity in the spirit, which
they did in the letter. If the Jewish Church was a representation of the
Christian, and their Altar, and Priesthood a type of ours: Surely something is
to be learned by us from what they did. Unity and Communion is something more
than a Ceremony, and Schism which is the breach of it, is I suppose the same
thing in the Christian, that it was under the Jewish Economy. St. Paul is
pleased to argue from the Jewish precedents, for the right of maintenance; that
they who minister about holy things ^ive of the things of the Temple, they
which wait at the Altar should be partakers with the Altar, and that even so
has the Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. Mr. Dodw. one Altar.
Plainly supposing that our Clergy answers the Levitical Priesthood, our
Churches their Temple, our Communion Table their Altar, and that what was
thought equal in their case in the provisions of the old Testament, is for that
very reason to be taken for ordained in the case of the Gospel Ministry; Vid.
Mr. Dod. one Alt. p. 23.
there being no other Evangelical ordinance. And why we may not argue from
Jewish precedents in the case of Schism, having the Apostles example for it in
case the of maintenance, I cannot understand. St. Paul argues from the
Aaronical, to the Melchizedechian Priesthood; from the Priesthood of mortal
men, to the immortal Priesthood of the Son of God; from the rights of the
literal, to those of the mystical Altar; and tells us that the Law was a
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; and yet Mr. M. H. is so apt a Scholar, that
in one of the most eminent and principal instances, he can find nothing to his
purpose.

Sigon: de Rep. Heb. l. 2. c. 8.
The Synagogues Mr. H. allows were the patterns of Christian Assemblies, but
not the Temple, p. 3. I should rather have thought the Synagogues, and Temple
too; especially if we believe the account which Sigonius gives; in which he is
followed by other learned men; viz. That Synagogues were first erected in the
time of the Captivity, that they who wanted the Temple to pray and teach in
might have some place like the Temple, in which they might assemble to perform
that sort of duty. Now Mr. H. tells us that Synagogues were the patterns of
Christian Assemblies: Sigonius that they were like and instead of the Temple,
and therefore any man would believe that the Christian Assemblies and the
Temple being both like the Synagogue, were also like one another: and
consequently the Temple as well as the Synagogue the pattern of Christian
Assemblies.

But I suppose Mr. H. da^es not allow the Temple to be a pattern for fear of
the Altar, and the Vindicator we find is for Prophets, rather than Priests, p.
41. The Priests (he tells us) were engaged principally in the Ceremonial, but
the Prophets in the Moral part of Worship; which was discovering the Mind of
God to the People, and pressing them to Obedience: and it is to this rather,
than the Priestly Office, that a Gospel Minister succeeds, ib. So that
according to this Gentleman, Preaching is the whole business of a Christian
Minister, and Prayers and Sacraments, which are the work of a Priest, are to
pass for Ciphers, and Religious Impertinencies. Our Author might have
considered, that the Spirit of Prophecy, so long as it lasted, did accompany
the Priesthood; and when at last the Scribes succeeded in the place of the
Prophets, Ezra himself was both Priest and Scribe, and accordingly prepared his
heart to teach Gods Precepts and Judgments in Israel, Ezr. 7.10. and (the
Prophecy that sometimes accompanied the High Priesthood) seems to outlive all
the rest, as appears from the instance of Caiaphas, who foretold the death of
our Savior; And, as the Apostle declares, this spoke he not of himself, but
being High Priest that same year, he prophesied, John 11.51. So that Prophecy
and Priesthood being united in the same person, if the Gospel Minister succeeds
to the one, why not to the other? or if he succeeds to the Jewish Prophets, why
not to such as were Priests, as well as Laymen? or if only to the Laymen, pray
who were the persons after Prophecy ceased among them, to whom the Gospel
Minister succeeded? or had he no Representative at all? perhaps you will say it
was the Scribe, who being Interpreter of the Law was for that reason a Type of
the Gospel Minister, like as the Synagogue where he taught was of Christian
Assemblies. And thence we may infer, That the Scribe and the Synagogue are as
like Mr. H. and his Congregation, as two Beans; and yet I am afraid the
Synagogue will not suit his purpose, any more than the Temple; the
Archisynagogus will spoil his Pattern, as well as the High Priest: For as there
is no such an Officer in the independent way, so both the Ordination and
Government of the inferior Scribes belonging to him, he so far resembles one of
our Bishops, that I fancy Mr. H. and his Vindicator will neither of them like
him.

The Instance of Eldad and Medad, and Mr. H's Opinion of the Old Testament
being thus far considered; let us now attend him into the new, for there he
tells us the special Enquiry lies, p. 6. And the Enquiry he there makes, is
after the signification of the word Schism; and the Reason he gives for so
doing, is because words, as he tells us, are the significations of things.
Whether there be not a little Nonsense in this weighty Reason, (which he lays
as the foundation of his notable Enquiry) I refer to the captions, being
willing rather to excuse it in a Man of his parts.

But he must pardon me, if I make bold to search more strictly into his ground
work; it is in kindness to the Superstructure, which will not abide a Storm, if
the Foundation be sandy. That Mr. H's is so, will appear, if we consider, that
although words do signify things, yet one word does not always signify only one
thing, neither is the same thing always signified by the same word. And
therefore as (...) may have several meanings; so other words in the new
Testament, may express the nature of Schism, as well as that, or at least help
us to understand, the true meaning of it. Thus Mr. H. himself interprets (...)
by (...). p. 11. St. Paul by (...) also and (...) and (...) St. Jude calls the
Schismatics (...), v. 19. St. John tells us, (...). 1 John 2.19. And there are
several other terms and passages in the new Testament relating to Schism, which
methinks ought not to have been omitted, by one that pretends to give us a
clear and a full account.

And as Mr. H. is defective in his inquiry, by reason of his slighting all
those passages, so neither is he exact in his interpretation of the words,
(...) and (...), you have the various meanings of 'em in a literal sense, viz.
taken for a rent, and rending, and cleaving, and breaking, but little to the
purpose, as he tells you, p. 6, 7. If it makes but little yet that little is
something, which Mr. H. ought not to have passed over in silence, and another
man will suppose that it makes a great deal; for as in the literal sense, it
imports a separation of parts, the rending, or breaking, or cleaving of one
body into two; So likewise in the Ecclesiastical there is something aequivalent
meant by it; viz. the dividing of Christ's body, the Church, and making two of
that Society, which ought to be united in one: which is most visibly done by
separation and breach of Communion.

Secondly, He says it is used figuratively for a division, and that twofold,
viz. 1st, A division in apprehension, and 2d, A division in affection. These
two parts of it being the necessary ingredients of his description, but if
there should be no real ground for this figurative distinction, if the places
he has quoted for the difference in apprehension, may as well be understood
concerning difference in affection, and so on the contrary, or if something
more is to be found in 'em relating to this affair, than what Mr. H. has noted;
then I suppose we may reasonably demure to his clear and full account. The
Texts he cites for a division in apprehension are, Joh. 7.43. c. 9.16. c.
10.19. and Acts 23.19. Now let any man look into his Bible, and examine these
passages, and I believe the meanest capacity will easily discover a great deal
more than barely a division in apprehension. See Joh. 7. and there you will
find the Sanhedrim, and their Officers, and the people divided about our
Savior. Among the people, some cry him up, as that Prophet, and the Christ;
others object against it, but shall Christ come out of Galilee, etc? Among the
Officers some were for taking him, others against it. In the Sanhedrim one
party chid the Officers for not bringing him, v. 45. reckoning them seduced by
him, (...);
v. 47. and the people cursed, v. 49. Nicodemus to be of Galilee (which was
then a term of reproach) because tho one of the Sanhedrim, yet he was secretly
his disciple, and stood up for him against them all, v. ^1. Now here was not
only a diversity of opinion, but a dividing into parties; a struggling of
Interests; a baffling of authority; a censuring and reviling of those that were
for our Savior, as deceived and accursed, and Galilaeans. Whether here was not
a division in affection, and what is more, a division and breaking into
parties, as well as a division in apprehension; let Mr. H. himself judge, or
the Vindicator for him, in case he is not able.

After the same manner he deals with Joh. 9. Where we read of a dissension
among the multitude, concerning our Savior, occasioned by his curing the blind
man. Some contending that he was not of God, because he broke the Sabbath;
others, that he was not a sinner, because he did such Miracles. The Man and his
Parents were both of our Savior's party, but the Parents durst not expressly
own him to be the Messiah, for fear of the Jew^. Pray, Sir, what where they
afraid of? Was it lest they should differ in apprehension? the Text tells us
otherwise. It was because the Jews had ordained, That if any man did confess
that he was the Christ, he should be excommunicated out of the Synagogue, was
to be turned both out of sacred and civil communion, and accordingly the Son
himself was so used as we find ( v. 33, 34.) for daring and persisting in that
acknowledgment. Now where the one party were so incensed against them that
owned our Savior, and the other so zealous in their belief; as to argue for
him notwithstanding the odium and trouble which thereby they might incur, to
call a dissension betwixt these parties, only a difference in apprehension, has
something in it peculiar to Mr. H. The dissentions betwixt private men may
perhaps pass under that cold title, but the dissentions of parties and
multitudes, (especially where people dispute warmly against the sense and
interest of a Government, as those who took part with our Savior, in the Jews
opinion, did) for the most part signifies a great deal more. And should there
have been such a dissension in behalf of King Charles the Second, or the Church
of England, when the Independents were uppermost, the poor Malignants would
have felt more than barely a difference of apprehension: And their Taskmasters
would soon have interpreted it to be the making of parties; how far the cases
are parallel, let the Reader consider.

The next place he alleges for division in apprehension, is Joh. 10.19. and
although some went so far as to cry out against our Savior, that he is mad, and
has a Devil, which expressions could hardly be used without some warmth and
resentment, as well as reproach and bitterness against those who owned him to
be the Christ: Yet Mr. H. is so very ingenious, as to apply it only to division
in apprehension, and so exceeding modest as to impose his mistaken sense
(without so much as offering at any proof) upon the rest of mankind,

Having done with (...), he falls next upon (...), which he says is used in the
same sense, Acts 23.7. Here the Pharisees and Sadduces were divided about St.
Paul, (...), there arose a dissension or an uproar, (for so the word may
signify), and the multitude was divided, and although the dissension was carried
on with the cries of the people, and the strivings of the Pharisees, with so
much noise and tumult, that the chief Captain was at last afraid, last Paul
should have been pull^d in pieces of 'em: yet this dividing of the multitude
according to Mr. H's. clear account, did signify no more, but only division in
apprehension.

Suppose a man should have said the same thing concerning the dissension at the
Boyne, about K. William and K. J. wherein the multitude was likewise divided;
whether it would have been ingenious, or ridiculous, let Mr. Vindicator judge.
It Is true, the Sadduces had had great Guns, nor did the Pharisees run away,
neither do we read of any mighty General that lost his life, yet there was
(...) in both cases, and St. Paul's life was in very great danger as well as
King William's; it was (...), v. 7. and but (...), v. 10.

Now I suppose any one might conclude from all the aforesaid Texts, that the
words (...) and (...) do import a division in affection; as well as in
apprehension, or something more than either, or both of 'em together; namely,
the dividing of the people into contrary parties; and therefore Mr. H. is
neither ingenuous, nor fair, in restraining the words only to one sense, which
are so capable of several, even in those very passages which he himself cites.
If other people would have been as hasty and as fanciful as Mr. H. to infer a
notion of Schism from the English of a word, and that again understood and
expounded, as themselves please, without taking in the sense of the context to
which it relates, they might have made short work on it, in proving Mr. H. and
his Vindicator both Schismatics: for if Schisma be dissension, as it is
rendered in these texts, Schismatici are dissenters, as these Gentlemen call
themselves; and so the business is done.

According to his ingenuity in expounding these Texts, he draws his inference
from them; viz. That this diversity of opinion, judgment, or apprehension,
cannot be call d or looked upon in it self a thing criminal; inasmuch as there
are many things which (either because they are dark and obscure and so not
capable of demonstration, or because they are trivial and of light moment, and
so not worth a demonstration) it is no matter what opinion men are of
concerning them, p. 7, 8. Now I would ask Mr. H. whether this paragraph relates
to the aforementioned Texts or not? If not, then he might as well have told us
his own opinion, with out quoting them it receiving no authority or
confirmation from them: and therefore should not have been obtructed upon the
World, under the pretext and umbrage of Scripture, but I suppose he intended it
as a position, grounded upon the aforesaid Texts, as appears from his calling
it this diversity; which pronoun relative This, must refer to the Antecedent
Texts, and his own paraphrase, and exposition of them; and if so, it is one of
the fliest Libels upon our Savior, and St. Paul, and their believing Friends,
and one of the best apologies for the Jews and Sadduces their Enemies, that I
have lately met with. For if it were a thing so dark and obscure, or so trivial
and light, that the difference was no way criminal, either on one side or
other, if it were no matter what opinion me^ had of our Savior and St. Paul,
no matter whether they believed the resurrection, or denied it; no matter
whether people took our Savior for the Messiah, or a mad man; no matter what
became of Christ and his great Apostles; or if these things were so obscure and
dark, and their ignorance about them so very invincible, the Jews surely were
not much to be blamed for any thing they did; nor the believers much to be
commended for making such a pother about things of such small concernment, or
at least so dark and obscure, that they could no way demonstrate whether they
did right or not. This must needs be the consequence of this paragraph, if it
relates to the former; and yet I am willing to excuse Mr. M. H. from it, having
the charity rather to believe that he knew not what he said.

I shall not trouble my self much about his pretty sayings, p. 8. though perhaps
it might justly be enquired, Aquin. 22. q. 39. 1. 3.
Whether Heresy does not always include Schism? Whether Evil does not sometimes
happen from the diversity, as well as the erroneousness of Opinions? Whom he
means by the Worshipers of the Diana of their own Opinions, and the Sottish;
Whom by the Saints; and whether Mr. H. is not a Schismatic, according to his
own Notion, by the uncharitable and partial Insinuations of his 3d, 4th, and
5th Paragraphs, in the last of which sure he means some body, when he talks of
a great strangeness to the Spirit of the Gospel. The Disciples of St. John
Baptist (he tells you) were hugely displeased, because Christ's Disciples did
not fast so often as they did, and quarrelled with Christ himself about it,
Mat. 9.14. Now all that those Disciples did, was to ask our Savior a question
in calm and proper terms, without any token of the least displeasure that I can
find, viz. Why do we, and the Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast not?
ib. And there was so much reason for that Enquiry, (considering how much
Religion they placed in Fasting, and what a good opinion they had of our
Savior, and how hard it was for them to reconcile the practice of his
Disciples, with the Character which their Master had given of him) that a Man
would wonder how it came to enter into Mr. H's head, that John's Disciples were
angry. Surely Mr. M. H. is of a very tender constitution, if he thinks that he
who asks him a question, must necessarily be displeased, and quarrel with him.
But if John's Disciples were so hugely displeased, and did really quarrel with
our Savior, when they asked him that question, surely there was a division in
Affection, as well as in Apprehension: and therefore this Text, as well as the
rest, might have been urged under that Head.

Neither is the Case at all so applicable to the Dissenters and us, as Mr. H.
would make it: The Fasting and Abstinence of John's Disciples, and the
Pharisees, was arbitrary, and peculiar to their Sects, not enjoined by the
Jewish Church; And, on the other hand, our Savior had all Authority, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, (as he was both King and Priest) united in his
Person. Now if in either of these Points, the Case of the Dissenters be
parallel: If Mr. H. can show that our Holy Days, etc. are only the private
Institutions of a particular Sect, without the Authority and Sanction either of
Church or State; or if he can make it appear that he is equal to our Savior,
that he is a Priest, and a King, or a God among his People, let him change the
Customs among them as soon as he pleases; let 'em fast all Christmas, and
carouze all Lent and go contrary in every thing to the Rubric and Canon,
provided [they have as much reason for their thoughts and practices, as we have
for ours,] which (with submission to Mr. H.) we could never yet see.

Thus much I shall freely grant him, that in case there arises a difference
betwixt private persons, such as Mr. H. and I, about matters of Religion, (I
should be but a saucy Procrustes, if I should go about to appoint the length of
him;) but if Authority thinks fit to call him to the Standard, he is
undoubtedly a Subject, and I know no reason why he should not go as well as I.
Some People have not forgotten, since they of his Party did usurp Moses's
Chair: how zealous they were for drawing up every body to their own pitch; not
only those that were in Covenant, but those that were out: insomuch that if
your size were too small, and you could not stretch, it would be next door to
hanging before they had done with you. And notwithstanding the smoothness and
love which Mr. H. personates in this Book, yet there is still so much roughness
and spite, (which he could not hide, and which the Vindicator openly boasts of)
in his rude usage of F.W. as makes me often pray, that I may never stand in
need of either of these Men's Charity.

We come now to consider the second sense of the word (...), and a Man would
have thought by this time it had been half construed, but you must examine three
places in 1 Cor. and thence you may be furnished with a true Notion of Schism,
p. 9. Now if I had been as Mr. H. I would have scratcht out all the former
Impertinence; for if here be the true Notion, what is all this stuff for before?
But then the little Book had been a great deal less than it is.

Just now you must look into three places for the true Notion of Schism, but
(Hocus-Pocus) turn over the Leaf, and you have it in one of them, 1 Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you Brethren -- that there be no divisions, ((...)) no Schisms among
you. And for the understanding of (...), you must observe this method, i.e.
First of all, You must enquire into the exegetical Exhortations that accompany
it. And secondly, Into the Corinthians miscarriage, which occasioned this
Caution, p. -- The exegetical Exhortations are, First, That ye all speak the
same thing, viz in the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, as he understands
St. Paul; but then he tells us from himself, See Bishop Ov. E^ Convoc. Book, p.
226.
and Estius (one of those who debauched the New Testament with their Popish
Annotations) That in little things it can never be made a Duty to be of the
same Opinion, since it is morally impossible. Now, for my part, I can see no
more impossibility for Men to be of the same Opinion in little things, than in
great. There is but one truth (and one best) in both. Their nature is as plain,
and it is as easy to me to find out my Duty with relation to Ceremonies, as it
is rightly to apprehend the great Mysteries of the Incarnation, and Trinity,
and therefore I know no reason why I may not agree with other People in little
things, as well as in great. A Table Gesture is a little thing, and yet I
suppose Mr. H. believes, that our Savior himself made it a Duty to use it at
the Sacrament. It would be pretty to see him demonstrate, according to his own
Rule, that it is morally impossible that we who now think otherwise, should
ever be of the same Opinion: and consequently, that our Savior could never
make it our Duty. If the Gentleman were better acquainted with Ecclesiastical
History, he would find that whole Churches and Nations had their peculiar
Customs and Ceremonies, and yet their Members agreed well enough in their
Opinions about the things he calls little, while they had no such People as he
to disturb their Peace.

He bids us observe, That St. Paul does not oblige us to think the same thing,
but (though your thoughts be diverse) yet speak the same thing, (i. e.) in your
Preaching and Converse, speak of those things only wherein you are agreed. I
observed before from Mr. H. that they were to speak the same things only in the
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity; and if he will allow me to lay these two
Observations together, the Sense will be thus, viz. you are not obliged to
think the same thing, (i. e.) to be of the same opinion in the fundamental
Doctrines of Christianity, and in your Preaching and Converse, take care to
speak of those things only wherein you are agreed; and as for the rest of the
Fundamentals, you may let them alone, (i. e.) according to Mr. M. H. do not
fall out, and fight about them. As if there were no difference betwixt mere
silence, and falling out, and fighting: But though Mr. H. may preach Fundamentals
according to this Gnostic Rule, I am sure that St. Paul himself followed a
contrary practice, or else he might have saved himself the trouble of many
sharp persecutions, as well as a great deal of pains in this Epistle.

Secondly, That ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment; which (says he) must be understood of a serious endeavor after
it, for otherwise a perfect conjunction must be reserved for a world of
everlasting perfection. If Mr. H. had but looked into his Greek Testament, and
duly considered the Original, perhaps he would have found no great reason for
this Interpretation. The words of St. Paul are, (...), Be ye compacted, or knit
together in the same mind and opinion. For (...), is in the literal Notion, to
compact, or knit together, either the members of a body, or the parts of a
building, etc. So Exodus 15.17. (...), Psalm. 40.6. (...), and as Mr. H.
observes, that (...) is used for the breaking of a Net, John 21.11. So (...),
is, in English, mending their Nets, Mat. 4.21. And as (...), and (...) are
opposed in the literal sense, so (...) and (...) are by St. Paul in the
Ecclesiastical.

Nor were the Corinthians all agreed in the great Gospel Truths, as Mr. H.
ignorantly supposes, p. 11. The Resurrection is surely to be numbered among the
great Gospel Truths, and yet many of the Corinthians denied it, which gave
occasion to St. Paul so strenuously to assert it in the 15th Chapter of this
first Epistle, Clem. Romans p. 60. etc. (...), etc. Vid. Chrysostom. and
Theodoretum in locum. Vid. Hammond. in cap. 7. v. 1.
and St. Clemens Romanus in his. That Marriage is lawful, and Fornication
otherwise, are (I suppose) considerable Gospel Truths: And yet the Corinthian
Schismatic allowed and practiced Fornication, even such as was condemned by the
generality of the Heathens, and no where scarce in use, (except among the
brutish Arabs) viz. That a Man should have his Fathers wife, cap. 5.1. And yet
this done by a Doctor of some Church in Achaia, within the Corinthian Precinct,
according to St. Chrysostom and Theodoret, (...): Not only admitted to be a
partaker of the Divine Mysteries, but likewise he had obtained the dignity of a
Doctor. And although some of those ancient Heretics could dispense with
Fornication, yet they dissuaded People from Marriage, teaching them, that it
was of the Devil. That we ought to own our Savior in times of the greatest
persecution, is a great Gospel Truth, Luke 12.9. and yet the Corinthian
Schismatics taught and practiced otherwise, (which Doctrine and Practice, St.
Paul is likewise thought to oppose, chap. 3. ver. 11, etc.) and went so far as
to partake of the Idol Sacrifices according to their worldly wisdom, that they
might escape persecution, which made the Apostle argue that point, cap. 8. and
to determine so peremptorily and severely, cap. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the Cup
of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table,
and the Table of Devils.

I might give you several other instances of the Gnostick heresy, (too rife at
that time in the Corinthian Church) but these surely are sufficient to prove
against Mr. H. that they were not all agreed in the great Gospel Truths. Now
Heresy includes Schism as it breaks the unity of the Faith, one of the
indispensible requisites to the unity of the Church. And therefore the
Corinthian Heretics being Schismatics likewise (i.e.) disjointed, and loose
from the body of the Church, the Apostle bids 'em be (...), well-jointed and
compacted in the Church. Again, in the same mind, and in the same judgment (i.
e:) by uniting themselves to it both in affection and principles, a work surely
to be done while men are in this world; and if it be not, Mr. H. will find it
too late when he enters into another.

I have only two things further to note under this particular. First, That the
Apostle charging the Corinthians to be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment, or opinion ((...)); it is strange how Mr. H.
could observe that they were not obliged to think the same thing, And secondly,
That this Text relating so plainly to difference in apprehension, even
according to his own exposition, it is no less unaccountable to me, why it
might not as well have been reduced under that head, as any one of those which
he alleged to that purpose.

Secondly, We must enquire into the Corinthians miscarriage which occasioned
this caution, which, he tells us, we have, v. 11, 12. There were contentions
among them, v. 11. Now the contention was about their Ministers, as Mr. H.
assures us, p. 11. But I would ask him, first of all, was there no miscarriage
antecedent to that contnetion? Yes surely, their heretical and wicked opinions,
which occasioned the antecedent caution, viz. That ye all speak the same
things. In these the Schism was founded, and they were probably the occasion of
their ascribing themselves to Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, and Christ. For
where difference in opinion occasions debates among people, not only the merits
of the cause, but likewise the original of each party, and the means of knowing
what they pretend to teach others are very frequently enquired into. Thus it
was in our Savior's case, when he taught something new and extraordinary,
beyond the common rate of their ordinary Scribes; Whence has this man this
wisdom and these mighty works? Is not this the Carpenters son? Is not his
Mother called Mary, etc? And are not his Sisters all with us? Whence then has
this man all these things? Mat. 13.54, 55, 56.

And there seems to be abundantly more occasion, for the like enquiry in the
case of the Corinthians; as will appear, if we consider the circumstances of
those early times, when this Epistle was written, especially what means of
knowledge the Corinthians then had; and what proofs they might make use of to
evince the truth or falsehood of any Doctrine in debate.

They could not have the writings of the New Testament, (this Epistle being one
of the first. And it may reasonably be conjectured (perhaps proved) that of
that little which was then written, they had seen nothing. For neither in their
Epistle to St. Paul, so far as St. Paul alludes to it, neither in his to them,
is there the least intimation of any such thing. And yet in the Epistles to the
Thessalonians, and the Gospel of St. Matthew (which were of a prior date) had
they been in their hands, they might have found the resolution of some of those
cases which they put to the Apostle, and therefore saved themselves the labor
of that part of their appeal.

And as for the writings of the Old Testament, there were two sorts of errors,
(not to mention any more) which were not easily confuted by their authority.
One was touching the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which (although it might be
proved from the Old Testament, yet the Gnostics who denied it, may reasonably
be supposed to have learnt from the Sadduces, some of their first Masters, how
to evade those proofs; and as for the other Judaizing Doctrines, the Old
Testament did so far seem to countenance them, that it was not likely that
every (...) should be able to prove it otherwise. And therefore it might become
the skill and authority of the great Apostle himself to show the contrary.

And as the Corinthians had not the assistance of the written rule, either for
information, or proof, in these cases, so both must be derived from their
Teachers; either in word or writing. For instruction (besides what they had
learned from our Savior and his Apostles) they had their Prophets and
Evangelists continually among them who being endued with the Spirit, were
thereby qualified to instruct and educate the younger converts in the Doctrines
of the Gospel, and from these the Corinthians received their common
Instructions.

But as the Orthodox Prophets had their true inspirations, so the Heretical
Teachers pretended to the same; and as the former had their true miracles for
the confirmation of their Doctrines, so the latter had their (...), their lying
wonders for the confirmation of theirs, to deceive, if it were possible, the
very elect. And that which made it still more difficult for the ordinary
Corinthians to judge betwixt them, was, because both parties continued in the
same communion: the Heretics not daring to go out (i. e.) to separate from the
Church, till a considerable time after this, when many of the Apostles were
dead.

Now where both sides were equal in order, pretended to the same inspirations,
the same miracles, and lived in the same communion: the proof of each Doctrine
must depend upon the credit and authority of those persons from whom it was
derived. If from Christ, it was the greatest; if from the Apostles, it was
next; if from one of the first Converts (well learned in the Christian
doctrines) highly approved and dignified by the Apostles, (as Apollos was) it
was of the last great authority. Thus St. Paul recommends the authority of the
household of Stephanas, as being the most early Converts in that Region, the
first fruits of Achaia; who having addicted themselves unto the Ministry of the
Saints, I beseech you brethren (says he) that you submit your selves unto such,
1 Cor. 16.15, 16. Therefore acknowledge ye them that are such, v. 18. Hereby
plainly directing them which side to choose, viz. those that were of Stephanas,
Fortunatu^, and Acha^cus's party, who took part with the Apostles, and
consequently were Orthodox. So likewise he magnifies his own authority, as
prior and greater than that of the first fruits; telling them that he planted,
Cap. 3.6. as the wise Master Builder, he had laid the foundation, v. 10. That
although they had ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet not many Fathers* for
in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the Gospel, c. 4.15. So that
having received their Christianity originally from him, they ought not to
gainsay his doctrines, they might not oppose their first fruits to his
authority. The College of their Prophets could not judge him. And as for those
who were the (...), and therefore said, they were of Christ (i. e.) had heard
our Savior themselves, and therefore pretended to have received their Doctrine
from him, and were consequently of greater authority than the first fruits, who
received theirs only from the Apostles, yet these were not to be credited in
opposition to St. Paul, who being chosen into the number of the select
witnesses, no other witness that was not one of that number could be equal to
him. Or if any man should oppose the authority of an Apostle, St. Peter, or any
of the rest, against St. Paul's, yet the Answer is easy, Is Christ divided? Can
he make two men the Apostles of contrary doctrines? The Apostles and all other
Orthodox Teachers must necessarily speak the same thing. They being laborers
together with God, c. ^.9. Ministers of Christ, Stewards of the mysteries, c.
4.1. but can lay no other foundation than that is laid in Jesus Christ, c. 3.11.

So that if men pretend the authority of St. Peter against those Doctrines that
are really St. Paul's, their pretenses by this very argument are proved
fictitious, and St. Peter could never be the Author of any such thing. Or if
the (...), who say they are of Christ, should pretend his authority against
that which is tr^ly St. Paul's, yet the answer is the same: Is Christ divided?
He chose o^t Paul, and gave him his Spirit to preach these doctrines, and
therefore those (...) must necessarily belie our Savior, who cannot be
supposed to make the Apostles Preachers of one Doctrine, and himself preach the
contrary. And yet if any man should set up Paul against the true Doctrine of
Christ, so as to make him the patron of their new Doctrines, because he had the
authority of an Apostle, yet the answer is easy, Is Christ divided? He cannot
have the authority of Christ to preach two contrary Doctrines, neither ought he
to set up any Doctrine of his own against the Doctrine and Authority of Christ,
which is the ground of that farther reasoning, Was Paul crucified for you? or
were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God that I baptized none of you
but Crispus and Gaius -- and the household of Stephanas, lest any should say
that I had baptized in mine own name, c. 1. v. 13, 14, 15. Tho we are Stewards
of the mysteries, have the authority of Apostles, and are accountable to no man
save only to the Lord, c. 4.4. yet this authority does not empower us to be the
patrons of contrary doctrines, that we should preach to you one doctrine
formerly, and now the contrary be obtruded upon ye under our names. It is
required of Stewards that a man be found faithful, c. 4.2. and therefore we who
are such ought to be true to our Master, and consistent to our selves. So that
if we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. And that they might
take the greater notice, he ingeminates the sentence, as we said before, so say
I now again -- If any man preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed, Ibid. v. 9.

Now for the Orthodox to say they were of Paul, or Apollos, etc. (i. e.) that
they received their doctrines from them, was the same thing then as to quote
Scripture now, i. e. it was the utmost authority they could allege. But when
the Heretics pretended to the same authority, the Orthodox had no way left but
to appeal to the Apostle himself, that it might appear under his own hand, what
his doctrine really was, and which party was in the right, and accordingly they
dispatched their Letters to him, by Stephanas, etc. by whom likewise they
received his answer in this Epistle concerning the things in debate.

So that it was the Heretical Gnostics only (not the Orthodox party) who are
reprehended by the Apostle for saying, I am of Paul, etc. 'Twas necessary for
them to allege these great authorities, that they might counterpoize the
Orthodox, who justly pretended to the same, this being one of the best ways of
proof in an age of inspirations, while there was little or nothing written.

And accordingly we find it made use of by the succeeding Heretics, till such
times as the Canon of Scripture was collected, and made up, (which was the best
part of a Century, at least, after the writing of this Epistle.) And when that
was done, they could not easily forget the same artifice, but still vented
their doctrines under the patronage of great names, so the Ebionites pretended
to be the followers of St. James; the Basilidans of St. Matthias; Basilides
himself of Glaucias, (the hearer of St. Peter) Valentinus of Theodades (who was
conversant with St. Paul, etc.) Sometimes they opposed the truth by pretended
and false traditions, otherwhiles by spurious and supposititious writings, and
at last by corrupting the very Text it self by their base interpolations.

Nor is it to be supposed that this was the practice only of the latter
Heretics, you may trace it in St. Paul's second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
written several years before this 1st. to the Corinthians -- That ye be not
soon shaken in mind, or be troubled neither by Spirit, nor by word, nor by
letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive
you by any means, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2, 3. Herein alluding to the pretended
revelations, the false and spurious traditions of Heretical Teachers, and
either some counterfeit Epistle urged under the Apostles name, or at least
their corrupt glosses and interpretations of those words in the 1st. Epistle,
c. 5.2. and perhaps it may not be unreasonably conjectured, that it was a
counterfeit Epistle, or at least that such practices were then in use, because
the Apostle is so careful to give 'em a certain token in the close of this
Epistle, whereby they might distinguish betwixt those that were genuine, and
those that were otherwise: The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which
is the token in every Epistle, c. 3.17.

And if this was the practice of the primitive Heretics, both before and after
the writing of this Epistle to the Corinthians, we may reasonably suppose, that
they did not wholly omit it at this time. And therefore I see no reason (but
rather a great deal to the contrary) why any body should be blamed, for saying,
I am of Paul, etc. save only those Heretics.

It Is not to be supposed that the Orthodox complained of themselves, for if
they knew themselves herein faulty, they might easily have reformed, without
ever acquainting the Apostle with it. And it is something remarkable, how
Clemens Clem. Ep. ad Corinth. page 110. Edit. Land. 1687.
Romanus aggravates the latter Schism of the Corinthians, by extenuating this,
(...), etc. But that siding was less criminal, for then ye took part with the
Apostles, who had born their testimony, and a man highly approved by them, but
now what kind of men are they that have turned you aside, etc. From which words
it is plain, That as the latter Schismatics were all of a Party, so were the
former: And therefore the being of Paul and Apollos, and Cephas, etc. is
comprehended by St. Clemens under one (...).

So that according to the circumstances of those times, the reasonings of the
Apostle, and the account of Clemens Romanus, they were all of one Party, whom
the Apostle reprehends, for saying, I am of Paul, etc. The (...) among them
(those who had seen and heard our Savior) pretended to be of Christ, (i. e.)
to have received theirs from St. Paul, and St. Peter; the elder Converts, among
the rest, who had been baptized by Apollos, to derive theirs from him. So that
the Schism of the Corinthians lay, in opposing the sound and orthodox Doctors,
maintaining their wild Heresies, under the pretense and umbrage of these great
names; and all other Heretics, who although they forsook not the Communion of the
Church, yet making a Separation within it, and forming a Party against the
truth, and opposing their Orthodox Governors, have been reputed Schismatics
upon the very same account in all Ages.

Having thus far given an account of the Corinthian Schism, which will do but
little service to Mr. H's Notion, let us now take a further view of his
Enquiry, and consider how ingeniously he manages the matter. He tells you, That
Schisms and Contentions are one and the same thing; as if Schism and Contention
had been convertible terms, and every one that contends, though for the greatest
Truths against the most pernicious Heresies, were for that reason a Schismatic.
Mr. H. might as well, and as truly have said, That Schisms and Factions are the
same thing, because St. Paul calls them likewise by that name: But, however, to
lay the greater Emphasis upon the word Contentions, he adds, it is worth noting
that Clemens Romanus in that famous Epistle of his to the Corinthians, still
calls Schisms (...), Contentions, En^. p. 11. Now from this Note of Mr. H's, I
hope he will give me leave to make another; which is, that Mr. M. H. never read
that famous Epistle: For though (...) be sometimes used in that famous Writer,
yet (...) and (...), and (...), and several other words, by which St. Clemens
means Schism, As (...), p. 110, 116. (...), p. 33. (...), p. 108. Edit. Land.
1687.
are brought in more frequently, but (...) in the plural scarcely once in that
whole Epistle: But Mr. H. being a modest, as well as an ingenious person, was,
it seems, contented to steal a Note out of Mr. Pool's Synopsis, rather than
undergo the drudgery and Greek of that famous Epistle.

It Is strange how Mr. H. in the next Paragraph should say, The Contention was
about their Ministers. Our Savior was ascended up into Heaven long before
this, and it would have been a strange wild fancy in any Corinthian, not to be
contented with any other Minister excepting only him. If Mr. H's Congregation
at the next Election of a Minister, should be divided into four Parties, and
one of them be for Christ, and no one else, I fancy the rest would conclude,
that either they were not right in their wits, or else that it is purely a
trick to have none at all.

And besides, it would be hard for Mr. H. to assign any reason why any body
should prefer Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, before Christ. I always thought our
Savior might have had the preference. And among all the wild Opinions of that
Age, I believe neither Mr. H. nor his Vindicator can name one Heretic, who ever
professed himself to be for Paul, etc. rather than for Christ.

He tells you, That he that was of Apollos, was as much a Schismatic as he that
was of Paul; which is very true, (though not for the reason which he gives.) They
were all of one side, against the Orthodox. There being not four Parties among
the Corinthians, as Mr. H. fancies, St. Paul himself makes but two, viz. the
Orthodox and Heretics, as is plain from that part of his salutation, ver. 2. To
all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours.

He tells you, page 12. That if one went to hear Paul, and another went to near
Apollos, that did not make a Schism: no, nor if one communicated with Paul, and
another with Apollos; which is certainly true: for it would have been no more
Schism to hear and communicate, as aforesaid, than it would be among us to
communicate with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London. But I
would fain know of Mr. H. how they must at that time hear and communicate with
St. Paul, who was then in Asia? how with Christ, who was then in Heaven?

There was no occasion for silencing either Apollos or Cephas, for they were of
the same mind with St. Paul, and the other orthodox Doctors. And yet there
might be occasion enough to silence some of the schismatical Teachers, who made
use of their Names, to give a reputation to their own Heresies; and accordingly
you find the Apostle threatening them, 2 Cor. 13.2. Now I write to them which
heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that if I come again I will not
spare. And in the 10th Verse, Therefore I write these things being absent, lest
being present I should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord
has given me, etc. which power was not only to silence, but to excommunicate
those Teachers, and inflict that further punishment which then attended those
Censures, and accordingly the incestuous Doctor was to be so dealt with by the
Apostle's authority and order, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. to be delivered unto Satan, by
being excommunicated out of the Church, for the destruction of the flesh, that
Satan having him in his power, might torment his body with diseases and pains.

For such a power as this the Apostles had, whereby they were more especially
enabled to convict Heretics of Imposture, who pretending to Miracles as well as
the Apostles, it was not easy for the common People to see which were in the
right, unless something extraordinary appeared on the one side more than the
other. And in this case nothing could be so proper, as that power of inflicting
punishments upon the very persons of the Wonder-workers. They might equal the
Apostles themselves in their pretenses to Inspirations, to Mystery, and
Knowledge. Their Tricks and Conjurations might perhaps seem as strange to the
common People, as any true Miracles: But when the Apostles inflicted miraculous
punishments, and yet they could neither save nor avenge themselves by all their
power, it would be plain enough to every one, who it was that acted by the
power of God, and consequently which side were in the right, and which Cheats
and Impostors. Thus St. Paul threatens the elated Gnostics, to know their
power, 1 Cor. 4.19. For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, i. e.
it will not be so easy for you to judge by disputations, etc. who are the
orthodox members of God's Church, as by these more evident demonstrations of
power, which make the case plain to every man.

And yet the Apostle was always tender how he used those rigorous methods, this
power being given for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. it
was only to be exerted upon the most notorious and incorrigible Offenders. And
this is the reason why we meet with so few instances of it, and why the Apostle
leaves it to their choice, how he should deal with them. What will ye, shall I
come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness, 1 Cor.
4.21. And this power seems to be appropriate to the Apostles, and their
Successors the Bishops of that early Age: For why else does the Apostle in the
case of the incestuous Corinthian, affirm himself to be present in spirit at
the meeting of the inferior Ministers of the Church. [ When ye are gathered
together. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.
] What matter whether the Apostle were present any way or not, if his presence
were no way necessary? why should his spirit with the power of Christ, be so
emphatically mentioned, ver. 4. if the Assembly had that power of Christ, so as
to do it without him; perhaps one reason might be, because the Corinthian was a
Doctor.

And we find the same authority over persons of that degree, appropriated to
the succeeding Bishops. So Timothy might bestow the marks of Honor, and
likewise receive Accusations against an Elder, and rebuke them that sinned
before all, so as to terrify others, 1 Timothy 5.17, 19, 20. Titus was to rebuke
sharply the Gnostic Prophets, those who bore the like character in the
Christian Church, to that of Epimenides among the Heathen, (i. e.) were Priests
and Diviners, to stop their mouths, which was surely to silence them, Tit.
1.11, 12, 13. So that the Apostles and Bishops who succeeded them in Authority,
had power to silence the schismatical Teachers, which is all we contend for:
But neither they nor we are for silencing those Ministers that being duly
ordained, are sound and orthodox, according to Mr. H's Supposition; and whether
he and his Vindicator belong to the former, or the latter sort, we are willing
at any time to stand a fair Trial.

As for his instance of Apollos, it will do him but little service, if
Antiquity is to be credited, which makes this very Apollos the first Bishop of
Corinth; and it is to be noted, that there were Teachers and Ministers before,
and therefore if Apollos was the first Bishop, he was of another Order. And
their boasted Father St. Jerome expressly tells us, that upon this very Schism
of the Corinthians Hi^ron. in Comment. ad Ti^um.
, In toto orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina
tollerentur. Not that there was no Episcopal Authority before this time, it was
lodged in the Apostles till now, and this was the first time they communicated
it to any other person.

With the like ingenuity Mr. H. expounds the second place in this Epistle,
where he finds the word (...), telling us, First, That it could not be meant of
breach of Communion, because they all came together into one place, v. 20.
Secondly, That the Schisms were Quarrels and Contentions about some little
things relating to the circumstances of public worship. Thirdly, That the
quarrel seems to be obout the time of beginning their worship, in every of
which conjectures Mr. H. is grossly mistaken, and seems not to have understood
St. Paul's meaning, as will appear if we consider,

First, That although it is true, as I noted before, that Schismatics did not as
yet hold any separate Conventicles, yet there was a most notorious breach of
communion, even at the Communion Table; and their miscarriages were so great,
and of such a kind, as were scarcely reconcilable with the nature of a
Sacramental Feast. Insomuch that the Apostle tells 'em, v. 20. When ye come
together into one place, This is not to eat the Lord's Supper, and the reason
was because they did not communicate one with another. For in eating every one
takes before other his own Supper, and one is hungry and another is drunken
(i. e.) The rich who contributed more plentifully to the common feast, did not
suffer the poor to be sharers with them, but snatched up their own oblation, and
eat and drank it themselves. So that those who by reason of their poverty,
brought little or nothing, went away hungry and ashamed, v. 21, 22. Now this
was so much a breach of communion, that according to this practice there was
really no communion at all. The rich looked upon what they brought as their own
Supper, to which no man else had any right, and for this reason were so hasty
to eat it up themselves, that the poor had nothing. So that while one party had
nothing to eat, and the rest ate every man his own without communicating one
with another, there was so great a violation of the designed communion, that
really they made it no communion at all.

And yet I can find no quarrels, or contentions among them. The rich who fed so
plentifully had no reason to quarrel, for they had their full share even to
excess. And although the poor had really a just cause of complaint, yet perhaps
because they brought nothing they thought it not seemly to mutiny. All the
Apostle mentions concerning their behavior is that they were hungry, v. 21.
and, as may be collected from the next verse, out of countenance and ashamed.

It Is pretty to see Mr. H. bringing in his little things here again, as tho
Heresies, v. 10. to violate the pious design of a feast of Charity, v. 20. to
be drunken themselves and starve the Poor. v. 21. to expose their poverty* and
put them out of countenance; and all this in the Church, at their Agapae, or
feasts of charity, were to pass under the title of little things. If there had
been any quarrels among 'em, these, according to the Apostle, must have been
the occasions; which surely cannot be little things in the opinion of any man,
who has not himself a very large Conscience.

The reason why the Apostle bids them tarry one for another, ver. 33. was, that
they might have communion by eating together, and not, according to their rude
and irregular practice, take every one before other his own Supper. But it is
unreasonable to conclude, That they quarrelled about the time of their meeting:
For although the time were fully agreed on by every man's consent, yet unless all
Clocks, etc. went alike in those days, and all men's speed were equal, some
would come sooner, and others later, as well as they do now; and the first
might devour what they themselves brought, before such times as the rest could
be there to partake with them.

I shall observe only two things more, before I pass to the next Scripture.

1. That Mr. H. in his account of this, very ingeniously passes over the next
and immediate Context, ver. 21. For there must be also heresies among you, that
they which are approved, may be made manifest among you. Now suppose that any
man should infer hence, that the Schism mentioned, ver. 20. was occasioned by
their Heresies; that their Divisions were only into Sects and Parties, some
being orthodox, and some otherwise, as it is among us, and that hence proceeded
the other irregular practices; I would fain know what he has to say to the
contrary.

And 2dly, It may perhaps try the wit of Mr. H. and his Brethren, to give a
clear account how St. Paul's reasonings, ver. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, and 32, can any way quadrate, or be reconciled to his Notion. And yet they
must be all brought in, or else the 33d verse quoted and urged by him, will
bear no manner of relation to the 18th, which he designs it to interpret.

The last place Mr. H. mentions, is 1 Cor. 12.25. That there be no Schism in
the body. I shall pass over his Remarks, p. 14. it being sufficient for us,
that he is pleased to acknowledge, page 15. that to be Schism, which breaks or
stockens the bond by which the members are knit together; which thing is so
notoriously done by separation, and breach of communion, that whoever is guilty
of that, may, according to Mr. H's Assertion, justly be charged with Schism.
That Bond, he tells us, is not an Act of Uniformity; neither, say I, is the
obligation of that Bond taken away by an Act of Indulgence. And therefore,
notwithstanding the late Act, nay, though we should have no Act of Uniformity,
yet all this would not excuse Mr. H. and his Vindicator from being Schismatics,
according to his own Argument.

True Love and Charity in point of Affection, (as Mr. H. assures us) is the
only Bond by which Christians are knit together -- And Schism is that which
breaks that Bond. That Schism does usually break Charity, no man will deny, Mr.
H. and his Party are sufficient instances of this truth, as those persons who
have the zeal and courage to oppose their Faction, do always find when ever
they fall into their hands.

And that Love and Charity is likewise a means to prevent Schisms, as it always
pays a just deference to all spiritual Governors, cools and abates the violence
of Faction, makes People humble, obedient, and docible, and causes all to
endeavor after peace and unity, we do readily acknowledge; and for this reason
both the Apostles and others have all along in their discourses about Schism,
pressed men to Charity, as a necessary means to bring them over to conformity
and unity with a sound and orthodox Church. But to infer hence, That Charity in
point of Affection, is the only Bond by which Christians are knit together, and
that Schism consequently is nothing else but Incharitableness are Positions
only fit for Mr. H. to assert, and the Vindicator to justify.

St. Paul does not say, as Mr. H. falsely quotes him, That it is the unity of
the Spirit that is the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. but exhorts the Ephesians to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: so that the bond of peace
must needs be something more than barely the unity of the Spirit. And by the
unity of the Spirit, more is certainly to be understood than only Charity, as
appears by the References made to it in the Context, ver. 4.7. and 11, etc.
which thoroughly considered, makes this Text little or nothing to Mr. H's purpose.

And withal it is to be remembered, that the Apostle insists upon several other
ties and obligations whereby Christians are knit together, besides Charity,
viz. they are incorporated into one society, one body, as well as animated by
one spirit, ver. 4. united in one hope of their blessed calling, ibid. united
as Subjects to the same Lord, as Professors of one and the same Faith;
initiated into the same Mysteries; and Partners in the same Covenant, by one
and the same Baptism; and united by our union and communion with the orthodox
Governors and Pastors of the Church, which, St. Paul tells us, were given us
for the perfecting of the Saints; or, according to the Original, (...), for the
compacting or knitting together of the Saints, ver. 12. (...), for the edifying
or building up of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith* etc. unto a perfect man, etc. that we henceforth be no more Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight
of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, ver. 13,
14. From all which it appears, that Mr. H. is for one Doctrine, and St. Paul
for another; and therefore having laid both opinions before the Reader, I
freely leave it to his own choice whether of the two he will follow.

Charity is certainly the bond of perfectness; but what is meant by (...), Col.
3.14. Mr. H. has not informed us: which surely he ought to have done, before he
had made any inference from these words, whether (...) signifies mercifulness,
Hammond in loc.
as it does, Luke 6.36. or perfectness, in all the duties of Christianity.
Charity may either way be the (...), or bond of it; for Charity is a very large
and comprehensive virtue: The Apostle tells us, it is the fulfilling of the
Law. So that every duty you can name is included in it, and every sin a
violation of it: The Thief breaks Charity, when he picks his Neighbor's
Pocket: The Murderer, when he cuts his Throat: The Traitor, when he conspires
against his Prince: And the Schismatic, who makes Broils and Factions in the
Church. But still, if any one should ask you -- Pray, Sir, What is Treason? and
you should answer, Incharitableness? What is Murder? Incharitableness. What is
Theft? Incharitableness. What is Schism? Incharitableness. I believe no man
would take you for a Conjurer in Logic, any more than in Divinity.

And yet this is all that Mr. M. H. has done toward furnishing the world with
a New Notion of Schism, and to acquire to himself the glorious Titles of Modest
and Ingenious, which the Vindicator so liberally bestows upon him, page 3.
which how well he deserves, let the Reader judge, and upon these doughty
premises he founds his Description of Schism; which ought, I suppose, to have
been a definition, that being much more proper for a Man of Art, and much more
suitable to his design, of giving you the true nature, or formalis ratio: which
are things a little too nice to be regularly inferred from every bungling
Description. And having thus far enquired into Mr. H's Account, let us now
return to the Vindicator: I fancy they are both of a Family, and therefore let
us see whether he may not put in a better claim to the aforesaid Titles.

He acquits Mr. H. page 4. from being Author of the Reply, fearing lest he
should have a share in the credit of it, of which there was no great danger;
for every body at first sight was willing to discharge Mr. H. it being not easy
to imagine, that he that could be the Author of such a Book as that of Schism,
should ever be able to make any tolerable Vindication.

In the next page he condemns T. W. for preferring Churchmen before Dissenters,
(i.e.) his Friends before his Enemies. To this I shall only answer, That it is
natural to all Mankind, and his own usual practice, and therefore I may as well
blame the Vindicator upon the same score, especially for so partially
preferring Mr. H. before Dr. Hammond, p. 49.

He boasts, page 6. how early he and his Party were aware of the Advances of
Popish designs. I would fain know where their Eyes were during the whole Reign
of King James II. and the Toleration of King Charles, when, according to the
sense of all wise Men, the Popish Agents were most industrious.

In all the glare of Gospel Light these Gentlemen could see no danger, but
rather did all they could to shelter and hide the design from other observing
Protestants. Dr. W. -- Vox Cler. p. 10.
had 100 l. for writing a Book to that purpose. Lobb and Owen were in Fee with
King James. Several of the principal Nonconformists assisted in the management
of the Jesuitical Intrigue. Many of their present Patrons were the Men pitched
upon at Court, to complete our Ruin, by repealing the Penal Laws and Tests,
and thereby letting Papists into the Parliament, and their Priests into our
Churches. No Man among them opened his mouth against the common Foe, or
endeavored to fortify his Conventicle against Popish delusions. And in the
whole Catalogue Vid. Catalogue of all the Discourses published against Popery,
during the Reign of K. James II. p. 33. printed at Land. A. D. 1689.
of Authors that appeared during that Reign, in the defense of our Religion,
there were but Two Nonconformists in all England, who had the Honesty and
Courage to set Pen to Paper in those Controversies.

So that although these Gentlemen can be aware of Popery as soon as any People
living, (perhaps, when the greatest danger is what themselves invent) yet, as
the wise man observes, A Gift blinds the Eyes: Sprinkle a little Money among
their Leaders, and give a Toleration to the rest, that the Subjects may be
paying in the Country, while the King pays them at London, they are all easy,
and well satisfied, while they are all getting money; so that do what you will,
they apprehend no danger. I appeal to the Memory of all England, whether this
be not the Case: I appeal to your own Consceences, wishing that you may repent,
and beg pardon.

For I must tell you further, (and perhaps it will be a kindness to let you
know it) that however successful you may seem to your selves, in preserving
your Reputatton among the less discerning Mob; yet the more sober and thinking
People are very much scandalized at these Practices, and sometimes do not stick
to say, That your zeal against Popery is all counterfeit; your design only to
get uppermost; and that you can either rail against the Papists, or join with
them, whether way soever does best fit your purpose of ruining the Church. Nay,
some uncharitable People go further, and say, That since you joined with Popery
against the Church, more than ever you did with the Church against Popery, they
are afraid lest if that Religion should prevail, (which God forbid) you would
be a great deal better Conformists than you are now.

He is again angry with T.W. for mentioning those great Men who have written in
defense of the Church, page 6. and endeavors to oppose him with another
Catalogue of baffled Names, Reynolds, Cartwright, Blondel, Amies, Daille, etc.
People that have been so fully answered and confuted by Mr. Hooker, Dr.
Hammond, Bishop Pearson, Mr. Dodwell, and others, that if the power of Reason
could ever prevail against Interest and Prejudice, a Man would think there
needed no further Arguings with these Gentlemen, whether this be so or not, we
are willing to refer with him to the judgment of all disinterested persons, if
the Vindicator will but tell us where we may have a Council of those who are
truly such: For to me, the whole Christian world seems to be concerned in these
Controversies. Those who have a Liturgy, and Ceremonies, or Bishops, as well as
we; and those that would have all these, if their circumstances were so happy,
are certainly for us. And as for that smaller Party who are for none of these,
and are most of them confined within our King's Dominions, they are all biassed
and interessed against us; so that in rejecting the judgment of every
interessed Party, methinks the Gentleman learnedly appeals to no body at all.

Only perhaps the Turks, Jews, and Heathens, in his Opinion, may be proper
Judges, who, I confess, are not much interess'd in the quarrels among
Christians. And yet taking in all Mankind, (which must surely comprehend those
that lived in former Ages, as well as the present, and I am sure they do not
appear to be the Patrons or Friends of his Schism) the Jews must condemn him
upon the same Principles as they did the Samaritans; the Turks and Persians
laid too much stress upon the business of Succession; and the most revered Laws
of the noblest body of Heathens that ever lived in the world, were expressly
against him: Leg. 12. Tab.
Separatim nemo habessit Deos, neve novos neve advenas nisi public adscitos
privatim colunto, constr^cta a Patribus delubra habento, Ritus Familiae
Patriaeque servanto. So that I know no Patron, either Christian or Heathen, the
Gentleman has to appeal to, unless it be his own scattered Party, or some of
his Friends, the New Whigg Atheists. And as for their Judgment and Approbation,
much good may it do him, I know no Man of ours that envies his happiness.

There is a wonderful vein of Argument (not to say Discretion) in his
management of T. W.'s Honors, page 7. If he supposes any weakness in himself,
he does not pretend to be infallible. Suppose he makes but a slip in style,
(which he hopes a Friend will pardon) the performance must necessarily be all
vicious. But, on the contrary, if he allows a Dissenter the least grain of
Christian temper, humility, or consideration, so as not to be totally divested
of all three, it is enough to saint him, he needs trouble himself no further,
for his condition is very hopeful, and cannot be desperate, page 8.

But, above all, the Address to the Skeptic does most afflict him, especially
that T. W. should suppose any Skeptic to be obstinate, page 9. Now, for my
part, I cannot perceive that ever he supposed any such thing, his words are
these: If thou be Skeptical, a slighter of our Religion, obstinate and
perverse, a despiser and reviler of the Clergy. By which it is plain, T. W.
intended four several Characters of those who are Enemies to the Church, now
there is no necessity that they should all be united in the same person; but if
they are all found among the members of the same Faction, (as certainly they
are) it is abundantly sufficient to acquit the Alderman. However, the witty
Vindicator, by changing Skeptical into Skeptic, and putting obstinate to it,
takes care to make Nonsense, where otherwise it is not to be found. This being
a part of the Ingenuity of these Gentlemen, to make Faults where they cannot
find them; and to raise Blunders out of their own imagination, and then confute
them; which surely is the worst, though one of the easiest ways of arguing that a
man can choose.

He is mightily offended with the Alderman, for making the Ninth Article of the
Apostles Creed the Standard whereby to discover Schism, as if it were a most
heinous Crime, no less than declining the Authority of Scripture, to make use
of it. The profession of that Creed has been the badge and symbol of all
orthodox Christians, for many past Centuries: which certainly it would not have
been, if they had not all believed it to be agreeable to the Scriprure. And
unless these Gentlemen have a mind to extinguish all the former sentiments of
the Christian Church, that they may the better impose upon the World what ever
Notions they please, I know no reason why it should now be laid aside. It Is
plain T. W. never intended to rival the Scripture with this Article; for he
goes on immediately to explain it by the sacred Text, tho* in this Case he
cannot be so happy as to please our peevish Author.

He quarrels with him likewise about the Origination of the Catholic Church,
and is angry that he does not date it from the Creation of Angels, or from the
Beginning of the Jewish Church: As if the Gentleman had never heard of the
distinctions betwixt the Church Visible, and Mystical; Jewish, and Christian;
or some body or other had put it into his head, that the Angels are Christian,
it being the Catholic Church under that denomination only that T. W. spoke of.

When our Savior uttered those words, Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Church; I desire to know of the Vindicator, whether
he did not speak of the Church de futuro, and as yet unbuilt? And when St. Luke
says, And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved; whether
he did not speak of it as already begun? so that the Christian Church must have
its beginning betwixt the time of that first saying to St. Peter, and that
other in St. Luke. If the Gentleman will try his Chronology, and assign us the
year and day, we shall gladly hear him; but if he will still derive its Epoch
from the Creation of Angels, we are ready to assert the contrary. In the mean
time he ought to be a little sparing in his Reflections upon T. W. for if he
were a Dunce, and a Blockhead, or a ridiculous Trifler for this account of the
Origination of the Catholic Christian Church, both Probantibus actis
Apostolorum descensum Spiritus Sancti quam Scripturam qui non recipient nec
Spiritus Sancti esse possunt. Qui necdum Spiritum possint agnoscere discentibus
missum, sed nec ecclesiam defendere qui quando and quibus incunabulis
institutum est Hoc corpus probare non habent. Tertull. de Prae. cap. 22.
Tertullian and St. Jerome Acta Apostolorum nudam quidem sonare videntur
Historiam and nascentis Ecclesiae infantiam ^xere. Hieron. Ep. 103.
, (not to say our Savior) and St. Luke, must equally be comprehended in the
same charge. Nay, the Vindicator himself grants in the next Paragraph, that the
Apostles and Disciples were the Church, without either Jews or Angels: And
therefore if T. W. were a Fool for passing them by, I hope the Gentleman will
not disdain to bear him company.

He is mightily troubled, page 11. about the admission of Church Members, that
it cannot be done barely upon their profession of Faith, without complying with
some significant Rites that are alien to Scripture-Rules. If he had but told us
plainly what he had meant, I could have given a more direct Answer, in the mean
time let him know that we decline the Charge.

The Disciples and Believers submitted to the authority of the Apostles, in
things indifferent. And if our English Dissenters would be as just to their
Successors, according to the rules and examples recorded in Scripture, no body
would require more from 'em. As for the saying of the Bishop of Worcester,
(which I suppose he durst not quote, because he was conscious to himself that
it was nothing to his purpose) it concerns the Papists only, and for what
belongs to us, I refer him to many other excellent sayings of the aforesaid
Bishop, in his Unreasonableness of Separation.

In the next paragraph he complains that Christianity does not make a greater
progress in the world, and immediately charges the failure upon needless
ceremonies, and want of worth in the managers. Now whether this be so or not he
may easily try, if he will either send Mr. H. or go himself, (for I do not
question but he will allow both to be exceedingly well qualified) and give a
call to the unconverted. Let 'em try the Emperor of China or the Cham of
Tartary, or (as T. W. advised them) the grand Signior if he pleases, if the
sanctity of the Preachers, the Spirituality and simplicity of Doctrine and
Worship after the Congregational way; If zeal against Ceremonies without
adoring any sort of Religion will do the business. We shall soon see whether
the Independent, or the Jesuit, are more successful (for there lies the
controversy) the Divines of the Church of England are no way concerned, having
not been much accustomed to travel upon that errand.

It seems he never heard that the Apostles did actually preach the Gospel to
all nations, neither do I believe they did to all Countries, and to every
person in every Nation. But if he will give us leave to expound it of some
persons out of all Nations, (which I suppose was all that T. W. meant, and the
thing is true, for) St. Peter we read preached Acts 2. and his Congregation
consisted of people in all probability out of every nation under heaven, Acts
2.5.

That the primitive Bishops had the power of ordination and government,
(whereby their authority did exceed that of mere Presbyters) and that the
Churches of several Presbyters were united under the government and care of one
Bishop, has been sufficiently evinced by diverse learned Pens: particularly that
of Ephesus, (one of the famous Seven in Asia) has been again and again proved
to be so governed. And this is all that we need to contend for; but if nothing
less will satisfy him than having every Diocese acred, that he may know
exactly the extent, (which he so briskly calls for, p. 13.) let him be at the
charge of it himself, we for our parts are well contented with less ado, unless
it were to more purpose. The primitive Dioceses being never supposed to be all
equal, but some greater and some less, as well as the modern.

Neither is it necessary to show that their modes of worship were exactly the
same with ours: the Vindicator himself assures us that they did not agree among
themselves about the circumstances of worship; and then how can he expect that
they should all agree with us. That they used and imposed things of the same
nature with what he calls our modes, and that our Governors are warranted in
doing the like by their example and Authority, is all we need to show; and that
has been done often enough already by diverse hands.

We confess that Bishop and Angel are not convertible terms, and yet suppose
St. John had said Angels of each Church in the plural number (instead of Angel
in the Singular); I would know how any man could prove Episcopacy from those
texts. And surely where an Argument may be made from the number in which a word
is used, he is not far amiss that should say such a thing is plain from that
word.

He triumphs in the next paragraph p. 14.15. as if he had found the Independent
notion in one of T. W's. assertions, Nay he cannot see how there should be a
multiplication or plurality of Churches till the increase of believers,
according to the Episcopal model. If the Gentleman will be pleased to put on
his spectacles, I will endeavor to show him how. Suppose then that one parcel
of converts were made at Jerusalem, another at Corinth, another at Ephesus,
another at Antioch, and another at Rome, and a Bishop and Presbyters
constituted over each particular Church. I desire him to consider, whether this
will not be the thing which T. W. spoke of, viz. A multiplication or plurality
of Churches by the increase of believers, without any necessity of supposing
that Churches must multiply like Bees, only by sending out a Colony when the
Hive is too full.

And suppose a Colony were sent out under the conduct of a Presbyter, and he
still under the government of the same, or another Bishop, I suppose this would
do the business, without any great service to the Congregational way.

But why did not the Vindicator give us some Scriptue-instances of this famous
notion? For, if a Colony must needs be sent out under independent Officers,
when ever believers grow too numerous for one Assembly, it may surely be proved
that some time or other it was so. And therefore I must call upon Mr.
Vindicator for matter of fact, which unless he can produce (and I am pretty
sure he cannot) he must not expect that much credit should be given to him: It
being a little too much for him to impose his notions upon us, as if they were
all according to Scripture; and yet not one Text to be found for them.

I would fain know how many Congregations there were in the Church of
Jerusalem, when the believers increased to so vast a number in so short a time:
Three thousand you meet with converted, Acts 2.41. More daily added, v. 47.
Five thousand you find mentioned, Acts 4.4. Multitudes both of men and women
added, c. 5.14. And yet still the word of God increased, and the number of the
Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests
were obedient to the faith, c. 6.7. Now I desire him to give me his Answer to
these following Queries: Whether all this number of Believers did make one
Congregation or more? Whether or no they were under the Government of only one
Bishop? Whether each of them was known to his Bishop, and to one another?
Whether they could not be Members of the same Church, till they were all
personally acquainted? Did they all ordinarily meet in one place to worship
God? And if so, where was it? Were the (...) so capacious? Or did the Jews lend
the Temple for an ordinary Meeting Place to the Christians? How the Preacher
could be heard by all this Multitude at once? Whether the vigor and strength of
his Lungs, or the thinness of Jerusalem air, did enable and qualify him for
that loud Performance? Or whether he had the Conqueror's Engine, or Sir Samuel
Morland's Speaking Trumpet? Or a peculiar sort of voice (like Mr. Baxters
Friend, who preached to a Congregation of ten thousand men, so that they could
all hear him, and yet his voice was none of the loudest) I desire his
information in these particulars, that we may see whether it be likely that the
Church of Jerusalem did increase and multiply in the Congregational way: but we
hope he will not stir a syllable from the sacred Text, that being no way proper
for a man that receives nothing but express Scripture.

In the next Paragraph he falls foul upon one of his own blunders. And because
T. W. affirms that all other Churches were one with that of Jerusalem, all
united in one body, under one head Christ Jesus, thinks he confounds him
mightily by proving a variety in circumstances of worship (as if to say) that
those Churches were united in one body, and that all Members agreed in every
circumstance of worship, were the same thing, and he that confutes the latter,
confutes the former also.

He might have considered, that even in that variety, many other Apostolical
Churches were the same. The Churches of Rome and Corinth, and most others, were
made out of Jews and Gentiles, who had the same different apprehensions about
Jewish Ceremonies, as well as that at Jerusalem; And therefore the difference
was not betwixt Church and Church, but betwixt the Members of the same
Churches, who were left at liberty by the Apostolical Synod, except in three
things; And for that Reason the Gentile Dissenters cannot possibly be the
Patrons of ours, unless the Vindicator can show, that the Jewish Ceremonies
were imposed, as ours are, by some Christian Church. If he can prove, that
Rules were given, and Matters of Decence imposed, and that any Christians in
that Age refused to submit to 'em, let him name 'em, as the Precedents of his
Cause and Party; I dare say, That every Churchman will allow 'em to be so.

In the next Paragraph he is fond of the Notion which he quarreled with in the
last (so inconstant are those people that know not what they would have). It
fits the Independents as exactly as if it had been made for 'em; for they hold
a Unity for Substance (tho not for Circumstances); they are united to all true
Churches, tho for condemning Bishops (who are doubtless the principal and most
necessary Members); they partake of the same Table, tho they set up Altar
against Altar; they are the same with us in the External Worship and Service of
God, tho in Covenant against us* and they refuse to communicate with us either
in Sacraments or Prayers. They are all united to the Head, tho not into one
Body, either among themselves or with others: For that part of Unity I observe
the Gent. passes over, and with a great deal of Reason, it being hard to find
several Members united into One Body, and yet still remaining all independent.
That wherein they differ from others is according to the Apostolical Mode; That
wherein others differ from them, is nothing but Innovation; Otherwise they are
the same with all true Churches, if you will believe this Gent. To all which I
shall only apply, and argue in the plain words of St. John; (...).
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would, no doubt, have continued with us; but they went out, that they
might be made manifest that they were not all of us, 1 John 2.1^.

Touching the Continuance of the Church he agrees with us, p. 17. Only about
the Authority of the Apostles he is pleased to fall out, not apprehending how
any Man can succeed the Apostles in their Apostolical Power. If he means the
Authority they had in the Church (i. e.) over the Presbyters, and other
Members, we affirm Bishops to be their Succ ssors; it being not reasonable to
suppose, that any Branch of Auth rity given by our Savior to his Apostles died
with them* for if their Authority over the Presbyters expired with their
Persons* why should that over the People continue after 'em, unless the
Gentleman will suppose (which I suppose he will not) that the Laity are the
only persons that need the Regulation of Superiors. All Multitudes must have
Governors, and the common Presbyters are certainly oo Numerou: a Populace to
be all independent. Let 'em submit therefore to Bishops their Successors, as
they did to the Apostles themselves, especially till such times as you can find
a Text to prove, That the Apostles Commission was only a Patent for Life; it
being a Matter of such Consequence in the Universal Church, that few will
believe you upon your own bare Word.

As the Authority of the Apostles was Universal, and extended to the whole
World, and was the same in all Churches, p. 18. so Bishops do succeed them in
the same Authority. And if it were not for those Humane Agreements (which the
Vindicator cannot disallow), the Government Ecclesiastical must be so
exercised; And I could wish the Gentleman would be pleased to consider, whether
a Bishop is not as truly a Bishop, and a Presbyter as much a Presbyter, in any
other Man's Diocese or Parish, as he is in his own? Is he suspended or deprived
when he is out of his own bounds? If not, I hope he may be a Minister, like the
Apostles, all the World over. And yet the exercise of his Ministry confined
within certain limits. Nor does this Notion give the Pope any greater power in
England, than it does the Archbishop of Canterbury at Rome (which is none at
all.) On the contrary, if Ordinary Pastors are Pastors only within their own
Precincts, Mr. H. and his Vindicator (tho Ordained) can be none, because they
exercise their pretended Ministry in other Men's Parishes.

He will not dispute the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Timothy and Titus, but he
tells us, it signifies nothing till the nature and extent of that Office be
first determined out of Scripture, p. 18. As if the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus were no Scripture. We find Timothy appointed by St. Paul to examine the
Qualifications of such as were to be Ordained; to lay hands suddenly on no Man;
to receive Accusations, and proceed judicially; and to rebuke before all even
Elders themselves, if there were occasion. Titus was to ordain Elders in every
City, to set things in order, to rebuke with all authority, to admonish and
reject heretics. And this power of Ordination and Jurisdiction wherewith
Timothy and Titus were invested, is what the Bishops have all along exercised,
and do still challenge at this day; and therefore we justify the present
Episcopal Authority by these two Scripture-Instances. And as the Congregational
Invention allows of no such Officers, the most Ordinary Pastors (call 'em
Bishops, or Presbyters, or what you will) being all independent, without ever a
Timothy or Titus to supervise and govern 'em; by the same Scripture it stands
condemned, and is plainly contrary to the Apostolical Pattern.

And if the Office of Timothy and Titus was itinerant, by reason of their
frequent Removes from place to place (as the Gent. supposes, p. 19.) our
Bishops are extremely like 'em in that particular, their Office being always
very itinerant in their Episcopal Visitations. But this is an idle Fancy, which
he probably learned from Mr. Baxter (an idle one I call it); for if the Office
of Timothy and Titus was really itinerant, they were certainly out of their
Office while they staid at home, the one in Ephesus, and the other in Crete
(tho doing that very business for which the Apostles placed 'em there) which
how well it agrees with Scripture and common Sense, let every discerning Reader
judge.

If none besides St. Paul were concerned in the Ordination of Timothy and
Titus, Sed quod ab uno Apostolo gestum est id ab omnibus simul Apostolis gestum
esse dicitur ob Collegium and Consortium Apostolatus Vales. Annot. in
Philos^org. H. E. l. 3. c. 15.

Sub imperatore Claudio loco duorum unicus Praefectus Praetorio Constitutus est
Burrhus Afranius. Sub Nerone Burrho mortuo duo praefecti praetorio constituti
su^t ut unius successores. Pears. de success. Diss. 1. C.IX. ubi plura in hujus
argumenti fidem, allata legas.

(...) Jos. l. 11. c. ult.

Augustus Constantinus in suburbana villa Nicomedi^ tricessimo and primo*
Imperii sui anno diem functus est liberis de* successione (...) Orbis
testamento Haeredibus scriptis. Ruffin. H. E. l. 1. c. 11.


it surely justifies the present Ordinations by a single Bishop; but if others
joined with him in Imposition of Hands, as the Gent. supposes in the following
p. T. W. was not much out; several of the Primitive Bishops being Styled
Apostles by the Ancients, as well as the Twelve: And therefore before he had
condemned T.W. he ought to have told us who those were that laid on hands with
St. Paul, and to demonstrate 'em Unworthy of that Title. But it is sufficient
to justify T. W. that what is done only by one, has been commonly said to be
done by the Apostles, by reason of their being Colleagues, and Partners in the
same Apostleship.

I dare answer for T. W. That this Man's Notion of a proper Succession never
entered into his head; No Man besides Blondel, and his quarrelsome Brethren,
ever reckoning it improper to call Two persons the Successors of One, when
really they are so. When Two Persons are Heirs to One, in the same Estate, or
succeed him in his Authority, they are called by Civilians (and I believe not
improperly) Haeredes, or Successores partiarii. When the Roman Empire became
divided, I would fain know, whether Constantine the Great, and Jovian, etc. had
no Successors? And I hope the Gent. will allow Their Majesty's, K. W. and Q. M.
to be called the Successors of K. J. without any great Absurdity. And as there
are Instances enough to be given of Two Persons succeeding One in his Secular
Estate and Authority, so I know no Reason, why Two Bishops may not as well
succeed One Apostle in the Ecclesiastical. The larger the Apostles Province
was, the more Divisions it was capable of, and consequently the more Successors
he might have; Timothy might succeed him at Ephesus, Titus in Crete, etc. Nor
does this succeeding of the Apostle in these Two Provinces, give 'em an equal
Power in one another's Diocesses (as the Vindicator supposes, p. 19.) any more
than the King of Spain has Power at Rome or Constantinople, because the Roman
Emperors are numbered amongst his Predecessors, by Franciscus Taraph^, and
other Spanish Historians.

Nor is there any necessity to suppose (as the Gent. would insinuate), that the
Apostle must either be suspended, or degraded, or translated to an higher Seat,
to make room for the Succession of Timothy and Titus in the Sees of Ephesus and
Crete: For it is evident, the Apostle himse^f gave them a Plenitude of Power
within their respective Charges (choose how much or how little he reserved to
himself.) So that they had the full Ordering and Government of those Two
Churches, and did therefore succeed the Apostle in it, even while he was alive.

But if the Vindicator will needs call 'em the Apostle's Coadjutors, while he
was alive, and give 'em the Title of Successors only, after his Decease, I know
T. W. will not quarrel with him; it being no way contrary to any thing he has
said. In the mean time I must desire him to forbear making wry Faces. If any
one shall still assert, That St. Paul Ordained his Successors at Ephesus and
Crete; for as it is impossible, that the Apostle should have any Successors,
unless ordained by themselves; nor very probable that they ordained 'em when
they were dead: So according to the Opinion of the Ancients, and common Sense,
they are said by T. W. to ordain 'em while they were alive. Thus Irenaeus,
Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi -- quos and Successores relinquebant suum
ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes. And a little after, speaking concerning the
Bishops of the Church of Rome, Fundantes igitur and instruentes beati Apostoli
Ecclesiam Lino Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt. From which Two
Passages it is plain, That the Apostles ordained Bishops their Successors while
they were alive, and that Linus, a single Person, succeeded the Apostles in the
plural; which is the double blunder, in express terms, wherewith our
nimble-sighted Author charges T.W. p. 20. Nor will Tertullion easily free
himself from our Author's Censure, if he ever hears of that Passage de
Praescript. c. 32. Evolvant Ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per Successiones ad
initia decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis, vel
Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit habuerit Autotem and
Antecessorem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census s^os deferunt, sicut
Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum a Joanne Collocatum, sicut Romanorum Clementem
a Petro ordinatum itidem perinde utique and caeterae exhibent quos ab Apostolis
in Episcopatum Constitutos Apostolici Seminis traduces habeant. So that
according to Tertullian, (...), Con. Antioch. c. 23.
the Apostles ordained the first Bishops in each Church, and were their
Predecessors, and they the Apostles Successors. Nor was it ever thought so
great a Mystery, by Men of Sense, either in Ancient or Latter Ages, for a
Bishop, or other Person, to ordain or constitute his Successor, as this Man
makes it. The Council of Antioch de^rees it Unlawful for a Bishop to constitute
his Successor: But if (according to the Opinion of our Author) they had thought
it a thing impossible, they would certainly have spared their Pai^s, it being
not very usual for Wise Men to make Laws against Impossibilities. Valerius
ordained St. Augustine his Successor, and he Heraclius* Augustine of
Canterbury, ordained Laurentius to succeed him in that See, according to Bid,
Bedae Ec. Hist. l. 2. c. 40. (...). Epiph. Haer. 20.
who (says he) did it after the Example of St. Peter, who is said to have
consecrated Clemens, evangelizandi adjutorem and simul Successorem; And
Epiphanius gives the Reason, why other Persons were made Bishops in the
Lifetime of St. Peter and St. Paul, even because the Apostles did frequently
travel into other Countries to preach the Gospel, and the City of Rome could
not be without a Bishop: To which I might add, That Severus, Bishop of Milevis,
and Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz, did, after the Example of the Apostles,
ordain Persons to succeed 'em in those Sees. And now surely nothing but that
Faculty of Ignorance (if there be such a Faculty) wherewith he reproaches T. W.
p. 21. could have emboldened this Vindicator to charge a Man with Nonsense and
Blunder, for asserting plain Matter of Fact, when there are so many Instances
to be found of the same Nature, according to the Sense and Practice of several
Ages.

I fancy few, besides this confident Author, will deny Linus to be the
Successor of the Apostles; and yet that he died before 'em, is maintained by
Bishop Pears. de success. Diss. 2. c. 2. Vid. etiam Vendelin. de Clementis Temp.
Pearson, who, tho he was a Learned as ^rotius, yet he is as positive as T. W.
that Linus immediately succeeded the Apostles in the Roman Chair. And therefore
I cannot but wonder, that our Author should pretend, That all the Learned Men
in the World deliver 'emselves timorously and uncertainly about this matter. It
is a Caution that Reeb, the Jesuit, gives all young Students, to beware how
they assert a thing to be the Opinion of All Authors: For, says he, if any one
happen to be of a contrary mind, you are quite shamed. Now here is some Modesty
in a Jesuit, but such is the Confidence of this Nonconformist, that he pretends
to tell you the Sense of all the Learned Men in the World (tho he never heard
of their Names), as readily as if he himself had been one of 'em, or at least,
they had been his Familiars, and most intimate Acquaintance.

With the same Gaiety, he affirms in the same page, That to say the Line of
Apostolic Succession of Bishops has continued in all Ages to this present
time, is an Assertion without the least shadow of Proof; yea, contrary to the
Acknowledgment of all Church-Historians, p. 21. Pray, Sir, what
Church-Historians ever acknowledged the contrary? A Man would imagine, that he
meant only those of his Party, who have been a Scandal to their Undertaking;
Nihil clarius in ^ota veterum Doctrina successione Romanorum Pontificum, Phil.
le Pr. in not. ad Tert. de ^re. c. 32.
or else, if otherwise, ^t could be done, he needed not to have been ashamed to
have given us their Names; but I am afraid, he is no better acquainted with
Church-Historians, than with other Learned Men.

Only as to the Papists (so lately his Cronies), we may, I suppose, take his
word, that they own insuperable Difficulties about the Succession of Popes in
the Roman See, p. 22. But what is this to the purpose? they neither deny, nor
doubt, that there was a Succession (although, for want of Writings, they cannot
determine the Order wherein those Bishops succeeded). There are Difficulties
concerning the Succession of Monarchs in several Kingdoms, not easily solved
for want of Authors* And yet to say, All Catalogues are false, because we
cannot tell certainly which is true, or because (through distance of time, and
want of Authors) we cannot tell who first succeeded: To conclude that there was
no Succession at all, is a way of arguing peculiar to its Author.

If Irenaeus could Name all the Successors in the Apostolic Churches, as the
Gent. grants in the forecited page, I presume he could not be mistaken in the
Succession of Linus. And if this Vindicator had been but so learned, a^ to be
acquainted with that Father, he would not have been so Angry with T. W. p. 21.
for Asserting the same thing that Irenaeus does. L. 3. c. 3.
I shall not trouble my self with his Mistake about the Year of that Father's
Death; for tho he disputed about the business of Easter Seven Years after that,
in which (as some body told this Gent.) he died; yet it is no great matter,
since hearsays will serve a Nonconformist instead of Chronology.

With the same Skill he proceeds to enquire, how it came to pass that the
Apostolical Succession was propagated in so few Churches as the Patriarchal
were? As if it were the Opinion of any body, that no Bishop, besides the
Patriarchs, did any where succeed the Apostles. If he ever met with such an
Assertion, let him tell us whose it is: In the mean time, if (for want of
Argument, and Understanding in these Controversies) he quarrels with his own
Chimoera's, I hope it is not to be called a Confutation of T. W.

We have a Catalogue of our English Bishops; so that we can name 'em as they
succeeded, so far as we have History to inform us, which is for many Centuries.
And as we find the Succession Regular, where we have a clear Account; so we
have no Reason to doubt of the like Care in former Ages; which is satisfaction
enough to us, that our present Ministry is regularly derived from the Apostles.
And he that shall Assert the contrary, so as to make us doubt of it, must bring
proof from good Authors, That the Succession was interrupted, or else he will
be but a feeble Exposer of our Principles. It is not sufficient to say, we are
uncertain whether we have any true Ministry or Ordinance, p. 23. we rely upon
the Providence of God, and the Care and Integrity of our Ancestors, for a Right
Succession of Ministers, as well as pure and genuine Scriptures. And although we
have not the Original Manuscripts to compare the one, not entire Fasti in the
other case; yet no Man shall bereave us of our Confidence, unless he can
produce Matter of Fact, and show, that we are deceived upon either Account. I
fancy the Vindicator does verily believe, that he came regularly from Adam; and
yet suppose any one should object, that he cannot tell his own Pedigree, and
give a Series of his Ancestors down from Adam to himself, and conclude, that
the Succession might therefore be broken; some one of his Progenitors might
have never a Father; and since he has not History to inform him perfectly in
the Case, he ought not positively to affirm* That he is of the Seed of Adam:
Would the Gent. take this way of Arguing to be strong and conclusive? if not, I
would fain know what occasion we have given him to impose it upon us.

But that he may not seem to talk wildly, and without any manner of Ground, he
puts Two Cases, which I presume were all he could think of, wherein the Line of
Succession might be broken* p 24. The first is, If there should happen a
Vacancy in any of the Apostolical Churches, and Sees, for some Years, and the
succeeding Incumbent be a Person ordained by an Abbot, who is no Bishop (as the
Northumbrian Bishops were by the Abbot of Hy, says the Margin), as is allowed
in the Roman Church, through which this Authority must be conveyed to us; Does
not this make an Intercision in the Line of Episcopal Ordination so
indispensible? It must do so, if you will believe this Author, p. 25. But I
say, there is no Nece^y of the Line being broken, tho we grant the whole Case;
For suppose, that all that Succession of pretended Bishops derived from the
Abbot, should be at last extinct, and the true Bishops of that, or a
Neighboring Province, called in to consecrate, the Line of Episcopal
Ordination would be right enough, notwithstanding the Abbot, and all his
Usurpers. Or suppose, that after the Bishop was ordained by the Abbot, One or
Two Rightful Bishops should join with him in the Consecration of the next, in
this Case the Line would be right enough; and all that can be said is, That
there was One Usurper in the Line of Jurisdiction, who never was within the
Line of Order, and consequently could make no intercision in it.

And perhaps to prevent any Irregularity in the Succession of that Order, the
Apostles gave the Example, and the Church enjoined, That a Bishop should be
ordained by Three at least; Ap^st. c. 1. Con. Nican. c. 4. Con. Are^. c. 21.
Con. Laodic. c. 12. Con. Paris. 1. c. 6, etc.
and likewise, that he should be Constituted with the Approbation of his
Metropolitan, and Com-Provincials; which practices were certainly a very great
security to the Right Succession, it being not very likely, That all the
Bishops of a Province should be so extremely careless, to suffer an irregular
Ordination, and the Persons concerned to Consecrate all void of that Character,
which they pretended to bestow.

After all, That ever any Abbot that was no Bishop, did ordain Bishops, I do
utterly deny. Adamnanu^ in his Life of Columba, Adamn. Vit. Col. Vsh. Primor^.
makes mention of a Bishop in the Abbey of Hy; and that there was always one
residing there, is confirmed by Bishop Usher, out of the Vlsle^ Annals: And
perhaps the Bishop of D^nkeld (as the Learned Bishop of St. Asaph conjectures)
joined in the Consecration of Bishop Aldan, Finan; Bp. of St. Asaph of ^h. Gov.
p. 102.
and Colman had the like Ordination: But Tuda, the next in Succession, was
ordained a Bishop among the South Scots in Ireland. So that should we allow his
Instance true, viz. That A^dan, Finan, and Colman, were ordained by the Abbot,
yet that Succession at Lindisfarn, in all likelihood, failed in Colman, and the
Line of Order was right in Tuda* and consequently, his Marginal Instance is
nothing to the purpose; an Instance that has been frequently urged by the
Nonconformists against Episcopacy, and as often confuted from the most
Authentic History of those Times by diverse Learned Men: Vind. C. E. cap. 9.
Vind. Ignat. par. 1. c. 10. Orig. Brit. Chapter Gov. c. 5. Barbos. Past. p. 2. All.
3. Number. 3.4. etc. Maur. de Alz. de Prac. Episc. Dig. p. 2. c. 5. Number. 6, 7, 8,
9. Aquin. Sup. q. 38. ar. 1. Res. ad ter. Vid. Victor. in Sum. Number. 216. Sect.
de Sac. Ord. Non facile crede^em Victor. in sum. Number. 237. quem seq. Vivald in
Candel. aureo. p. 1. tit. de Sacram. Ordin. Number. 17. In fine asserenti se
vidisse quandam Bullam Papae concedentem facultatem sacerdoti conferendi Diac.
and Sub. Diac. Barbos. Past. p. 2. Al. 3. N. 4. Ap. c. 67. Nicaen. c. 19. Con.
C. P. c. 4
Bishop Bramh^ll, Bishop Pearson, the present Bishop of Worcester, and St.
Asaph, and Mr. Dodwell, have so fully Answered this business of Hy, that a Man
would wonder at the Confidence of this Gent. that he should still hope to
impose the same Mistake upon the World.

Nor does the Church of Rome allow that an Abbot who is no Bishop should
Consecrate a Bishop. They are so far from allowing it, that their Canonists
generally declare, that the Pope himself cannot empower any Presbyter to Ordain
so much as a Deacon. An Abbot who has Jus Mitrae and Bacu^, a Cardinal or an
Ordinary Presbyter by Commission from the Pope may confer the lesser Orders,
but not the greater, or those which are called Sacred, viz. those of Bishop,
Priest, and Deacon; nay even as to the lesser, Thomas Aquinas, Joh. Major, and
Paludanus Affirm, that it is safer to receive the Order of Subdeacon from
another, than from such a privileged Presbyter: And although Anguianus and some
few more are of opinion that the Pope might Empower a Presbyter to confer the
Higer Orders, yet it never was the allowed practice of that Church. And I
challenge him to produce so much as one instance of any Abb t that was no
Bishop, who ever Consecrated a Bishop. As for Subdeacons and such people, who
are sometimes Ordain^d by Abbots, the Gentileman knows well enough we have no
occasion for 'em, in England, and therefore the Succession of our Bishops may
be just and regular notwithstanding this first Case.

As to the Second, viz. Whether this line of Ordina ion may be continued in a
Schismatical Church? We Answer, 1st. That such was the care of the Primitive
Church, so great a regard they had to a right Succ^ssion, that they who thought
the Ordination of certain Heretics void such as the Pa^lianists and Montanists
(...) etc. decreed 'em to be Ordained by a Catholic Bishop. And it is likewise
determined by the first Council of Constantinople concerning the Ordinations
made by Maximus Cymicus, that they are all null* they neither allowing him to
be a Bishop not those Ordained by him to enjoy any Function among the Clergy.
And in the Roman Church, B^^n. T^m. 9. p. 2^4* P^^tin. d^ V^. Pont. p. 22.4.
Contra ^^ephanum, III. al^s IV. Mabill. in Ordi^. Romans Com. p. cxix.
particularly those ordained by Constantine (the Lay-Invader of the Papal
Chair), were by a Council under Stephen the Third or Fourth, to return to their
former Orders, (unless they were in great Esteem with the People, and in that
Case they were to be re-ordain'd by the Church; and for fear of laying the
Foundations of a future Schism, it was further decreed, That none of 'em should
be promoted to any higher degrees. By these and many other Instances, it is
plain what Care the Church has taken to re-ordain, or utterly silence those
whose Orders they thought void.

And lest any such persons should creep into strange places* and there invade
that Office to which they had no Right: No Man, either of the Clergy or Laity,
Ap. (...) 12. con. (...) 30 con. (...) c. 33. (...) C. (...) c. 7. con. (...).
c. 12. con. Elizbe^^. c. 51.
was to hold Communion with 'em, under pain of incurring the Ecclesiastical
Censures* No Clergy Man was to go abroad without Commendatory Letters; no
bishop to be ordained without the Knowledge and Consent* of his Metropolitan,
and the Neighboring Bishops; No Heretic to be admitted into Orders; and if
ordained to be deposed* No Man to ordain in another's Province: By which, and
seve^^l other Canons, it became extremely difficult for any such Heretics or
Schismatics, whose Orders they thought void to make any considerable
intercision in the Line of Succession.

But I can see no Reason, why the Line of Ordination may not pass through a
Schismatical Church; For although by Schism People are out of the Church, and
while they continue so* cannot enjoy the benefit either of Ordination or
Sacraments; yet to say. That ^^^h are absolutely destroyed, and nullify'd; so
that a ^^^^matick l^^^ the Characters, and can neither be a Christian (...) (i.
e.) not the Subject of Apostolical Power, 'till he be (...)^^^ baptized and
ordained, is an Assertion beyond all that I c^^^d ever yet meet with. The
Meleti^ns were Schismatics, and (...) th^se (...) by Meletius were received
into places where oth^^ (...) though the Paulianists and (...) were to be
re-baptiz'd (...) ordained by the 19th Canon of the Council of Nice (...) those
ordained by the Nova^^^ns, (...) (...). ibid c. 8.
when reconciled to the Church* were to continue in the same Station which they
enjoyed before (except Catholic were in p^ssession) by the 8th Ca^^ of the
very same Council. From which Instances it is plain, T^^^ according (...) the
Sense of those Fathers; though Schismatical (...) ^^^ieties were out of the
Church, yet it did not wh^^Y d^v^st 'em (...) their Character, so as to make
'em no longer the (...) of ^cal Power, as this Vindicator would insinuate.

Nay, the severest Enemies to Heretical Ordination^* never went so far as our
A^^^or, as appears from what they declare in a ^^^^^lel Case, viz. that of
Baptism. St. Cyprian himself owns the practice in his days to admit reconciled
Heretics, Vid. Cypr. ad Quinte^. Steph. ap. Cyp. ad Pomp. cp. 74. Crescent.
ap. Conc. Carthag.

(...), ap Eus. H. E. l. 7. c. 7.

Ec. His. l. 1. c. 9. Apos. c. 67. Con. Nic. Can. 19. etc.

Ap. Cypr. Ed. Ox. Ep. LXXV. Novatus a Th^umagade ap. Con. Carth.


as Penitents only with Imposition of Hands, if at first they were Baptized by
the Orthodox Clergy. And so Heraclas of Alexandria took care that such persons
should renounce their Heresies, not at all requiring 'em to be Rebaptiz'd. And
in like manner Miletius retained his Character tho debarred the exercise of his
Function by the Decree of the Nicene Council, as appears by their Synodical
Epistle in Socrates. So that here the case of Baptism and Ordination run
parallel: neither being made void by mere Heresy or Schism, and accordingly we
find them put together in several Ancient Canons, and in Firmilianus's Epistle
to St. Cyprian, etc.

It Is true the case was otherwise with those Baptized or Ordained by Heretics
or Schismatics; they were to be Reordain'd and Rebaptiz'd, according to the
Sentiments of those African Fathers. How consistently with their own practice
let others judge; for if Heretics or Schismatics, did retain their Character
while they were out of the Church, as those Fathers seem to allow, I can see no
reason why it should be totally out of their Power to confer the like upon
other Persons; for if it be said that they lost their Character, by departing
from the Church, how they could obtain it again, without a new Ordination is
past my understanding: And therefore why Miletius himself should retain his
Character, Socr. ubi. sup.
and yet those Ordained by him be confirmed or settled, (...) (if by those words
is really meant a Second Ordination) I must learn from others.

Vid. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 18.
As for the grosser Heretics, that lived before the time of St. Cyprian, and
whose several manners of Baptizing were so Monstrous and Wicked, I cannot
wonder if the Ancients thought fit to Baptize them over again: Their former
Baptism wanting the necessary words, and being Consequently void in the very
performance, and therefore when Tertullian and other Fathers reject their
Baptism, I am of opinion it makes little for St. Cyprians Cause. So that
notwithstanding the Testimonies produced by a Learned Author, ^aun. Ep. 15.
Agrippinus might be the first introducer of that Practice, as Vincentius
Lirinensis testifies: Vincen. Lirin. Com. c. 9. p. 21. Edit. Cantab. 1687.

Ap. Cyp. ut Supra. Vid. and Cyp. ipsum in Ep. ad Ju^aian


And this I am the rather induced to believe be, cause Pope Stephen then
condemned it, as a Novel Custom, and Firmilianus and other Africans, seem to
own, at least could not deny that it was so, as appears by the Answer they made
to that Objection.

So that by the most constant usage of the Church in those first Ages, the
Baptism of Heretics was not to be admitted in gross, neither was it
Universally to be rejected upon St. Cyprians Principles: there being a
difference to be made betwixt those Heretics who did not really Baptize at
all, and those that did. And so you find both the first and second Councils of
Arles, admit such as were Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, 1. Con. Arcl. c. 8. 2. Con. Arcl. c. 16. 17. Optat. 1. 4.
and Rebaptising only those that did not believe in the Trinity, nor
Consequently use the Essential Form, and so Optatus declares, Quodcunque in
Trinitate factum est been factum est.

The like distinction I reckon is to be made concerning Ordinations: viz. Those
who derived their Orders only from Heretics, and Consequently never had any
Succession from the Church, were justly to be reputed as Unordain'd, but those
Ordained by Heretics, who had their Ordination originally from the Church, and
did not omit any thing necessary to the conferring of Orders, had no occasion
for Reordination. And to let pass the distinction betwixt the Novatians, and
Cataphrygae, made by the Nicene Fathers, Optatus and St. Austin have both of
'em settled the point in their Controversy with the Donatists, Vinc. Lirin. c.
11. p. 26. Ed. Cant. 1687
who pretended the Authority of the African Council, for Rebaptizing the
Catholics. Thus In hoc Sacramento Baptismatis Celebrando tres esse Species
Constat, etc. Optat. l. 5. p. 143. Edit. Com. 1599.
Optatus in Celebrating the Sacrament of Baptism, there are three kinds of
things which you can neither increase, nor diminish, nor pretermit: The 1st. is
the Trinity. The 2d. in him that Believes. The 3d. in him that does the Office,
but they are not all to be esteemed of equal moment: For I look upon two of 'em
to be necessary, and one as if it were necessary. The Trinity obtains the
principal place, the Faith of him that Believes comes next after this, and the
Person of him that Ministers is nigh, but cannot be of the same Authority. The
two former remain always unalterable, and fixed, for the Trinity is always the
same, and the Faith in several Persons is but one, both always retain their
proper Efficacy, but the Person of him that Ministers is known that it cannot
be equal to the two former sorts, for this reason, because it alone appears to
be alterable. etc. And Ibid. p. 141, 142.
a little before he acquaints us with the practice of the Church at that time:
As often as any one Baptized by you (i. e. the Donatists) desires to come over to
us, we receive him according to the Example of our Master with all simplicity,
for, far be it from us that we should call him back again to the Font who is
already washed, far be it from us that we should repeat that which is to be
done but once, or double that which is but one; for so it is written by the
Apostle, saying, there is one God, one Christ, one Faith, one Baptism. And St.
Austin confirms the same thing: 1st. of all distinguishing, aliud est non
habere, aliud pernitiose habere, aliud salubriter habere; Aug. l. 2. Cont. Ep.
Parmen.
and then telling us concerning those that are separated from the Unity of the
Church; that there is now no question but that they both have and may confer
(both Orders and Baptism). Sed pernitiose habent, pernicioseque dant, quia
extra Vinculum pacis sunt. and the same Father asserts the same Doctrine a
little before in two cases; First, If any of the Schismatical Clergy be
reconciled to the Church, tho it seems expedient to allow them the exercise of
their former Function, yet are they not to be Reordained, etc. and Secondly, If
on the contrary the Church judges it not convenient to allow them any
Ministration, Vid. Tim. Pro^. C. P. (...). ap. Coteler. Ec. Gr. Mon. T. 3. p.
420. and E. Niceph. C.P. Epist. Canonic. Ibid. p. 459, etc. Mason Br^mhal.
Burnets Vind. p. 60.
yet their Ordination is not hereby made void, but continues with them still,
etc.

To this I might add the practice of the Greek Church in former Ages, and the
opinion of the Romanists at this day, who although they are as little friends to
those they call Schismatics as any People in the World, yet the most Learned
of them declare that no Man indeed ought to receive Orders from either
Heretics or Schismatics, and that both he that gives and he that receives
them sin greivously, yet where Heretics or Schismatics that Ordain were
truly Ordained themselves, and the Ordinations made by them according to the
Forms of the Church, such Ordinations are valid, and Heretics or Schismatics
so Ordained, need no new Ordination, but only to be reconciled. And this we
find alleged by Protestants against those Popish Enemies, who sometime have
urged the very same Argument against our first Bishops, which this Vindicator
makes use of now. I wish this were the only instance wherein, the Papists and
Dissenters are agreed against us.

And now let the Gentleman take his Answer to this difficult question: Whether
Schismatics can Ordain? It being generally given in the Affirmitive; if we may
be allowed to believe, as most People do, the deriving of our Orders through a
Schismatical Church can be no prejudice to the line of Succession: And yet all
those Persons who have thus determined concerning the validity of Schismatical
Ordinations think Schismatics out of the Church as much as T. W.

Perhaps our Author expected to Triumph in this Concession, and that made him
call so earnestly for an Answer to this Question: Supposing that if Ordinations
made by Schismatics are granted to be valid, our present Non-conformists may
find a place among the Clergy, when ever Mr. Baxter and -- can obtain a
Comprehension without a new Ordination, but this we deny: For although Schism
does not invalidate any man's Orders when they are really given, yet this will
be no plea for those who never were Ordained; which must needs be the case of
many of you who deny the Order of Bishops. For we believe with St. Jerome, that
the Power of Ordaining belongs only to the Bishop, and your Ordinations made by
Presbyters are all Void and Null; and till you can prove the contrary we take
you for no more but a parcel of Lay-intruders into those Holy Functions to
which you have no right, (those of you only excepted who have been Episcopally
Ordained.)

And those who have inquired more nicely into your Mission, are apt to suspect
that many of your first Apostles, from whom several of you, in all probability,
do derive your Orders, never were Ordained; and how to distinguish those from
others, at this day, we cannot tell. And this is an Observation which I suppose
the Vindicator had never met with; or else he would scarce have been so
confid^nt, as to tell us, p. 26. that they are in the Line still. And yet it is
hard to say, whether he was not aware of some such thing; or else what should
make him so earnest, as to lose so many Pages aga nst this Line of Succession?
which, if it would do him no good, would certainly do him no harm. Methinks it
is, at least, a Matter of Reputation to succeed the Apostles; and therefore I
can see no Reason why this Vindicator should take such pains to oppose it,
unless (being conscious to himself, that his Party has no pretense to it) he
would, if it lay in his power, make it void or needless, to prevent others
insisting upon it, who he knows can make out a better Claim.

It has been the common practice of many others, besides this Gent. to lay
aside those Notions which their Circumstances would not bear, and to find out
New Devices with which they would more easily quadrate. And therefore we cannot
wonder; that he looks upon Ordination to be no more but a Public Approbation
of Ministerial Abilities by competent Judges, p. 26. Most of this Man's Party
have no other Ordination (and perhaps many of 'em not that). Otherwise, we
know, the Saints are as tenacious of Privileges as other Men. And therefore if
they could make any tolerable pretense to the Line of Succession, they would
magnify it to the full as much as we do.

But why only a Public Approbation of Miniseterial Abilities? Does the Public
Approbation of a Man's Abilities invest him in his Office? Will a Testimonial
from the Inns of Court make a Man a Judge? or from the Universities a Minister,
without any Commission from the King, or Ordination from the Bishop, or any
body else? But this is such a way of making Clergymen, as never was heard of
before. And indeed our Author himself puts in Two other Circumstances in the
next page, viz. That he be chosen by the rest, and set apart by the most
competent Judges, which amounts to a great deal more than only a Public
Approbation.

And these Judges he supposes may be Laymen in certain Cases of Necessity: As
in case that a Company of Laymen be cast upon an Island, or remain in same
Country, when their Pastors are all killed, or turned Heretics. But in the
first place, I must put him in mind, That as no Man is to meddle with the
Sacred Offices (except he he called of God), no Man to preach, except he be
sent; so no Man is to call or send as from God, but he that is Authorized by
him for that purpose. Our blessed Savior himself, when he gave Commission to
his Apostles, recites his own; All power is given unto me in Heaven and in
Earth; Go therefore, etc. Mat. 28.18, 19. As my Father sent me, so send I you,
John 20.21. And We hope our Dissenting Brethren, when they go about to Ordain,
will not disdain to follow his Example. In all Ages of the Church the calling
or sending of persons to the Work of the Ministry, has still been the business
of a select Order of Men: Neither is it to be altered now, except our Author
can show us a Text of Scripture, whereby Laymen are empowered to Ordain the
Clergy, or some Scripture Instance to justify that Practice. And if this
cannot be done, I should be loath to be one of those Laymen, though never so
discreet and knowing, that should presume to appoint Ambassadors for Almighty
God, without his Order. Neither can I see any Reason, why a Man may not as well
be a Minister of Jesus Christ, without any Mission at all, as by the Mission of
those persons who never were sent themselves.

As to the Three Cases, wherein ou Author supposes that such Lay-Ordinations
became Necessary, we have no Instances before us in Ecclesiastical History of
that kind, nor any particular direction in Scripture to do as he thinks we may.
And therefore we cannot tell what Method God Almighty would take in such Cases;
whether he would revive the (...), and call persons to the Ministry after an
extraordinary manner, that hereby the Authority might again appear to be
derived from himself, rather than accept of such unauthorized Ministers, as are
only propounded by the People.

Nor is it so easy to guide our selves by Arguments drawn from seeming
Necessity, in cases where there is no such Necessity at all. For instance;
Suppose that a Company of Christian Women were cast upon an Island, whether
would one of them, of the best Qualifications, chosen by the rest, and
approved, and set apart by the most competent Judges among 'em, to administer
in Holy Ordinances to them, be a true Minister of Jesus Christ, and a Lay
Person no longer? Here is the same Necessity which our Author supposes; And if
the Case holds as to the Men, I can see no Reason why the Women (whose
Salvation is as Necessary) should be rejected. But if a well-qualified Sister
should happen to win the Hearts of the most competent Judges in Mr. H's
Congregation, she must, according to our Author's Argument, be a tru^
Clergywoman at their next Election. Suppose that the Sacred Scriptures should
be totally destroyed, or so corrupted by Heretics, that it were impossible to
learn out of 'em the great Christian Trut^s, would not Papists, upon this
Supposal, cry up the Use of Unwritten Tradition, and the great Necessity of an
Infallible Judge? Would not the Socinian argue stiffly for Natural Religion?
which might be practiced well enough after all that loss? And why should not
the Quaker put in for a share, and prefer the Conduct of Inward Light; which
may easily survive the Written Word? And yet what Orthodox Believer would abate
his Reverence for Scripture, upon the Inferences of such People? No more will
it become us to admit Lay-Ordinations up n that of our Author, from this
Supposal of Necessity. As wise Men as he would have concluded another way: Not
that Laymen are to Ordain Ministers, but that where Ministers a^e wanting,
People may either minister to themselves, or communicate without Symbols; or
forbear till such times as Ministers can be had. Why may not Almighty God as
well dispense with some One of these things, as with a Lay-Ordination? And
therefore when so many other Courses may be taken, I would know by what Logic
this Vindicator can prove, That Lay Ordinations become Necessary! And if not
Necessary, all his Argument is at an end, whereby he would make 'em lawful.

I believe there never was any Case of Absolute Necessity for Lay-Ordinations;
but if possibly such should happen as the Gentleman mentions, I am apt to
believe that Bishops and Ministers, duly ordained, might be had from other
Countries; And if not, methinks it would be reasonable and fit, that we should
first see what God would do in such Cases, before we presume to do any thing of
our selves, for which we have no Scripture Warrant. In the nighest Cases to
his, those of the Abyssines, etc. it is plain the Persons concerned were of a
quite contrary Opinion to that of our Author: The Abyssines did not think their
want of Ordinances did empower 'em to Ordain Clergymen; but were contented to
be without those which are to be dispensed by Priests, till such times as
Frumentius returned from Alexandria, who was there made a Bishop by Athanasius,
and his Colleagues in Council; And yet they served God in the best manner that
Laymen could do. They had their Conventicula, Meeting Houses, as Ruffinus,
(...) Oratories or places for Prayer, as Socrates, Buffin. H.B. l. 1. c. 1^.

Soc. H. E. l. 1. c. 19.

Sunt enim Conventicula loca privata inquibus collectae fiunt and ab illis:
distinguuntur. Ecclesiae quae sunt publici juris, etc. Vales. Annot. in Sec. l.
1. c. 19.


but not to be called Churches, as Valesius distinguishes: They Catechized, but
did not Preach: They prayed, but had no Sacraments that we read of. And when
Frumentius came back, like an Apostle of the Country, he was Endowed with the
Power of Working Miracles, as the most Authentic Evidence both of his Doctrine
and Mission.

N^w if those Christians had been of this Author's Opinion, it might have saved
Frumentius the Fatigue of so long a Journey, for the Christian Merchants at
Auxumae might have Chosen, and Approved and set him apart, and without ever
troubling Athanasius, he had been a true Minister of Jesus Christ, sufficiently
Authorized to the Work, Vindic. p. 27.
and a Lay Person no longer. And if Oswald, King of Northumbria, had but
understood the Nature of Ordination, like this learned Gentleman, he needed not
have sent to the Abbot of Hy for Bishops; he and his Privy Council, or others
of his Christian Subjects might have ordained enough. For probably there were
not only Christians but Presbyters in Northumbria at that time: Twelve Thousand
being baptized according to Nennius and Paulinus; their Archbishop, Nen. H.
Prit. c. 65.

Vid. chronic. sanct. cru. Edin. ad an. 627. Angl Sac. Tom. 1. Hist. de
Success. Ep. Dunelm. ib. p. 691.


with the Assistance of Edwin their King, having spent six years in planting
and settling Christianity there, and but two years betwixt his going off, and
Bishop Aidan's coming thither. And unless the Gent. can show the contrary, viz.
That none of the former Converts were then remaining; or if they were, that
none of 'em were better qualified, none more competent Judges than the rest;
but all alike. It is plain, by their practice, that they were not of his
Opinion.

When ever a new People were Converted to the Faith, great care was always
taken to have a Lawful Ministry among 'em, both Bishops and Presbyters duly
Ordained: Ruffin. H. E. l. 1. c. 10.
For this Reason the Iberians dispatched an Embassy to Constantine, desiring
that Pri^sts might be sent 'em. Soz. H. E. l. 6. c. 38.
And when the Saracens were Converted, Mavia, their Queen, desires that Moses,
a Saracen, might be the Bishop of that Nation; and when he refused to be
Ordained by Lucius of Alexandria, the Bloody Arian, the Roman Magistrates (we
find) carried him to the banished Bishops for Orders, which they needed not
have done, if they had been of the Mind of our Author: For if Ordination be
nothing more but a public Approbation of Ministerial Abilities by the most
competent Judges, Moses was really Ordained before ever he came at those
Bishops; his Ministerial Abilities being publicly Approved by the Roman
Magistrates and the Queen, before he left his own Country. Ang. sac. p. 423.
Tho. Chesterf. de Episc. Cov. and Lich. Ibid. p. 425.
So when Peada, King of the Mid-Angles, was Converted and Baptized in
Northumbria, he brought Home with him four Presbyters, viz. Cedda, and Adda,
and Betti, and Duma, that he might Propagate the Christian Religion among his
own Subjects, and Diuma was afterward Consecrated the first Bishop of the
Mercians and Mid Angles, by Finan Bishop of Northumbria; and yet I doubt not
but his fellow Presbyters were competent Judges, and might have made him a
Bishop as well as Finan, if our Author's way of Ordaining had been then found
out: But as the Church never dreamed of any such rare Inventions; so it is
plain they thought Episcopal Ordination necessary, that the only way of
deriving that Authority from our Savior, was by Succession, and that no Man
might Administer in Sacred things, unless he were thus Admitted. And for this
Reason the Council of Celichyth under Wulfred, Archbishop of Canterbury, were
so wary, that they would not admit an Stranger of the Scotch Nation to perform
any Sacred Office; quia incertum est nobis unde and an ab aliquo Ordinentur,
Spelm. Conc^. Ang. Tom. 1. 329.
because it was uncertain to them by whom, and whether they were ordained by
any body at all.

Now as it is plain, from all these Instances, that the Christians of several
Countries and Ages, were of a quite contrary Opinion to that of our Author, so
I might add several more, were I not to deal with Persons, who, rather than lay
aside that Scheme of Government which they have lately espoused, will despise
all Antiquity; insomuch that the practice of the very Apostles themselves
cannot escape their Censure; Vind. p. 27.
witness that unseemly Jest wherewith the Vindicator endeavors to Ridicule
that Sacred Ceremony; viz. Imposition of Hands; which being used by St. Paul,
in the Ordination of Timothy, what is here said against it in General Terms, is
no less a Libel upon him, than it is upon us.

I wonder who taught him the Notion of an uninterrupted Succession of our
English Monarchs, from the Eldest Son of Noah. Ibid.
If he can produce it from any Author, I shall then believe that he can speak
truth for once. In the mean time, I cannot but admire, that a Man who disputes
with so much Pertness, as if every thing that he says were all Oracle, should
want either the Sense to understand, or Integrity to report so plain a Notion.

If our Loyalty to English Monarchs is so great a Trouble to these Gentlemen,
that they cannot hear it asserted, without torturing their Ears, we cannot help
it. I confess it is no more than what I always thought; and since the Gent. so
freely owns it, I hope it will be taken notice of: For the Government (which
G^d be thanked is not yet quite a Commonwealth) must needs be concerned in that
Grievance; And he that can libel the Grandfather with so much Impudence, Vind.
p. 57, etc.
and triumph in the Subversion of those Principles, which lately supported the
Monarchy, cannot be thought to wish very auspiciously to the present Reign.

And yet notwithstanding their Natural Aversation, and Spite against Monarchy,
so easy and flexible are those Gentlemen to any thing of their own Interest,
that when King James the Second afforded 'em a Tolerat on, No Complements were
too high for him. Subversion of Religion, and cutting of Throats, the dangerous
Consequences of a Popish Successor, were absolutely forgotten: The Monarch was
no Bugbear, nor the Papists neither; Prerogative and Dispensing Power were
harmless, innocent things: His Leige-People, the Dissenters, Leads Address,
June 25. 87.
were vying who should most feelingly express a Thankful Heart; They magnified
him as the Generous Leading Pattern to the Princes of other People, and a
Father to his own; The Assertor and Restorer of God's immediate Dominion over
Conscience; the covering Cherub, under whose refreshing Shadow they promised
themselves Rest -- The First and Happy Instrument, Independ. and Bipt. in the
County of Glou. May, 87. Dissent. of Maldon, Great Coghall, etc. July 9. 87.

Dissenters in Leathward in Cumberl. Aug. 87.

Presbyter. of Colchester, Aug. ^. 87.


under God, of the present and future Peace and Prosperity of his Dominions --
One designed for great Services, the blossoming whereof was then made visible
in his Celebrated Wisdom, in happening upon the most melodous Harp to charm all
evil Spirits, that many other Princes had no Skill to use; (though according to
others Concarring herein with many Noble Princes before him.) But as others
thought fit to express themselves -- Of all that ever sat upon the English
Throne, It shall only be said of Your Majesty's Reign, That from the Western
Ocean, even to the Frozen Thule then had the Churches Rest, and were
multiplied, no one forbidding them -- Your Royal Indulgence, like the Sound of
the Jubilee Trumpet, has so exhilarated the Hearts of your Dissenting Subjects,
that they want Words to express their Gratitude, and Tongues to Celebrate your
Clemency, etc. So dear was that Unhappy Prince to these People, upon the
Account of the Indulgence (though at the same time they knew well enough, that
he inte ded hereby the Ruin of the Established Church), that they followed him
with Acclamations and Shouts, beyond all others, wherever he came. The Flattery
of their Addresses had no other Bounds but want of Wit; You have hereby ecchoed
to the angelical song, which brought him into the World, who at his ingress
into it brought peace, and at his egress out of it, bought peace, and thereby
immolated that Resignation of a narrow interest, for the Divinity of a more
general Preservation; and so tuned the strings of your auspicious Government,
as to make melody over your whole Empire. Presbyt. of Hull, October. 87. And a
little after, they call him plainly their Redeemer.
and that Defect was oftentimes supplied with Fustian and Blasphemy. He that
reads 'em, would think many parts of 'em to have been taken out of their
Prayers; insomuch that God Almighty and King James the Second had in many
instances the very same Complements. Nay, if the Prophets did any where
magnify the Divine Clemency by a most extraordinary flight of Expression, it
was presently got into the Addresses, and applied most ingenuously to King
James, to enhaunce the Dissenters Gratitude for that Illegal Act. So that
methinks there is little Room for this Gentleman to talk of Lewd and Extravagan
Caresses between Ambitious Princes and Aspiring Churchmen, Vind. p. 28. while
those of his own Party are extant, and may be seen.

Though it should be granted, That Ceremonies have no Moral Goodness in them
(as he says is acknowledged, p 28.) yet Decency has; which we think will not
easily be preserved without them; and that it is fit they should be chosen and
imposed by the Authority and Wisdom of Superiors. For if otherwise Religious
Offices were to be performed, according to the Opinion and Will of every Rude
and Fantastical Person, we see by the Practice of Conventicles, where that
Liberty is taken, how awkardly they would be managed, to the great Scandal and
Offense of the more Ingenious and Sober People. Nor is it easily to be
imagined, That God Almighty should be better pleased with the Rudeness of their
Worship, than with the Decency of ours. Especially considering, That besides
the Practice of the Church in all Ages, we have the Injunction of the Apostle,
That all things be done decently, and are to Worship God with our Bodies, as
well as with our Souls, which are God's.

As to the Ceremonies of our Church in particular, they are so few, and easy,
that he must certainly be a Man of more than ordinary Peevishness, or less than
ordinary Sense, that can take 'em for Encumbrances upon the Worship of God. The
Vindicator himself, upon Second Thoughts, will not, under pretense of
Spirituality, Vind. p. 38.
reject the Natural Decorum of an Action in the Worship of God which I am very
glad to hear, And if he will but do One Thing more, viz. allow the Bishops and
Clergy, in Convocation, to be fitter Judges of that Decorum than every mean and
half-witted Pastor, there would be very little more required from him.

I am confident, when this is done, that people will be better reconciled to
our Ceremonies, than to suffer themselves to be Excommunicated, and Damned, for
not complying with them, as the Vindicator talks, page 28. In the mean time, if
any Man be so stiff and peevish, or malicious against the Church, as to deprave
her Ceremonies, and so far despises her Jurisdiction and Government, that he
will not vouchssafe an Appearance to the most Legal Summons, nor yield to the
most Reasonable and Just Monitions in that Case, she does pursue our Savior's
Rule -- He that neglects to hear the Church, we think ought to be reckoned as
an Heathen Man, and a Publican, or in the Language of the UNITED MINISTERS --
When all due Means for the reducing him prove ineffectual, Heads of Agreement.
Tit. 3. Sect. 4.
he having hereby cut himself off from the Church's Communion, the Church may
justly esteem and declare it self discharged of any further Inspection over him.

And in this practice the mildest Protestant Churches agree with us* Eccles.
Dis. of the Reform. Churches of France, transl. into Eng. 1642.
The Reformed Churches of France having used a Coercive Power over their
inferior Members. Those that should stir up Strife or Contention, to dis^oyn
or break the Union of their Church, concerning some Point of their Doctrine or
Discipline, or about the Method, Matter, or Style of the Catechism (though of
Humane Composition), or the Administration of the Sacraments; Public Prayers,
etc. shall be censured as Rebellious Persons -- And in case they will not
renounce their Errors -- then they are to be cut off from the Church. If the
Pastor or Elder do it, he shall presently be suspended from his Charge and
Employment, and be proceeded against at the next Ecclesiastical Synod. If he
teaches False Doctrine, and persists after Admonition; If he is not obedient to
the Admonition of the Consistory, or Convicted of Heresy, Schism, or
Rebellion, against Ecclesiastical Order, he is to be deposed. If he thrusts
himself into the Ministry, where there is pure preaching already, and will not
de^it when warned of it, he is to be quite cut off, and proceeded against as
the Synod shall think fit. And the same Course is to be taken with all his
Followers. And at the End of that Book, we are told, That this Order and
Discipline had been resolved and concluded on by no less than Twenty Seven
National Synods, from 1559 to 1637, etc.

Now if these Reformed Churches of France were not to be Censured as
Uncharitable, for the Establishment and Exercise of this Discipline, I know no
Reason why ours should lie under that imputation.

In the next Paragraph he finds fault with T. W's. Notion of of the Communion
of Saints but gives none of his own, whether for fear lest he should mistake,
or lest his own Party should be condemned by it, I shall not now enquire. It is
certainly a nice Point for Separatists to manage, It being hard for those that
neither Pray with, nor receive the Sacraments, nor live under the Government of
any Church, to Demonstrate plainly how they hold Communion with all, as this
Vindicator confidently pretends. However though he could establish nothing
himself; yet that he may do something toward finding fault with T. W. he
proceeds to examine his aggregate description of the Communion of Saints, which
he tells you consists of these things.

First, A firm belief of all the Articles of Faith contained in the
Apostolical, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds. Now this mightily offends him: 1st.
Because it was not said in Scripture; as if he that believes those Creeds did
not believe Scripture. Those Creeds, tho of human composition, Symbolum Apost.
exigi coepit ubi variae Haereses in Ecclesiam irruperant Voss. de tribus Symb.
Dis. 1. c. 14.
yet are according to Scripture, and contain the Faith into which Christians
are Baptized. They are the Symbola wherein the Orthodox of all Countries agree,
and whereby they have distinguished themselves in several Ages, from those
Heretics which did not assent to them. The two former have been generally
received, and admitted, into the Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches,
and therefore it is strange how the Vindicator can suppose that the Greek and
other Eastern Churches are shut out by this condition of Communion.

It Is true in the Article of the Procession they objected against the Latins,
the addition of Filioque in the Nicene or Constantinopolitan Creed, (and
perhaps not untruly, considering that in the old Ordo Romanus published by
Hittorpius, wherein that Creed is ordered to be used in both Languages these
words, tho in the Latin, (...), qui ex patre filioque procedit, qui cum patre
and filio. simul adoratur Hittorp. Ord. Romans de Div. Offic. p. 39. Ed. Col.
1568. Vide and Voss. de tribus 9. symbol. Diss. 3 c. 20. etc.
yet are omitted in the Greek). But nevertheless they used the Creed, and from
them it came Originally into the Latin Church. And as to that which we receive
under the Name of Athanasius, those among the Greeks who thought it to be his,
had always a very great veneration for it. But in some Greek Copies the words
(...) are left out. So that upon the whole matter the Eastern Churches have no
quarrel against either of those Combefis. ad Man. Calec. not 59.
Creeds. All their contention with the Western in this case is about the true
Reading of them Symbolum fidei, quod ipsi profitentur idem est atque illud quod
Latini in Missa recitant: Differunt in eo a Latinis quod ipsi de Spir. Sancto.
dicunt, qui ex Patre procedit, Latini qui ex Patre filioque procedit; id cum
Graeci non negent idem cum Latinis dicere existimandi sunt. Leo All. de Cons.
l. 3. c. 10. Sect. 1.
. And therefore unless he had been more particular about that, this first
Branch of T. W's. description may stand, and yet neither the Greek or any
Eastern Church be excluded.

Secondly, To partake of the same Table, it is true T. W. did not mean the same
individual Table, as the Gentleman rightly supposes, and yet he meant something
more than barely the same Eucharist in Specie; Heretics and Schismatics, may
deliver the same Eucharist in Specie; and yet he that Communicates with either
is not thereby in the Communion of the Saints.

Thirdly, To join all in the same Holy Prayers, and Supplications, and giving
of Thanks: T. W. does not hereby Excommunicate all the rest of the World. For
although the Forms of Holy Prayer, etc. are different in several Countries, yet
people joining with the Church where they live in its Holy Devotions, do answer
this Branch of the Description and those Christians who refuse and separate
from them are certainly Schismatics.

Fourthly, To be Subject and Obedient to our Spiritual Rulers, and Governors,
who have derived their Authority from the Apostles by a due Succession in all
things pertaining to godly Life, Decency and Order. He cannot except against
this: They are desirous to give due Honor and Obedience, to their Spiritual
Governors who derive their Authority from Christ, but still he endeavors to
justify their Separation upon two accounts.

Vind. p. 32.
First, Because he thinks the Bishop ought not to Govern so many Congregations,
nor by such Rules, and Officers, as they do Neither,

Secondly, By the nomination of the Civil Magistrate without the consent of the
People, or the Ministers within the Diocese, and while he does so, he is a
Creature not to be found either in Scripture or in the Primitive Times, and
therefore can be no Spiritual Governor of theirs by Divine Right.

As to the Government of so many Congregations, we think it not Essential to
the Office of a Bishop: It being not the greatness of the City he lives in, or
the extent of his Diocese, or the Number of Congregations, but the Ordination
that makes him a Bishop. We acknowledge with St. Ep. ad Evagr.
Jerome that the poor Bishop of Eugubium had the same Order, and Authority,
with him of Rome, and that he of Tanis was equal in that respect to him of
Alexandria, Soz. l. 2. c. 14.
and that Milles the Martyr in Sozomen who had never a Christian within his
Diocese, Ibid. l. 7. c. 19.
was as truly a Bishop as he who had all Scythia under his care.

On the other hand to persuade us that the great Extent of a Bishops Diocese
does make void his Office, will be a task, I am afraid, too difficult for our
Author to manage. We have no such Doctrine in Sc ipture. And this conceit as it
is beyond the malice, so it is below the Sense of all Heretics and
Schismatics in former Times. And if it were true, the Apostles themselves must
have been the greatest Usurpers: They having a larger extent of Jurisdiction
even according to this Author, than any of their Successors. But this Argument
has been so Copiously, and so lately managed, by Doctor Maurice in his Learned
Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy; that I shall only need to refer the Reader
thither.

Secondly, As for, the Officers used by our English Prelacy, we think them such
as are extremely useful, in order to the more regular and easy management of
the Episcopal Charge, The Chancellor is a Person well learned in the Canon and
Civil Laws, and consequently able to judge or assist the Bishop in his Judicial
Proceedings. Nor is it any great exception against him, in my Opinion, that he
is a Layman, while there is no Necessity for him Personally to perform any of
those things which belong only to the Clergy: Lyndew. de Constit. q. incontin.
Dec. Rural. vid plura de judiciis, c. 1. Dec. Rural.
The Dean Rural is a Temporary Officer under the Archbishop or Bishop, ad
aliquod ministerium exe^cendum Constitutus. -- Cujus Officium est in Causis
ecclesiasticis citationes ei transmissas exequi -- cujus sigillum in talibus
erit auctenticum.

The Rules they go by are the Canon and Civil Laws, where the Laws and Canons
of our own Kingdom have not expressly directed. The Authority they have is from
the Bishop, and the Law. So that he who disobeys them in the just and legal
Exercise of their Authority, disobeys both. How Sacred and Certain that
Authority is, I wish these Gentlemen may consider.

And if it were purely a matter of Choice, yet methinks Church Affairs are more
likely to be well managed under our English Prelacy, by such Officers and
Rulers, than after the Independent Fashion, by the Sudden and Arbitrary
Determination of every Mean and Ordinary Past^r, perhaps in a Consistory of
Clowns, who must Pole for that Truth and Equity, which they do not understand:
And if either the Pastor, or any body else happens to be wiser than the rest,
so as to judge right, have Power to overruled his Sense and Arguments, either
by Votes or Tumult.

Neither, Thirdly, Do we think the Consent of the People, or of the Ministers
of the Diocese, Essential to the Office of a Bishop: Our Savior Constituted
his Apostles without it; We have no Command in Scripture for any such Consent:
The Practice of the Primitive Times was various; and therefore we think it a
Matter left wholly to the Discretion of the Church. Matthias and Justus seem to
be appointed by the People, as well as the Apostles, Acts 1.15. etc. But the
Apostleship was not determined by that Election, but by the Lot which fell upon
Matthias: For Justus, who was equally Sharer with him in that Act of the
People, was thereby no more an Apostle than he was before. And perhaps the same
way of Choosing by Lots, might be used by St. John, as Mr. Dodwell conjectures;
but was never, Diss. Cyp. p. 12.
probably, in Use after the Apostles Days; though if it had been Necessary, we
cannot believe it would have been omitted in the following Ages. The Seven
Deacons (we read) were Elected by the People, but received their Authorities
and Office from the Apostles, by imposition of Hands.

And these are, I believe, all the Instances of Popular Elections that can be
found in Scripture; but from none of 'em is it evident, that the Election of
the People did contribute any thing that was Essential to Holy Orders.

The Reason why it was admitted, was, that they might confer the Power and
Character upon the Best and most Unexceptionable Persons; such as were of
Honest Report; which could not so easily be known, without consulting the
Multitude: Cyp. Ep. LXVIII. Ed. Oxon.
And this is all the Use that St Cyprian makes of the aforementioned Instances,
who tells us, That it was so ordered in the Case of Eleazar, the Son of Aaron,
and ought to be so, that the Crimes of ill Men may be Detected, and the Deserts
of Good Men Extolled -- And that the Apostles proceeded so diligently and
warily in the Choice of Matthias, and the Seven Deacons, lest any Unworthy
Person should creep into the Service of the Altar, or obtain the Degree of
Priesthood. And he adds further, That in his Time it was the Custom for the
Neighboring Bishops of the same Province, to Meet and Choose a Bishop in the
presence of the People, who fully understood each Man's Life. And after this
manner they advanced Sabinus into the Place of Basilide.

All this seems to be plainly allowed by the Council of Laodicea, which will
have none to be made Bishops, but such as are of Known and Approved
Conversation; Con. Laod. Can. 12.
and provides that they should be constituted, (...), by the Discretion of the
Metropolitans, and Neighboring Bishops In which Po^nts it agrees exactly with
St. Cyprian s Model; Can. 13.
an^ yet the Canon immediate ly following, will not allow the People to choose
those that are to be advanced to the Priesthood; and therefore surely their
Consent was not then thought Essentially Necessary to the making of a Bishop.
Nay, so far was the Church from the Opin on of this Author, that upon the Death
of Auxentius, Theod. H. E. l. 4 c. 7.
the Arian Bish p of Milan, the Synod petitioned the Emperor, That he would
choose one to suc eed him in that See; which certainly they would not have done,
if they had thought that his Nomination would have made him such a Monster, as
our Author speaks of, viz. A Creature not to be found in Scripture, or the
Primitive Times.

I might add several other Instances of Bishops, Metropolitans and Patriarchs,
chosen to their respective Charges, by the Discretion of the Emperor and other
Princes; but I suppose it is not necessary.

As to the Nomination of our English Prelacy; suppose it had been of right
Originally in the Clergy and People, yet they by their Representatives in
Parliament, 25 H. 8. c. 20.
have confirmed it to the Prince; So that it is his by Law: And for my part, I
know no Reason why it should not so continue. Episcopacy is the same, choose who
Names; it being not the Nomination, but the Ordination that makes the Bishop.
And if that be the same now which it was in the Primitive Times, our Episcopacy
must needs be the same with theirs.

Page 33, and 34. The Gentleman is willing to be tried by the Pattern of those
Churches which are truly Primitive; but I find he dares not venture far among
'em, for fear of losing his Cause. He complains, That a Century, or Two, made a
considerable Change in the Features of their Government and Worship: but in
which Century that Change was wrought, he durst not inform us. However, if he
pleases to venture his Cause upon it, let him take any of the first Fifteen, to
prove Congregational Episcopacy; and (provided he will allow the Writers of
that, or the next Age, to be credited before those that lived later) I shall
freely join issue with him.

We have a Specimen of his Abilities already, page 34 and 35. where he tells
us, That Ignatius charges the Bishop to take a personal cognizance of every
Member of his Church, not excepting the very Servants.

And Secondly, That it was the Custom then in every Congregation to receive the
Sacrament every Lord's Day; and that they never received it, nisi ex antistitis
manu, but from the Hand of the Bishop. What could such Bishops be more than
Pastors of single Congregations? To which I Answer:

(...). Ignat. Ep. ad Polyc.
First, That Ignatius does indeed require of the Bishop, to discourse people
singly, as God should enable him: But how does this prove, That he was to take
a Personal Cognizance of every particular Member of his Church? Had he no body
to assist him in the Remoter parts of his Charge? Why could no Man else
acquaint him with the Frailties and Misdemeanors of particular persons, but all
must depend wholly upon his own Cognizance and Observation? Or because he was
not to content himself barely with Public Preaching, but was to discourse 'em
particularly, as he found occasion: Does it therefore follow, that he must
needs be acquainted with every Member o his Church? How if they were too
numerous, or lived too remote to be all Personally discoursed with? All that
Ignatius requires is so far as God shall enable him; Which kind of Expression,
methinks, implies some difficulty -- Let Assemblies be held often; (...). Ibid.
Enquire after all by their Names; do not despise, or behave thy self
insolently toward the Menservants, or Maidservants.

This, I suppose, is the Passage to which our Author principally refers. Though
if he had been able to have quoted it, we might have been abundantly more
certain However, from this it is not to be concluded, that he must take a
personal Cognizance of every Member of his Church, or that he was the Pastor
only of One single Congregation; For how does he prove, That those (...) were
to be only at One Place? Why might not the several Assemblies in his Diocese be
as well comprehended under that Title? Again, how does our Author prove, that
(...) signifies no more but the Ordinary Congregations? Why not the more
Extraordinary Assemblies, when the Bishop Visited? Perhaps the Bishop had a
Scroll, wherein the Names of Christians were enrolled; and in calling them over
at his Visitations might enquire into the Faith and Manners of particular
Persons, and call for the Men themselves, and as he found Occasion, discourse
'em, (...), by way of Doct ine, Admonition, or Reproof: Or, peradventure he
might call over the N^mes of the Congregation where he himself was present,
that he might hereby discover who were heretically inclined: For even then such
Persons began to withdraw from the Communion of the Church, and to hold
Conventicles, though very privately. And if we take it in the latter Sense, it
will contribute little to his Cause, unless he could first prove, That the
Bishop's Congregation would not be a Pattern to the rest, (...). etc. Id. ad
Smyr. (...). Ibid.

Vid. Dodw. in Irenae. Dis. 1. Sect. XVII.


and that there were no Subordinate Presbyters to do the same thing, by the
Bishops Order, in other Congregations within his Diocese.

And that there were more Congregations than one under the Bishop of Smyrna, is
evident from that Pass^ge of Ignatius, in his Epistle to them; (...). Ig. ad
Smyrn.
Let no man perform any of those things which belong to Public Assemblies,
without the Bishop, That Eucharist is to be thought valid, which is either
under him, or at least, which he allowed. What had he to do to allow the
Eucharist in Congregations Independent upon him, and to talk of giving
allowance to himself in his own is to great a Blunder for Ignatius to be
charged with. So that all the distinction here made is betwixt a Congregation
under the Bishop, viz. that where he was Personally present, and another
Congregation Assembled by his permission, and allowance; and must consequently
imply that in the Church of Smyrna there were several Congregations under one
Bishop, what relates to Servants is nothing to this purpose in Ignatius,
whatever it was in our Authors Head.

Nor is the Second Alligation more regular or just than the former. (Antistitis
manu) in Tertullian (for thence it came Originally by way of Mr. Baxter to our
Author) referring not to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Aquam adituri
ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistit^ manu contestamur nos
Renunciare Diaibolo etc. -- Eucharistiae Sacramentum and in Tempore victus, and
Omnibus and mandatum a Domino, etiam antelucanis Caetizbus, nec de Aliorum
manu, quam praesidentium sumimus. Tert. De Cor. Milit. c. 3.
but to the Form of Renouncing the Devil, etc. which was preparatory to
Baptism, and the persons to be Baptized did it sub Antistitis manu, for ( ex)
as this Man quotes it would have made it Nonsense. Tertullian does indeed
speak of the Lords Supper not to be Received nisi de Praesidentium manu, But
this will do our Author no Service: The word Praesidentium including the Bench
of Presbyters, as well as the Bishop in Cathedra.

Vid. Pears. Vind. Ignat. p. 2. c. 13. Assert. 2. Dod. in Iren. Dis. 1. Sect.
VII.
Nor will the Passage out of Irenaeus, which he so hastily misapplies (if fully
cited and understood,) afford any advantage to his cause. Presbyters in that
Father, oftentimes denoting the Age, rather than the Office of those Persons
meant by it, as diverse Learned Men have already observed. And in that Sense not
only Presbyters, but likewise Bishops, Deacons and Laymen might be comprehended
under that Title: And accordingly Irenaeus distinguishes by diverse Characters
telling them what sort of Elders they were to hearken to, Qua propter eis qui
in Eccles. sunt Pres. obaudire oportet hiis qui Successionem habent ab
Apostolis sicut ostendimus, qui cum Episc. Successione charisma veritatis
Certum secundum placitum Patris acceperunt. Iren. l. 4. c. 4, 3.

Iren. l. 4. c. 43


viz.

First, Eis qui in Ecclesia sunt, those who are within the Pale of the Church.

Secondly, Hiis qui Successionem habent ab Apostolis, etc. those who had the
Succession from the Apostles, and who together with the Succession, in their
Episcopal Charge, did receive the sure Gift of Truth, according to the Will of
the Father.

Whence it is plain that Irenaeus in this place, means Bishops only when he
talks of the Apostles Successors. And therefore our Authors Inference in behalf
of Presbyters having their Succession from the Apostles as well as Bishops, is
out of Doors. Irenaeus reckons up the Bishops of Rome in order as they
Succeeded to Eleutherius then Bishop, who was the Twelfth from the Apostles,
concluding Hac Ordina^ione and Successione, etc. by this Ordination, and
Succession, that Tradition which is in the Church from the Apostl^s and the
Preaching of the Truth is handed down to us. From which it is plain that
Succession in their days, was more than bare Conformity to the Apostles Model
in Government and Worship: For they Succeedded the Apostles.

First, In Power and Authority, So Irenaeus -- quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias
Committebant -- quos and Successores relinquebant suum ipsorum, Locum
Magisterii tradentes.

Secondly, In Place, So Linus was constituted the Successor of St. Peter, and
St. Paul, at Rome; and Irenaeus tells us further that they made him Bishop. And
therefore if his Successors afterward mentioned kept up to the Apostles Model,
they must likewise derive their Office as he did, from Persons invested with
the same Character, and Consequently as Linus was Ordained by the Apostles, who
had that Episcopal Authority in themselves, which they conferred upon him, So
the rest down to Eleutherius must be Ordained by Bishops. And if so let our
Author consider with himself whether his Notion, or ours, is nearer in all
Points to the sense of those Times.

When I consider how nice and strict this Gentleman was in the Notion of
Succession, P. 19. 20 that he could not allow Two Bishops to Succeed One
Apostle, nor One to Succeed Two, I cannot but wonder that in the Writing of 16
Pages, his Head should grow so loose as to make it no more than Conformity to
the Apostles Model in Government and Worship. Surely if this be the truest
Sense as the Gentleman affirms, One Bishop may Succeed Two Apostles, or One
Apostle be Succeeded by Twenty Bishops without any such absurdity or Blunder as
our Author cries out against in the forequoted Pages.

We all grant that for Persons wilfully to withdraw themselves from such
particular Churches as are framed according to Scripture Rules, and impose no
new or needless Terms, is to Act Schismatically, because such wilful
Separation when n^ cause is given, cannot be without breach of Charity with our
fellow Christians, Page 37. Yes it may through the prejudices of Education, or
for want of understanding: People may take that to be New which is very Old,
and that which is very Decent and Fit to be Imposed, to be altogether Needless;
and withdraw themselves from particular Churches framed according to Scripture
Rules, when purely out of mistake they think them otherwise. They may be led by
Interest, or won over by persuasion, to a new Communion, and yet have no hard
thoughts of that Church, or its Members, which they left. I cannot believe that
every Dissenter at his first going off from the Church of England, does
immediately hate us; I find several of 'em very Kind and Affable Persons; And
yet if our Author has granted Right, all their Charity (though a very good and
commendable thing) cannot excuse 'em from the Guilt of acting schismatically.

And because our Author has granted this, I shall grant likewise, That Schism
is frequently the Effect of Uncharitableness, which perhaps was all that honest
Mr. H. meant, when he call d it formalis ratio. People are sometimes froward
and peevish, and apt to take Pe^ at little things; and when they are once
angry, and out of charity will forsake the best friends in the world (tho
perhaps for worse Company); And the new Acquaintance, if he be not very dull,
will be ready enough, for his own advantage, to find out Suggestions, true or
false to confirm and improve the Quarrel.

Again, Uncharitableness is otherwise the Effect of Schism, when People have no
way to justify their Separation from an Orthodox Church, and to support and
propagate the Cause which they have engaged in, but by vilifying and aspersing
its Members, and abusing every thing that belongs to its Communion: And when by
the long continuance of these Practices, they have so far wrought upon their
own belief, as to think those Objections right, which at first were only taken
up to serve a Passion, or Design; and that both Persons and Things are really
as bad as they have been used to represent 'em: When they look upon others as
the Enemies of God, and Opposers of his pure Worship, as Reprobates, and Damned
themselves and Hinderers of the Salvation of others. It is no wonder if they
make no Scruple of the most Violent and Uncharitable Practices: Especially when
Ambition, Covetousness, and Vainglory go along with these Conceits.

And yet in the very height of Violence and Cruelty, it will be no mean Task to
persuade 'em, That they are uncharitable, nor consequently Schismatics in Mr.
H s Notion; For Charity is seated in the heart, which no Man can look into; and
therefore the breach of it not otherwise Visible than by outward Practices. And
as to those, be they never so Villainous, yet it is in vain to object 'em*
while they are committed under the Patronage of a Rjghteous Cause, and also
with a great Appearance of Devotion and Sobriety. If you are robbed and
plundered by One of these People, you are not to call him a Thief, or to say,
he was Uncharitable, for thus undoing his poor Neighbor; for it was only the
spoiling of an Egyptian, or, in another Phrase, the weakening of the wicked. If
they kill you, it cannot be Murder, so long as the Example of Phineas stands
upon Record.

Or if he destroys his Prince, yet if he can but once pass Tyburne, he is no
Traitor; there is Scripture enough, as he thinks, to discharge him from that
Guilt. And as for the more puny Instances of Uncharitableness; such as Lying
and Slandering, and raising Tumults, and the most Grave and Solemn Perjuries,
to promote the Cause, either the Love of Good Men, or Zeal for Reformation,
will easily excuse 'em among Friends: And to prevent Scandal among other
People, if they be done one Day, they may be denied the next.

If any Tradesman appears more than ordinary in Defense of the Church, no
Schismatic is to have any Dealing with him; and if you say, he is
Uncharitable, he tells you, No, surely! He has the Management of his own Purfe,
and may lay out his Money where he pleases. If any injured Catholic goes about
to Right himself in a Court of Judicature, get a Jury of Donatists, and he is
so far from obtaining any Relief, or Benefit of Law, that he is sure to be
Condemned. And if you say, the Jury was Unjust, they will bring their Action.
-- Take Warning by your Neighbor; for they went according to their
Consciences, and you are not to question their Reputation. If any Clergyman
appears against 'em, in Defense of the Church, it shall be their whole ^usiness
to make him Odious, to expose his Faults, in case he be any way o^noxious;
which Charity would rather cover, and by Detraction and Calumny, to lessen and
deprave the Character of the most Excellent Persons. If he be of a Grave and
Reserv d Conversation, they shall accuse him of Pride; if more cheerful and
free, he shall be Reputed Dissolute; if Thrifty, Covetous; if Liberal and
Charitable, it shall be said, that he does it out of Vainglory, or the hopes
of Merit: And if he be more than ordinarily strict in the Duties of Fasting and
Prayer, he shall be reckoned Superstitious, and the best Title he can obtain,
will be that of a very great Formalist In fine, be they Clergy, or Lay People,
the violent Schismatic, he that either manages the Faction, or hates the
Church, will never speak well of 'em, where he can find the least Occasion, or
pretense to speak ill.

And, as in all these Instances, the Charge of Uncharitableness is confidently
evaded, so I would know of these Gentlemen, how Schism, in their Notion, may be
discovered, so as that a Dissenter may be Convicted, if he be really Guilty:
For if it be one of the blackest Crimes, the Arch-Rebel of all in Christ's
Kingdom, it is very fit that it should be reproved and discountenanced. But I
cannot see how this can be done, till we first know how to fix it upon
particular Persons, We desire theref^re a plain Answer:

First of all, by what Rules that is to be done?

And Secondly, Whether those who are concern d in the foremention d, and such
like Practices, are not real^y Schismatics? For if they are* we hope that Mr.
H. and the rest of his Way, who boast what Power they have within themselves to
Admonish, Suspend, and Reject Scandalous Persons; will so order the matter that
th^^ may be no such People in any of their Congregations. For otherwise, if we
see a Book written to prove Uncharitableness to be Schism, and the Crime of
Schism therein aggravated to the highest degree, and yet the Author's own
Congregation crowded with Uncharitable People, what can we think of the
Discourse, but that it was all mere bant^r; And that all the Power of
Admonishing, etc. which they so eagerly challenge, is to be employed only for
the Advantage of the Conventicle, but never against any of those Practices,
though never so violent or scandalous, that serve to promote its Interest.

What he says to p. 40. has been already Answered, as far as it is material;
And there ends his Vindication of Mr. H's Notion. So that having examine d him
hitherto with as much Patience as he did T. W. I shall pursue him no further,
hoping that I need not trouble my self about the Remarks on either side.

FINIS.

