THE Mystery of Atheism; OR THE DEVICES Made use of To Countenance and
Propagate it: Together with the EVIL and DANGER of them. Set forth in several
Letters to a Friend. Wherein is made appear, that it is not want of Evidence,
but Sincerity that makes Men Atheists. By the Author of the Mystery of
Phanaticism.

Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God. LONDON: Printed
for A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row. And sold by
Rich. Gravel, in Bristal. 1699.

The PREFACE.
IF any be desirous to know the occasion of these Letters, he need only look
abroad, and may soon see that there is but too much occasion for them: For
Atheism is so strangely increased among us of late Years, and grown to that
height, that like a torrent it overflows the Banks and Boundaries of Laws, and
has almost carried away all Religion before it: So that it is high time to use
our best Endeavors to stem this Tide, and if possible to put a stop to this
overflowing of Vngodlyness.

It has been a matter hotly disputed in former times, whether there ever was,
or could be such an Anomalous Creature as an Atheist; or if any Age had here
and there afforded one, he was reputed a Monster or Prodigy, and gazed upon as
a Wonderful Rarity: But our Age has put this matter out of Question, and
perhaps afforded more than any that has gone before it; this Monster is now
grown familiar, and may every day and almost every where be seen. Atheism in
old times was so modest, as not to venture abroad without a Mask or Disguise;
but it is now become barefaced, and has cast off all blushing and shame; and
where as the fool in David's days only said in his heart, in ours he speaks
out, and says with his Tongue, there is no God.

'Twill be needless to recount here the extreme Folly and Danger of Atheism,
which the Reader will find in some measure done in the following Letters: If
there be a God that made and governs the World, (as there is all the Reason in
the World from the Make and Management of it to believe there is) what a vile
affront must it be to Question his Being, and to go about to argue him out of
the World, that made and placed us in it? This must tear up all Religion by the
Root, subvert the Foundation of human Society, and destroy all that Trust and
Confidence we ought to have in him and one another: Yea, the Atheist is the
most gross and silly of all Impostors, for he puts a cheat upon himself, and
not only excludes him from all the Comfort and Happiness he might hope from so
lovely a Being, but exposes himself to all that Misery and Punishment, that may
be feared from an incensed Deity.

And yet as silly as this is, he is not only willing to be thus grossly
deceived himself, but is very busy to draw in and deceive others, and to make
Proselytes to such a senseless and fatal imposture; by which means the
infection of this Evil spreads daily, and the distemper is wellnigh become
Epidemical.

Now this Mystery of Iniquity working so strongly in our days, and this
Spiritual wickedness being again seated in high places, 'twill be requisite (if
it may be) both to detect and dethrone it. It Is indeed a matter Worthy the
inquiry of the best and wisest Men, to search into the bottom of this Evil,
that by knowing the Cause, they may the better apply timely Remedies for the
Cure of it, before the distemper grow inveterate and incurable; for though all
sin in general, yet an Atheistical Contempt of God, and boldness in sinning, do
more particularly undermine the Peace and Prosperity of a Nation, and more than
ordinarily hasten and ripen it for destruction.

Now though there may be some latent Causes of Atheism, that lie more hidden and
out of sight, yet there are others that are more visible, and apparently lead
to this great Evil: The loosening the Principles of Religion and Government
has certainly a great hand in it; the dissolving the Ties of Justice and
Honesty does not a little contribute toward it, and the breaking the Bonds of
Unity and Peace have an easy and natural tendency to it: how much the
immodesty and immorality of the Stage has tended this way, has been lately
showed by an excellent Pen; what mischief has proceeded from that other Stage,
I mean the Conventicle, sad experience may inform us; and how much Religion
has suffered by a new Set of Reformers, who are for Reforming all faults but
their own, may be daily seen; and this, as all other Mysteries, has some
depths and intrigues, which must be searched into and laid open, before the evil
can be prevented.

'Twas foretold that in the latter days, some should put on a Form of
Godliness, without the Power of it; and likewise that there should arise
Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts: Both these Prophecies we may see
accomplished in our days, in which we find some acting very vile things under a
Cloak of Religion; and others throwing off all pretensions to it, breaking their
jests upon God and Religion, and making the most Sacred and Serious things the
Object of their Contempt and Raillery: And both these, though steering different
courses, fall at last into the Gulf of Atheism, in which many are swallowed
up, and from whence few return.

In a Word, Atheism is the Completion of Vice and Wickedness; in which they all
center and terminate; so that this sin when it is finished brings forth
death, and sinks Men into everlasting perdition. This then being an Evil so
pernicious to the welfare of Mankind, as well as to the Honor of our Maker,
'twill be necessary to set forth the Arts by which it is disguised and
propagated, that we may behold this Monster in its own shape, and be thereby
induced to shun and detest it.

Farewell.
The CONTENTS.
Letter 1. OF the Atheists casting off the awe and sense of a Deity, the better
to enjoy and indulge his Lusts. page 1 Letter 2. Of his solving the Phenomenon
of the World without a Deity. p. 11 Letter 3. Of his endeavoring to stifle the
Convictions and Notices that Conscience gives of a Deity. p. 24 Letter 4. Of
his ascribing the Notion of a God to easiness of Belief and fond Credulity. p.
34 Letter 5. Of his resolving it into the Principles and Prejudices of
Education. p. 43 Letter 6. Of his attributing to Fear or a Superstitious Dread
of some invisible Powers. p. 50 Letter 7. His ascribing it to State Policy. p.
58 Letter 8. Ascribing it to Common Compact. p. 64 Letter 9. His denial of the
Notion and Being of a Spirit. p. 70 Letter 10. Of the unequal Distribution of
Earthly things. p. 78 Letter 11. Of his taking advantage from the Disputes and
Differences in Religion. p. 86 Letter 12. His making use of the Hypocrisy of
Pretenders to cast off all Religion. p. 93 Letter 13. Of Scoffing at Religion.
p. 99 Letter 14. His charging Religion with a Foolish Bargain. p. 106 Letter
15. The Close, containing some Directions for the Cure of Atheism. p. 113
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Received yours, wherein I find you passionately bewailing the growth of
Atheism; and very desirous to know something of the Causes and Cure of it.

I am sufficiently sensible of the Justice of the Complaint, and because this
Evil has so malign an influence, not only on the private but public Welfare,
cannot but commend the Charity of your Request, and therefore shall endeavor
something toward your Satisfaction.

1st. And here the First and Grand Device of the Atheist, that occurs to our
view, is, The casting off the awe and dread of a Deity, the more securely to
enjoy and indulge his Lusts: This is indeed the great depth of this Mystery of
Iniquity, which must therefore be a little searched into and unravelled, that we
may the better see the malignity of it.

It Is most certain, that the Looseness and Debauchery of men's lives is the prime
fundamental Cause of all Atheism; for Sin and Wickedness make a Party against
Religion, whose Chief design it is to check and control them; and where
Religion is not strong enough to subdue men's Lusts, there men's Lusts will be
strong enough to subdue their Religion; these are contrary one to the other,
and as the one gets ground, the other loses it: When Vice and Wickedness have
taken possession of the heart, and prevailed over the Affections, they soon
draw the Mind over to their Party, and engage it against all Religion. Corrupt
Practices, naturally lead to Corrupt Principles; and the debauchery of Manners,
of course, brings on the debauchery of the Mind. That there are strong
Propensities and Inclinations in men's Natures, to wickedness and vice, is a
thing too sensibly felt to need any proof; and that these may, and frequently
do, wear off and obliterate the Natural Impressions of Good and Evil, the
Course of men's lives too sadly verifies; and, what a natural tendency this has
to Atheism, half an eye may discover. For, whilst men retain any love to
Virtue, and keep the mastery over their Lusts and vile Affections, so long they
retain their Religion, and keep up a due sense and veneration of the Divine
Majesty! but when they strike off from the love and practice of Virtue, and let
loose the reins to their vicious Inclinations, they naturally run into
Irreligion and Atheism; for Virtue and Goodness being the only Curb to restrain
this Extravagance, when that is gone, they have nothing left to stop them in
the Career, and so are hurried on headlong into the gulf of Atheism. If you
observe it, Good men are never disposed to Atheism; it is the grief and
abhorrence, but never the Choice of such Persons: It Is only the profligate and
profane, who have sinned away the sense of a Deity, that fly to it for
shelter: and to give their lusts the freer scope, make their last resort to it.
Yea, these too must in a great measure un-man themselves, before they can so
far degenerate; and in a manner turn Beasts, before they can turn Atheists.

But what influence has the looseness and debauchery of men's lives upon the
producing of Atheism? Why, Great every way. As,

First, Men's wicked lives make it their Interest that there should be no God,
and this gives a Biass to the mind that strongly draws it into Atheism. All
siin and wickedness being repugnant to the Purity and Perfection of a Supreme
Being, and contrary to the express Declarations of his Will, must necessarily
incur his displeasure: And though Infinite Goodness may warn Sinners of the
danger, yet Infinite Justice cannot suffer the wilful Violations of his
Authority and Laws to go unpunished Now, resolute and obstinate Sinners being
conscious how they have affronted such a Being, and thereby rendered themselves
obnoxious to his just Indignation and Vengeance, have all the reason in the
world to dread him; and, if they can, to fly from him; from whom they can have
no other than fearful Expectations of Wrath, and the Revelation of Righteous
Judgment: And having thus made him their Enemy it is plainly become their
Interest that there should be no such Being. Now Interest (you know) has a
mighty Influence on men's Inclinations; and as they easily believe what makes
for them, so they are hardly persuaded to that which makes against them: Hence
we see, that Good men easily believe a God, from whom they have well-grounded
hopes of Happiness and a future Reward: whereas wicked men are very hardly
brought to it, because they have reason only to fear him, and can look for
nothing but eternal misery and destruction from him: And if at any time they
have any Faith in him, it is but like that of the Devils, to believe and
tremble. Again,

2dly, Men's wicked lives having made it their Interest that there should be no
God, their next step is to make it their wish that there were none. This is
another piece of this Mystery of Iniquity, and a farther advance to Atheism:
For, the belief of an Incensed Deity, must needs sit very uneasy upon the
mind; it cannot but fret and gall, and fill it with continual horror and
perplexity: The Sense of this serves to imbitter the Pleasures of Sin, to put a
check upon men's Vices, and will not suffer them to enjoy their Lusts in quiet;
which being resolved to do, they grow impatient under this Check: And this
makes them desirous to rid themselves of the awe and sense of such an uneasy
Being. The good man finds that ease and satisfaction in the sense of a Deity,
that he would not for any thing be without it, for it fills him with joy and
content now, and gives him Peace and Happiness at the last: Insomuch, that were
he to wisn himself the Chiefest Good, it would be in the comfort and
complacence he feels in the belief of a Deity. Whereas the loose and wicked
person, is haunted with perpetual Fears and Terrors; and the disquietude he
feels, from the apprehensions of a God, drives him to wish there were no such
Being to observe and punish him; and then a small matter will persuade him to
it; for, Facile credimus, quod volumus, we easily believe what we long and
desire should be true.

3dly, And this leads to the third and last step to Atheism, which is, from
wishing there were no God, to endeavoring to persuade themselves that there is
none; there being an easy and natural transition, from the one to the other:
for the Will and Affections have a great sway on the Understanding; and when
Interest has engaged the former, they soon draw the latter to their side; so
that what men make their Wish, quickly becomes their Choice; and from a desire
to discard the Deity, easily come to deny and disbelieve him.

But by what Means do they endeavor and effect this? Why,

1. First, They muster up all their Reason and Wit to argue against the Being
of a God, and seek to dispute him out of the world. To this end, they labor,
as well as they can, to weaken the force of all those Arguments that are
brought for the proof of a Deity, and make the best shift they can, either to
answer or evade them. Again, they magnify the strength of those Arguments that
are brought against such a Being: And, (though to prove a Negative, in this as in
many other cases, be both irrational and impossible, yet) to show their
goodwill to their Maker, the slend'rest Cavils or Probabilities of this nature
shall have a mighty force with them; and the slightest Sophistry be advanced
into Demonstration. But if this will not do, they endeavor,

2. To banish all thoughts of God out of their mind, and to cast off the
remembrance of him: Because they cannot sin quietly for him, they resolve not
to think of him, and therefore put those thoughts far from them that give them
this disturbance. This was the Atheists course in David's time, who tells us, [
That God was not in all their thoughts;] yea, that his thoughts were always
grievous to them; and therefore they removed them far out of their sight, that
they might have no fear of him before their Eyes: And the thoughts of a God
that observes and records our Actions, and will one day reckon for them, are
still irksom and grievous to impenitent sinners, which makes them use their Art
to get rid of them. Indeed, could they but reconcile the belief of a Deity,
with the enjoyment of their lusts, the thoughts of him would be easy enough to
them; and this temptation to Atheism in a great measure cease. Could they serve
the true God, as the Heathens did the false ones, with riot and uncleaness,
none would be greater Votaries than they: But since the sense of him strikes
such a damp upon their Pleasures, and puts such a curb and restraint upon their
Vices, they cannot away with the thoughts of him, and therefore labor to rid
their minds of the belief, that they may be rid of the fear of such a Being.
But, is this a wise or safe course? No, extremely foolish and dangerous: for,
tho 'it be weakness to fear where no fear is, yet not to fear where there is a
just cause and a proper Object for it, is the height of Folly: And, to shut our
Eyes against a certain Danger, for fear of being frightened by it, is no better
than madness. Indeed, could we put out the Sun by winking, or avoid the danger
of Divine Vengeance, by shaking off the dread of it, there might be some show
of Reason for our Unbelief; but, since the truth of things depends not upon our
belief or disbelief of them; and the very Notion of a Deity implies a necessity
of Existence, it must be monstrously senseless and unreasonable, to cast off
the awe and dread of him.

Again, To regulate our Faith by interest and affection, is to walk by a false
and crooked Rule: For, these being frequently corrupted, clap a wrong Biass
upon the Mind, which too often turns it from the Truth, and turns it unto
Fables: And consequently, to steer our course by these measures, is to follow a
false Guide, which must lead us out of our way. Indeed, would men rightly
understand and follow their true Interest, it would then lead them aright into
the paths of Religion, there being no comfort or security at all to be had
without it: But, when they weakly mistake their Interest, and vainly wish there
were no Superior Being to obstruct it, they do but court misery, and fondly
choose their own destruction.

In short, the vast risque that these men run, plainly shows it to be extremely
unsafe and dangerous: For, if the Atheist find at last that there is a God,
whom he has all his lifetime denied and despised, what unspeakable Horror
must seize his guilty Soul, which must groan for ever under the wrath of such
an Almighty Being, and be eternally miserable without ease or remedy? The
Good Man runs no risque at all, for the sense of such a Being has made him
more healthful and easy to himself, more useful and serviceable to others, and
more honored and respected of all men for both: And if there be no God at
last, he can find no inconvenience in this belief; but if there be one, he has
infinitely the better on it; being sure to be Eternally Happy in his favor and
presence.

So that if this were but a doubtful Case, common prudence teaches men to choose
the safest side; to which therefore 'twill be our Wisdom to incline. I am,

SIR, Your hearty Friend, A. B.
October 16. School.
LETTER II.
SIR,
I Find you sensible, in your last, of the great evil and danger of that
Artifice which has drawn so many into Atheism, ( viz.) The casting off the awe
and sense of a Deity, that they may go on the more securely in their Sins. I
proceed in this to another Device made use of to the same purpose, (and that
is) some Men's endeavoring to solve the Phenomenon of the Universe, and to give
an account of the Existence of the World without a Supreme Being.

It Is well known, that one of the Principal Arguments and Demonstrations of a
Deity, is taken from the Works both of Creation and Providence; [ The Invisible
things of God from the Creation of the World, being clearly seen, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead.] And it is evident, (as the same Apostle told the Men
of Lystra) [That God has not left himself without witness, in that he does
good, and gives rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness.] Indeed, the admirable frame and order of the World,
together with the wonderful Provision made for all the Creatures in it, plainly
bespeak an Almighty Agent, to be both the Contriver and Preserver of it: Yea,
there are those visible marks of an Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, stamped
upon every Creature, that manifestly show the Finger of a God; and direct our
Minds to the Knowledge and Contemplation of him.

Now to evade this clear and palpable Proof of his Being, the Atheist racks his
Brain to find out a way of accounting for these things, without a first Cause
or Orderer of them. And of these there are two sorts, viz.

The first, Of those that assert the Eternity of the World.

The other, Of such as make it the Product of Chance and Fortune. The Former,
are the followers of Aristotle, and the Latter of Epicurus. Both which show
their great unwillingness to believe a Deity; and how desirous they are to live
without God in the World. But let us Examine the Account they give us of these
Matters. To which end, let us begin with the first sort.

1st. Who, to set aside a First Cause, affirm the World to have had no
beginning, but to have been from Eternity, as it now is; there having been an
Eternal Succession of Men and all other Creatures, as we now find it.

Now, what proof is offered for this bold Affirmation? Why, none at all, it is a
precarious Assertion, taken up from the single Opinion of Aristotle, without
any offer of Proof, or color of Reason; and only shows that some Men have a
mind to have it so; and would fain persuade themselves and others to it, if
they can. And yet this Opinion, as delivered by Aristotle, serves not the
Atheist's turn neither: For, though he affirmed the World to have no Beginning,
yet he said not 'twas of its self; but that it proceeded from God, by the way
of a Natural and necessary Effect, as light does from the Sun. Where there is a
plain Confession of a God, from whom the World and all things in it sprang by a
Natural and Eternal Emanation. So that he did not, with the Modern Atheists,
set up the Notion of the Eternity of the World, to exclude a First Cause, but
thought it to be consistent with it.

But is there any Proof that the World had a Beginning, and that there is a
First Cause and Maker of it? Yes, as great as the Nature of the thing is
capable of; which being a matter of Fact of an ancient Date, can only be proved
by Testimony, and the fair appearances of Reason: And if both these concur in
the matter before us, it is as much as the thing will bear; and consequently, as
much as any wise man will require.

1st. And First, that the World was made and had a Beginning, we have the
Testimony of all Mankind from the first making of it; there being an Universal
Tradition hereof, delivered down through every Age since its Beginning. The
Egyptians, and Phoenicians of old; the Grecians, Assyrians, Persians, and
Romans, of latter Date, all had, and handed down this Tradition. Yea, the
Indians and all other the most rude and barbarous Nations, that had little or
no Commerce with other Nations, concurred in this Belief; all of them
worshipping a God, whom they owned to be the Maker and Governor of the World.
And though some difference has been found about the Computation of Time, and the
Age of the World, yet all agree in this, that it was made. Yea, we find
Aristotle himself, who was the first Asserter of the Eternity of the World, (in
his Book De Mundo, Chap. 6th) freely confessing, that 'twas a general Tradition
among all Men, that all things are of God, and were made by him.

2dly. Again, Secondly, we find this Universal Tradition confirmed by the
written Histories of all Times and Places ever since. If we allow Moses the
Credit of the first and ancientest Historian (which cannot be in Reason denied
him) we have a full and consistent Relation of the Beginning of the World and
all things in it, which has been received, and recorded from him in all
succeeding Ages; and is most agreeable with the Account which all other Ancient
Writers, whether Poets or Philosophers, give of this matter, being in all
probability derived from him: Insomuch, that we find Aristotle himself (in his
Book De Coelo, lib. 1. cap. 10) once more acknowledging, that all the
Philosophers that were before him, did hold that the World was made.

3dly. Moreover, Thirdly, we can trace up the Original of all Arts and
Sciences, in the several Times and Places, when, and where they were first
Invented: Which, if the World were Eternal, would have been found out long
before, and been known far beyond all Memory: Unless we can suppose, that all
Men in the Ages before we have any Account, passed an Eternity in a deep Sleep;
and were all so dull, as either to do nothing Memorable, or to be unable or
unwilling to Record it. And therefore Lucretius wisely ask the Question, If
the World had no Beginning, how comes it to pass, that the most Ancient Poets
mention nothing higher than the Theban War, and the Destruction of Troy?

And indeed, if the World had no beginning, it is strange that no account
should be given of any thing in that Eternity of Duration, before the World is
said to begin: And that all things that are known, should be found out and
Recorded since that time.

4. Besides Fourthly, We see the sundry parts of which the World consists, to
be subject to decay and Corruption; and had they been so from all Eternity,
they must in all probability have utterly perished and come to nothing long
since. The Frame of the World, is composed of such frail Corruptible Materials,
that, in an infinite space, would necessarily dissolve, and fall asunder,
without a Superior Power to uphold and keep the parts together. This we may
see excellently urged by Lucretius (Lib. 5.) where he tells us, That the World
must necessarily be acknowledged to have had a beginning, otherwise, those
things which are in their own Nature corruptible, could never, from all
Eternity, have held out against all the forcible and violent Assaults and
Accidents, which in an infinite duration must have happened to them. And
therefore wefind, that Aristotle having affirmed the World to have had no
beginning, was thereby driven in his own defense, to affirm, it can have no
end; for whatsoever has an end, must have a beginning: And if the Frame of the
World be Subject to Dissolution, it could not possibly have been from Eternity.
In short, we plainly see, that all things are some way or other produced; every
man is of another; and every other thing has some Cause of his Being, which
must necessarily lead up to a first Cause, which is of its self, and made and
preserves all other: And if the World had no beginning, we may safely conclude,
it must long since have had an end. So that this First Hypothesis of the
Eternity of the World, taken up without any proof, upon the single Authority of
Aristotle, against the Universal Belief and Tradition of Mankind, is, both
unreasonable and unaccountable.

2. Let us proceed then, Secondly, to that of Epicurus, and see whether that be
any better. And here, to exclude a Deity or first Cause, we find him affirming,
that the World was made by Chance, and all things in it came together of
themselves, by some lucky Hits and Accidents: An account whereof is briefly
this, ( viz.) They tell us, that the Matter of which the World was framed, was
from Eternity; and likewise, an Infinite empty space, for the innumerable small
Particles (called Atoms) to move and play in: And that these being in
continual motion, did after infinite Trials and Rencounters, without the help
or direction of a Supreme Being, by lucky Hits and Chances, settle at last in
that goodly Frame and Order of things, which we now see, and find the World to
be in.

A goodly account indeed! Which serves only to show, that some men are willing
to believe any thing rather than a God. For, who ever heard of a House that was
made without Hands? Or a Book composed by an accidental jumbling and meeting
together of Letters and Syllables of their own accord? And yet, This is far
more easy to be imagined, than for so Stately and Beautiful a Structure as
this of the World, to be raised without an Artificer: Or the great Volume of
the Universe, to be compiled without an Author. But, what Foundation has this
vain and incredible Hypothesis? Why, none but the bold confidence of Epecurus
and his Followers, grounded upon a desire of letting loose the Reins to his
Appetite, and enjoying sensual Pleasures without control. Indeed, there can be
no possible evidence of the World's being thus made by chance: For, these
Atoms of which he speaks are altogether invisible; and, for ought we know,
move only in the empty space of an Fpicurean Brain. Yea, there is all
imaginable Evidence to the contrary: For, there are those apparent Marks of
Infinite Power and Wisdom in the Frame of the World, that render it altogether
impossible to be the effect of Chance: for, since none could ever speak of a
Structure, where all the parts of it came together of themselves; and we never
read of any thing Great and Noble, that was ever effected or came to pass that
way; how senseless is it to conceive, that this glorious and regular Fabric of
the World, which affords as many Wonders as Parts, should be the work of any
other than a Divine Hand.

So that the Folly of this Device, of giving an account of the Being and
continuance of the World, without a Deity, is very apparent; for it contradicts
the Reason and Sense of Mankind in all Ages; and opposes a Truth, that has
swim'd down the Current of time without interruption. Neither is the Evil and
Danger less visible, than the Folly of it: For, this is the highest Affront and
Indignity that can be offered to our Maker, to rob him of the Honor of his
Works, and to deny him the Glory that should accrue from them. There is
certainly a Tribute of Honor and acknowledgment due to the Sovereign Lord and
Maker of the Universe; which is to be paid by all his Creatures, but especially
by Man, who is made the visible Lord and Viceroy of this lower World: Now, to
call in question his making or right of governing the World, is to deny him
this Homage; and consequently to prove Rebellious to our Supreme Lord and
Master; which must needs be a matter of extreme and inconceivable danger.

Again, 2dly. It Is a high piece of Ingratitude to disown our Maker and chiefest
Benefactour, from whom we receive Life and Breath and all things; and to whom
we owe therefore our loudest Praises and Thanksgivings: And when all other
Creatures in, their way, show forth the Glory of God, what Unworthiness is it
in Man, who was chiefly designed for that end, to withold it from him: This
is, not only negligently to observe the Works of the Lord, but utterly to
disclaim and forget the Operations of his Hand: Which must needs sink him who
was made somewhat higher than the Angels, into a Condition lower and worse than
the Beast that perishes.

3dly. Yea ( Thirdly) This is not only a high piece of injustice and
ingratitude to our Maker, but a great injury to Mankind; who are hereby
deprived of that Assistance and Affiance, they might have in a Supreme Being;
and consequently of that comfort and benefit they might receive from him. We
daily see what impotent and feeble Creatures, even the best of Men are; liable
to a thousand miseries and misfortunes, which they can neither prevent nor
remove: Now the only comfort or relief we can have against These; is, in the
Apprehensions of a God, who is of infinite Power and Goodness; and
consequently, both able and willing to help us: There we may safely repose our
Trust and Confidence, with well-grounded hopes of a supply of all our wants,
and a happy issue out of all our afflictions: Now, by calling in Question the
Truth of such a Being, who is the Author and disposer of such Events, Men
bereave themselves of all these comfortable expectations, and make themselves
miserable by their own Infidelity. So that this Device of the Atheist, is as
imprudent as it is unreasonable; for it deprives him of all that comfort, which
he might have in this Life; and excludes him from all that happiness, to which
he was designed in the next.

These are obvious Truths, on which I shall not need to enlarge; and shall
therefore leave them to your farther Meditation. I am,

SIR, Your true Friend, A. B

LETTER III.
SIR,
IN your last I find you readily own the works of Creation and Providence to be
palpable Demonstrations of a Deity, and wonder at the Atheists blindness or
boldness in so easily overlooking or gainsaying them.

I proceed in this to another Device to the same purpose, and that is the
silencing the Voice of Conscience, and stifling the frequent Notices and Alarms
it gives of a Supreme Being: Among the other witnesses that God has left us of
himself, that of Conscience is none of the least, which for the clear and
uncontrolable Evidence of its Testimony, has been reckoned more than a
thousand witnesses. That we might not be left without sufficient Light in a
matter of so great moment, God Almighty has not only Engraven his own Image
and Superscription upon the Works of his Hand, that by the frequent viewing
thereof, we might be still minded of him, but has likewise set up a constant
Monitor in every Man's Breast, that by hearkening to it we might never forget
him: This is that which is styled the Light of Nature, and by some the Light
within them, which, if rightly understood, must be meant of this Directive
Light of their own Mind or Conscience: Solo^^^ styles it, the Candle of the
Lord, to light us in the way, that we should go. The Prophet Isaias calls it, a
voice behind or within us, saying, this is the way walk in it, when we are
turning either to the right hand or to the left. St. Paul told the Gentiles,
that though they had no written Law, yet they were a Law to themselves, their
Conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another, Romans 2. And withal adds, that as God has not left himself without
witness, having given sufficient notice of his Being; so he had left them,
without excuse, if they did not Worship and Glorify him as they ought.

But how does Conscience give this notice and conviction of a Deity? Why,
sundry ways; as,

First, By its secret motions and suggestions, which oft-times awakens our
Mind, and powerfully stirs us up to our duty to him: If we observe it, we shall
find and feel something within us moving, and loudly calling upon us to that
which is good; and secretly whispering and dissuading us against that which is
evil: Now these are the private Notices of Conscience, which God has set up as
a Remembrancer and witness of him within our Breasts. Again,

2dly. We feel an inward delight and complacence in well-doing, and are filled
with joy and peace in believing: Now, whence should this proceed, but from the
secret notice of Conscience, which minds us of a God, and that what we have
done is acceptable and well-pleasing to him? The good Man (says Solomon) is
satisfied from himself, that is from his own Conscience, which he styles a
continual Feast, that entertains him with the sweetest peace and tranquillity of
mind, and fills him with purer joys, than any earthly comforts can afford him,
even with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, arising from a Belief that God is,
and that he is a Rewarder of all those that diligently seek him. Moreover,

3dly. The Sinner feels secret Stings and Lashes within, when he has done
amiss, and is inwardly troubled and perplexed after the Commission of any
Enormity; his Debaucheries grate upon his mind, and follow him with frequent
fears and terrors; there is no peace to the wicked; but they are like the
troubled Sea that cannot rest. Now, this can proceed from nothing but the
inward whispers and information of Conscience, which frequently takes the
Sinner aside, and rates him soundly by himself, letting him know how he has
offended his Maker, and thereby justly incurred the dismal effects of his
displeasure; hence the Sinner feels many sharp girds and twitches within, even
for Sins known to none but God and himself: Which knowledge proceeds from this
secret Monitor, who is both an Accuser, Witness, and Judge, all which Offices
it commonly performs with great fidelity and diligence; insomuch that if there
be no God to be feared by us, we might envy the happiness of brute Beasts, who
have none of these frights, nor are troubled with any of these stinging
Reflections: Yea Mankind, without a Deity, would be not only the most
miserable, but the most ridiculous of all Creatures, to be thus terrified at
nothing, and scared with such an imaginary Bugbear of his own making: All other
Beings have some real Object of their fears; and surely Man must be the
silliest of all Creatures, to be thus haunted with the dread of invisible
Powers and a Judgment to come, if no such things were to be feared or expected:
his Understanding and Reason would serve him to good purpose, to suggest such
needless terrors, as to fright him with a Dream, and make him tremble at his
own Shadow. So that this remorse and trouble of mind, with which the greatest
Sinners are pursued, is a plain Argument of a Deity, without which no tolerable
account could be given of these things.

But if Conscience be so clear a proof and witness of a Deity, how comes it to
pass, that so many deny and forget God, when they have such a faithful and
constant Monitor within to keep him in remembrance? why the Misery as well as
Mystery of it is, that too many silence the Voice of Conscience, and will not
suffer it to speak, or if (as it sometimes happens) they cannot stop its mouth,
like the deaf Adder they stop their ear, and refuse to hear the Voice of the
Charmer, tho he charm never so wisely; yea, tho they are many times hard put to
it to still the clamor and importunity of their own Minds, yet they use all
their Arts to keep it quiet, and to stifle those Convictions.

But what course do they take to effect it? Why,

Sometimes by lulling it a-sleep in a carnal security; or else, if that will
not do, by hardening and searing it as with a hot Iron.

First, I say, some men to keep their Conscience quiet, endeavor to lull it
a-sleep in a carnal and fatal security; and this they do by an inordinate
pursuit of their sensual Lusts and Pleasures; if the serious thoughts of a God
sometimes press too much upon them, they seek either to drown them in their
intemperate Cups, or to stifle them by the softness of Lewdness and Dalliance:
If they find their minds begin to recover out of this Lethargy, and these
serious thoughts return, they have recourse to idle and loose Company to
relieve themselves from the trouble of them, where they keep their Heads so hot
with their frequent excesses, that they are seldom or never cool enough to
consider things as they ought, and thus by bringing a continual dooziness upon
their Senses, they pass away their time as in a Dream or Slumber, and by
degrees fall into an utter forgetfulness of God and their Duty. But if they
cannot presently thus lull their Conscience a-sleep, they endeavor,

2dly. To harden it against Conviction, and to sear it as with an hot Iron; and
this they do by vicious habits contracted by a long continued custom in Sin,
whereby the Mind is in a manner stupefied, and made senseless of all Evil and
Danger: This is such a degree of wickedness to which none can arrive presently,
for Nemo repent fuit Turpissimus. Time is required to wear off the impressions
of Good and Evil; for Conscience recoils at first, and has that natural
tenderness, as to feel the smart, and fear the evil of such courses; till by
frequent resisting its Calls, they have overcome this Reluctance, and made it
become callous and past feeling; and thus by a long practice and continuance in
Sin, they gradually lose the sense and awe of a Deity, and settle in Atheism
and Infidelity.

Now for Men to be at so great pains to stupifie their Conscience, and hinder
it from doing its office, must be a very unwise and unsafe course; for this is
to silence the Voice of God within us, and to turn the deaf Ear to our Maker;
yea it is to despise the remembrance, and hate the knowledge of him, and to say
with them in Job, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

And yet after all their pains, this will prove in the end but a fruitless
attempt, for Conscience will one time or other speak, and loud enough to be
heard too, and tho it may be lulled asleep a while, it will e're long awake,
and ring a Peal of Vengeance in the Ears of all such bold and daring Sinners,
as seek now to stupifie and silence it.

Indeed, that present senselessness and stupidity, which they bring upon their
mind, serves but to render their condition the more desperate and remediless;
for as in bodily distempers, when the sense of pain is lost, the Patient is in
greatest danger, and the disease proves most mortal, and incurable; even so in
spiritual Maladies, when the mind is past feeling, the Case is commonly past
recovery; and evermore the less sense of pain, the greater danger: which should
teach us to hearken to the voice of God and Conscience whilst it is called to
day, lest the Heart be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin; before the
Mind grow brawny and insensible, and fall into such a deep sleep, as nothing
but Eternal Misery can awake it.

In a word, the peace and tranquillity that the Mind feels from the
Apprehensions of a God, shows it to be the interest of Mankind to believe and
please him, which alone can give us this hearts-ease: And likewise the terrors
and frightful Apprehensions, that flow from a dissolute life, are sufficient to
make all Men abhor and abandon the Cause of Atheism. I am,

SIR, Your Faithful Friend, A. B.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Find you sensible of the hard shifts the Atheist is put to, to silence the
Voice of Conscience, and stifle the Alarms and Convictions of his own mind,
together with the Folly and Danger of that Stratagem. I proceed therefore to
another, and that is to ascribe the Notion of a Deity to a too great easiness
of Belief, or a fond Credulity: This we find to be a frequent Plea and
Objection in this case. One great Argument for the proof of a God, is taken
from the Universal Consent and Agreement of Mankind in this Belief, there being
nothing so generally owned and received, in all times and places, as this
Truth; and that not only among the Wise and Knowing, but even among the rudest
and most ignorant part of the World: Nulla gentam barbara, etc. says the Roman
Orator, There is no Nation so barbarous as not to Believe and Worship a God.

Now whence should this Universal Consent of Mankind in this Belief proceed,
but from the Voice of Nature, which speaks loud enough to be heard, the sound
whereof is gone through the Earth, and the Words to the end of the World? Yea,
this can be no other than an Impression stamped on the Mind, by a Divine Hand,
engraven by the Finger of God himself, and interwoven into the very Frame of
our Being.

But how does the Atheist evade this universally received Truth? Why, by
charging Mankind with too great a Credulity in this matter; as if all Men
beside himself, were too hasty and easy of belief, and took up this persuasion
upon very slender and insufficient grounds; whereas he scorns to be thus easily
led by vain talk, and to yield up his understanding to uncertain rumor: Hence
the great Atheist of our Age founds all Religion upon the belief of tales
publicly told, as if the Being and belief of a Deity, were built only upon a
report handed down from one to another, and had no better foundation than
common Fame.

Now is not this a strange piece of rashness and presumption, for any to
condemn all before or beside himself, for a company of credulous Fools and
Children, that can believe any thing, and swallow the greatest difficulties,
without the least reason or examination. But let us enquire a little farther
into this matter.

Who was it that first raised this Report of a Deity? Or by whom was this
Tradition began? This is matter well worth the enquiry, who made this first
Discovery, or raised this Spirit, which all the Wisdom of the world could never
conjure down since. Certainly he must have been some wise or cunning Body, that
could invent and propagate so plausible a story, as to pass the Trial of all
Ages, and that none could ever find out or detect the falsehood of it, sure the
Fame of such a person would have been Recorded in the Annals of Time, and
Posterity could never have been so unjust to his Memory, as to let him sink
away in silence and oblivion: And yet the Atheist here is wholly at a loss in
these things, and will neither pretend to tell us the time when, the place
where, or the person by whom this report first began: Only (as one has
observed) he thinks it probable that some body long ago (he knows not when)
beyond the Memory of all Ages, did start such a notion in the World, and that
it has past for current ever since; but if this Tradition be older than all
History, why may it not have been from the beginning? And then it will be far
more probable, to be a notion which was bred in the mind of Man, and born with
him, than a Tradition transmitted from hand to hand through all Generations,
especially being found in those barbarous Nations, that have scarce a Tradition
of any thing else. But how come these Men thus to oppose the general Sense of
Mankind, and to call in question so universally owned and received a Truth?
Why! this proceeds,

Partly from their great unwillingness to believe it, which makes them take
hold of any, even the meanest shifts, to countenance their unbelief. And

Partly from an Affectation of Singularity, whereby they would be thought wiser
and more knowing, than any that went before them, that they see farther into
matters than other Men, and that their Understandings are by head and shoulders
taller than their Brethren; they know well enough, that should they go on with
the common herd, and say and do as others that have gone before them, they
should be thought to be no wiser than they; and therefore that they may set up
for Wits, and be accounted Men of a deeper reach and insight into things, than
others, they strike out of the common road, and go a new untrodden way by
themselves; this makes them look upon the belief of a Deity, (though confirmed by
the general consent of Mankind) to be only the effect of weakness and want of
judgment, that they who entertain it, are merely carried away with the Stream,
and like easy credulous persons, take up things upon trust, from the uncertain
Hearsay and Report of others no wiser than themselves: Whereas they, like Men
of judgment, believe and act by another Rule; and where their own Reason cannot
convince them of a truth, there no Authority of others shall sway them to the
belief of it. And thus by a vain conceit and affectation of Singularity, they
leave the track in which all others have gone before them, which unawares
bewilders and leads them into Atheism.

But is it a vain Credulity, to embrace a Truth confirmed by the Consent and
Approbation of all Mankind? or is it any piece of Wisdom, to set up a single
opinion against the Wisdom of the whole World? No, far from it; the wisest of
Men has told us, that he that is wise in his own conceit is a fool; and
certainly he must be extremely so, that thinks himself wiser than all Men
beside him: Indeed, to keep the mind from being enslaved to precarious and
Vulgar Notions, or receiving things upon trust without examination, is to
assert the freedom of the Understanding, which very well becomes a wise Man to
do; but to reject an Opinion merely because it has been universally received,
is a rudeness offered to the Reason of Mankind; for if many heads may be
supposed to be wiser than one, that wherein all Heads concenter and agree,
ought in Reason to be preferred before any single opinion; and therefore to
quarrel with a Truth, for no other reason, but because it has been owned and
embraced by all, is an unpardonable piece of pride and singularity; for this
makes Men overvalue themselves, and set too low a price upon the judgment of
their betters, which is a high piece of arrogance and folly: Yea by this means
they deprive themselves of the benefit and assistance of other Men's
Understandings, and leaning wholly upon their own, are thereby often betrayed
into great errors and miscarriages.

It Is true, we are forbid to follow a multitude in doing Evil, but not in
receiving Truth, which is the greatest good we can do to our selves or others:
And though we are bid to try all things, yet we are required to hold fast that
which is good, and not to start aside from the belief of that which has past
the trial and approbation of all Times and Ages.

There is (as one has well observed) a Reverence due to the Judgment of
Mankind, and that which has been received by all or most Men, has been ever
thought most worthy of acceptance: yea the laws of modesty require us to think
others better than our selves, and to suspect our own Judgment, when it crosses
theirs; for though the generality of Men may be sometimes mistaken, which should
therefore put us upon the stricter search and enquiry into Truth, yet to be
over positive and confident against the universal Sense and Belief of Mankind,
is to resist the clearest evidence we can have, and to run counter to the
greatest probabilities.

But what if these great Masters of Wit should all this while be found the most
Credulous and easy of belief of all Men? what then will become of all these
vain Boasts and Pretensions to Reason? And yet this is as clear as the Sun at
Noonday; for they believe many things without the least color and shadow of
reason; and deny others that have all possible evidence of truth; both which
are apparent instances of a gross and absurd Credulity.

They believe that there is no God, and consequently that it is impossible there
should be one, a thing which no Art of Man ever could or pretended to
demonstrate.

Again, they believe either that the World was never made, or if it were, that
'twas made by chance, and that all things in it came into that excellent order
they now are, by mere fortune: which shows that they can believe at random, and
take up the most absurd Hypothesis at a venture. Again,

They believe that though matter be in it self a dull and senseless thing,
utterly incapable of Reason and Understanding, yet there can be no spiritual or
immaterial Being to influence or actuate it. In a Word,

The Atheist can believe against all the Sense and Reason of all Mankind, and
think all the World beside himself to consist only of Fools and Knaves; a bold
Britain! And yet those and many other are the goodly Articles of the Atheist's
Creed, which he that can swallow, must be a man of strong Faith or vast
Credulity, and must believe with his Will, not with his Understanding. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER V.
SIR,
ANother Device of the Atheist is to resolve the Belief of a God into the
Principles and Prejudices of Education: This Device is near akin to and
grounded upon the former, and pretends to give some account of the spring and
rise of this Credulity; which he takes to be from the first impressions of
Education; this being the first Notion instilled by Parents into their
Children, as soon as they come to understand any thing, and is improved by
those who have the Education and Management of them ever after.

And here they observe, what deep impressions are made upon the Mind, by the
first things we hear or learn; how long they are wont to continue with us, and
how ready Men are to communicate them to one another, and more especially to
derive them to their offspring: From whence they think such a general belief of
a Deity may easily be supposed in time to obtain, and be transmitted down from
hand to hand through all Generations.

Now here the Question may be asked again, Who was the first person that
invented and conveyed down this Notion? what was his name or his Son's name,
that we may know him? how came he to entertain it himself? who taught it him?
and how came he so readily to believe and propagate it to Posterity? Why, of
all this the Atheist can give no manner of account, unless he will fly to the
Holy Scripture, and say, that Adam the first Man had it from God, and taught it
to his Children, and so conveyed it down to all Generations; but this would be
to yield up the Cause, and to acknowledge a first Being and Maker of all
things, which yet he is very unwilling to grant.

Besides, that this is a precarious and groundless Hypothesis, may plainly
appear from this, that Men in all Ages have been known to be of different
tempers, and to have had various and different ways and methods of Education,
by which means they have received different Impressions, and entertained
various Sentiments of things: And yet we find all Men, in all times, and of all
tempers (though differing never so much in other things) to agree and concenter
in this belief of a God, which shows it to have another and higher Principle
than that of Education.

Again, if we consult the frame and make of our Being, we shall find this
Notion of a Deity stamped upon our very Natures, and that in such plain and
legible Characters, as may easily show whose workmanship we are, and out of
what hands we came; and this too in persons of no Education, and before any
thing was instilled into them by it, which farther proves it to proceed from a
higher Cause: To all which if we add moreover,

That strong and powerful Inclination that is found in all Men to worship a
God, we shall find this to go before, and not to be planted in them by
Education: If we survey the World, we may observe a natural proneness and
propensity to Religion, even in the most barbarous and uncultivated parts of
it; all of them every where conspiring together to worship something or other
as a God: Now this cannot possibly be owing only to Education, which may indeed
direct, but cannot infuse these Inclinations; he that created the Soul, could
alone put that bias into it, that draws so strong to the adoration of him; for
the best nurture can no more put such new Inclinations, than it can put a new
Nature into us: So that this universal Inclination to religious Worship must
proceed from something within, that is born with us, and is connatural to our
Being; and can no more flow from any thing imprinted on our Minds from without,
than the natural Passions of Hope and Fear are owing to the impressions of
outward Objects.

But here the Atheist tells us, That this Argument taken from an universal
Inclination to worship a Deity, will hold as strong for Polytheism and
Idolatry, as for a Unity of the Godhead; there being as great, if not a greater
part of the World led by it to worship many false Gods than one true one.

Now to this, which is all the Atheist has to say in this case, sundry answers
may be given. As,

First, The Assertion on which the Objection is grounded is a great mistake,
for the greatest and wisest part of Mankind have ever paid their Adorations to
one Supreme Being: As for the Jewish Nation, the whole body of them served one
only God, known by the name Jehovah, as is evident from Profane as well as
Sacred History; and for the other Nations, that derived their Pedigree and
Tradition from them, they had always one above the rest whom they worshipped
with the highest acts of Adoration: Indeed some of the grosser Heathens
multiplied their Gods, according to the multitude and variety of Blessings they
supposed to receive from them; but these were derided by the Philosophers and
more knowing Men, and the practice of the Multitude without the opinion and
approbation of the Wise, signifies no more (as one has told us in this case)
than many Ciphers without a Figure.

Again, Secondly, The Polytheism of the Heathens is a good argument against
Atheism, and their Idolatries are a plain proof of a Deity; for the rudest and
most ignorant of all people have had those impressions of him upon their Mind,
that they would rather have many Gods than be without any, and worship false
Gods rather than none at all. Though they mistook the true God, yet they all
agreed in this, to worship some God or other; and this mistake of theirs was
not for want of sufficient Evidence, but from the neglect or abuse of their
natural Reason, which led them from the true to false Gods, for when they knew
God (says the Apostle) they worshipped him not as God, and therefore their
foolish hearts were darkened. Moreover,

Lastly, the many false Gods of the Heathen are a plain proof that there is one
true one, for all Counterfeits suppose a Reality; there would be no false Coin,
if there were none true; all Images are intended to represent something that is
real; neither would any Idols be set up, if there were not a true God to be
worshipped. In short then, the Notion of a Deity must be founded in Nature,
because it is universal; and could not be acquired by Education, it being found
in those that never had any.

Beside, nothing is lasting but what is natural; for the best things acquired
by Instruction, have in many persons been lost and forgotten; and consequently
the Notion of a God would have failed in time, and the Worship of him ceased in
many places, if it had no firmer Principle.

Seeing then that both these have continued through all Times and Ages, and are
still found in all Persons and Places, yea, since the Atheist himself can
scarce wear off the Impression, or rid his Mind of the awe and sense of a
Deity, it is a poor shift to resolve the Belief and Worship of him into the
Principles and Prejudices of Education. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER VI.
SIR,
I Showed in my last, That the Impressions of Education could not create, but
must suppose a Deity, and that the knowledge and belief we have of him, is
owing not so much to the outward Instructions we learn from others, as the
inward Inclinations implanted in our own Mind; which are not taught, but born
with us.

But if the Atheist cannot solve this great Phenomenon, or account for so
general a Credulity this way, he has another Device for that purpose; and that
is to ascribe the belief and worship of a God to Fear, or a superstitious dread
of some invisible Powers: And this he thinks cannot fail to do it. For the mind
of Man (he tells us) and of some especially, is mightily subject to the
impressions of Fear, which are wont to sink deep and continue long with them;
and these again are apt to imprint the same dread on the Minds of others; which
being discovered and communicated, fill melancholy heads with infinite Fears
and Jealousies, which at length increase into a general awe and dread of such a
Being: so that Men are frighted into this belief by the frequent talk of a God,
as Children are into the fear of Spirits by the Tales of Faries and Hobgoblins;
and for this they quote that noted saying of the Poet,

Primus in Orb Deos fecit Timor. Fear first made Gods: Men being scared with
some Jealousies arising in their Minds about it, and terrified with the
thoughts of what might happen.

Now here by this Assertion, the Atheist grants that the Minds of Men are
generally seized and possessed with the Fears and Apprehensions of a God, which
is too well known and felt, to be called in question: So that the main enquiry
here is, whether Fear can create this Being; or whether such a Being may not
rather create these Fears? for since all other Passions presuppose their
Object, it is not to be conceived how fear alone should make it; if there be a
God, that presides over all things, and inspects our ways, there is great
reason to fear him; but if there be none, it is not to be imagined, how fear
should make such a Being, or create such an universal Belief in Mankind, that
there is one. But how come so many to fear, where no fear is? what makes Men
endowed with Reason thus to be scared with their own shadow? or if some such
timorous creatures may be found, that are apt to be frighted with the terrors
of their own fancy, How come all Mankind to be seized with these panick fears?
what should create such an universal trembling? or rivet this frightful Idea so
deep into Men's Minds, that no Art or Endeavors can root it out?

Why, of this no account can be given without a Deity? which might well enough
imprint this dread upon them, from a sense of his infinite Power and Greatness.

Indeed, it is easy to conceive how Infinite Power and Justice may cause a
dread; but it is not to be imagined, how dread should be the cause of such
infinite perfections.

Again, it may be asked whether this Fear were before or after a Deity? if it
be affirmed to be before, as it must be, if Fear be the Cause of him, the Cause
being ever before the Effect; it will follow, that something may be before that
which is Eternal; for since the Notion of a God implies a Being that existed
from all Eternity, if Fear preceeded, and made this Being, it must have been
before Eternity, and likewise give a Being to that, which never had or could
have any beginning; both which are manifest contradictions.

If this Fear be said to be after a Deity, then it could not be the Cause of
him; forasmuch as no Effect can be before, but must still come after the Cause.

Whence then should this fear proceed, by which Men are awed into this Belief?
Why, it must proceed either from the suggestions and report of others, or from
the inward suggestions of our own Mind.

If it came from the Relation and suggestions of others, it may be asked, who
suggested it to them? And this enquiry will not cease, till it be traced up to
the first Author; in which the Atheist is at the same loss as he was before, in
running up the rise of this Tradition.

If these Fears proceed from the inward suggestions of our own Mind, which is
apt to fancy terrible things; it may be asked, who or what is it that brings to
mind those terrible things, and occasions those suggestions? Why this can be
nothing but the sense of some invisible Powers, whom we have some way or other
offended, which may cause some remorse, and imprint some fears of his
displeasure: And let the Atheist give any other account of it, if he can.

Beside, does not the Notion of a God imply a Being of infinite Mercy and
Goodness, that is always ready to take care of, to support and comfort his
Creatures? And since the Object of Fear is always something that is dreadful,
how can Fear create the Belief of such a Being, which is rather the Object of
desire than dread, and deserves muchmore to be loved and wished for, than to be
feared by us? So that fear alone, could never produce this Noble Effect; it
might indeed beget an opinion of some stern, sour, and severe Being, to be
dreaded and shunned by all that hear of him; but could never form a Notion of a
Gracious, Merciful, and tenderhearted Lord, that is to be loved and desired by
all that know him: And therefore the Atheist to make his Hypothesis the more
plausible, must join Love and Hope to Fear, to complete this Glorious and
Divine Achievement.

Moreover, the Love of so benign, gracious, and amiable a Being, is sufficient
to overcome and expel fear, and nothing but the solicitation of sensual Lusts,
could keep Mankind from admiring and doteing upon him: There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear; because fear has torment, he that
fears is not made perfect in love: 1 John 4. 18.

Indeed the Love and Relation we bear to a bountiful Creator may well enough
admit of a filial fear, consisting in an unwillingness to offend or displease
him; but no servile tormenting fear can consist with the love that is due to so
excellent a Being.

So that Fear is so far from making a God, that it tends rather (if it were
possible) to unmake him, to turn him into Tyrant, and consequently to make him
the object of our hatred and aversation; for he that has such dreadful
Apprehensions, cannot but wish there were no God, and from thence is but one
remove from believing there is none. Yea,

This slavish fear tends to bebase Mankind, and even to unmake him too, by
degrading him to a lower Species, for Degeneres animos Timor Arguit. Such a
fear sinks him beneath the dignity of his Nature, and makes him like the Beast
that perishes. Furthermore,

If there were no Being of such infinite Perfections to employ our
Contemplation, the highest and noblest faculties of the Soul would be vain and
useless; the Understanding would want an Object suitable to the Capacity of its
Apprehension; the Will would have none commensurate to the largeness of its
desires; the Affections would be destitute of an object worthy of its Love and
Complacence; yea Fear it self would want both an Object and a Reason for those
frequent terrors, that haunt and assault the Mind. Now there being no Power or
Faculty in the meanest Creature, but what there is some Reason and Use for, can
it be conceived that the Noblest Faculties of the Soul should be planted in it
in vain, and become all useless for want of a suitable Object to employ them.

In short, if there were no God, Mankind would have nothing but temporal good
things to desire, and nothing but temporal Evils to fear; of both which the
brute Beasts have a quicker sense than he: Yea his Reason, which is the
Perfection and Glory of Humane Nature, would serve for no other end, but to be
a Caterer to the Senses, and provide for the gratification of a Carnal
Appetite, which may be as well if not better gratified without than with it: So
that without a Deity, as all Fear would be in vain, so all the superior
Faculties of the Soul, viz. Understanding and Reason, would be useless and
insignificant, as having no Object fit to exercise or entertain them. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER VII.
SIR,
I Find you sensible in your last, that Fear could not be the Cause, but the
Effect and Consequent of a Belief of a Deity; and that no tolerable Reason can
be given of the natural fear and dread of a God, if there were no such Being:
So that the Atheist being beaten out of this Subterfuge; I proceed in this to

Another Device, which he seeks to take shelter in, and that is, to ascribe the
Notion of a Deity, to State Policy, and to make the Belief of it a Contrivance
of cunning Men, to keep the World in awe.

This is a new Device invented and propagated by some in this latter Age, who
(as a great Man has told us) imagine that some great Prince or Politician,
like Nebuchadnezzar, set up this image of a Deity, and commanded all People and
Nations to fall down and Worship it: And this being found an useful Engine of
State, to keep Men in obedience to Government, has been received by all
Princes and States ever since. A goodly device indeed! and no doubt the issue
of some wise and politic Headpiece; and to make it the more plausible; they
insist at large, upon the Reason why it should be cherished and countenanced by
all Princes, viz. Because of the good influence it has upon the awing the
People into Obedience. Again,

They tell us of the Peoples readiness to comply with the humors and practices
of Princes, who giving their Example and Encouragement herein, are easily
followed and imitated by their Subjects: by which means this Notion, having the
Stamp of Authority upon it, has passed current, and is generally embraced and
kept up in the World: This is the sum of what they have to say in this Matter.
Now here we may observe,

1. That this Device plainly supposes the Usefulness of Religion. toward the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind, and how greatly it conduces to the good Order and
Government of the World; which shows it to be the interest of Mankind to wish
it true; and this (one would think) should rather incline Men to embrace, than
evade so useful a Notion.

But by whom was this Engine of State devised? where or when did this great
Prince or Politician live, that first found out this Arcanum imperii, this
great Secret or Mystery of Government? what proof is there alleged for any
such Contrivance? Why, none at all; no discovery has been yet made of the
Author of this Invention; it still remains a Mystery, as well as an Engine of
State, a Cobweb spun out of some fanciful and subtle Brain; in a Word, it is a
mere Conjecture, taken up without the least appearance of Reason, or proof for
any part of it.

Indeed, The thing appears in it self unpracticable; for how is it possible for
the wisest Politician to rivet such a Notion into the Minds of all Men, that
should never get out? where is the Person that ever did such a feat? and if no
such one be any where to be found, we may safely conclude the deep and lasting
impressions of a Deity upon Men's Minds, to proceed not from the Art of Man, but
from the Finger of God.

Beside, this is an improbable way of compassing the design; for the subtlest
Politicians are wont to work upon the inclinations they find planted in Men's
Nature; but do not hope to put new ones into them: They are wise enough to
know, that Men are more easily led, than driven; and therefore choose rather to
make use of those Principles they find them already possessed of, than go about
to infuse new. Hence it comes to pass, that Princes reap the benefits of Peace
and Order from Principles they never sowed in the hearts of their Subjects, but
found planted there; and it is most certain, that the People are much more awed
and kept to their duty, by the natural impressions of Religion, than by any
artificial Methods of Policy or Contrivance: So that Politicians promote their
ends, not by making but finding Religion in the Minds of Men; for though Reason
of State may cherish, it can never create the Notion of a Deity.

But have Princes or Politicians been more free from the Fears of a Deity, or
the Terrors of another World, than other Men? This would be, if Religion were
only a Device or Engine of State: whereas we see and find the quite contrary,
for they have the same sense and impressions of these things with other Men,
and can no more rid their Minds of them, than the meanest of their Subjects:
History tells us, how some of the Roman Emperors were wont to be frighted with
the noise of Thunder; as thinking it to be the voice of God: We read how
Caligula used to creep under a Bed at the sound of it, taking it for a sign of
the anger and displeasure of Heaven; and we read of many other great Persons
and Statesmen, who have been alarmed with the fears of a God, and the terrors
of another World: Now if Religion were only a Juggle of State, or a politic
Device of cunning Men; how come they to be thus terrified with their own
Contrivance? Men are not wont to be affrighted with Bugbears of their own
making, or to tremble at that which they know to be a mere scarecrow; it is
plain, the greatest and wisest persons that have ever been, have known of no
such Cheat in Religion, for if they had, no account could be given of those
fears and troubles of Conscience, which they in all Ages had about it.

Beside, it is hard to conceive, how all the Princes and Potentates of the Earth
should agree together to entertain a Fiction; and though they have such different
Designs and Interests, should yet conspire to devise and promote a Notion that
is void of all Reason or Truth.

Or if they could, how is it to be imagined, that the People should be all so
ready to receive it? They are not wont so easily to believe their Governors
upon their bare Word, or embrace a Notion that has so plain a design upon
their Peace and Welfare: Yea the more subtle and politic they take their
Governors to be, the more they are apt to suspect them; and to pry into the
Reasons of their Counsels and Intentions.

Lastly, if the Notion of a God were only a politic Contrivance to keep the
World in awe, or a Device framed in some Men's heads, to cozen others into
obedience to them, how comes it to pass, that this was never discovered in any
Age? Sure it would have been found out one time or other; Cheats do not always
continue undiscovered; Truth commonly breaks out, and Time lays open the
Imposture: if then this pretended Secret was never known or discovered by any,
but remains still as much a Secret as ever, we may very well conclude it to be
it self a Juggle and Fiction of some Men's brain; or a Device of the Atheist to
cozen and deceive himself. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER VIII.
SIR,
WHen the Atheist is driven out of the Refuge of State Policy, and can neither
tell the person by whom, or the time when this Engine of State was invented, He
flies to

Another Device, which is to resolve the Notion and Belief of a God into common
Compact: An account whereof is briefly this.

That Mankind, for the better preservation of Human Society, by common Consent
formed this Notion of a God, which they generally agreed together to embrace;
and finding the benefit and good influence of it upon the public welfare, have
by common Compact preserved and kept it up ever since: A notable Account
indeed! which shows that some Men will believe any thing, rather than what they
should.

However this account farther grants the Usefulness of Religion to the welfare
of Human Society, which is indeed so necessary to it, that it is impossible it
should long subsist or continue without it; for Religion is the Bond or Cement
that holds all the parts of it together, and gives all the force and efficacy
to the Laws by which it is upheld: All the Obligations of Conscience, which
alone can keep Men to their duty, result from the Belief of a God; without
which, no ties of Oaths, Promises, or Engagements, could hold Men either to
Honesty or Obedience: So that the usefulness and necessity of this Notion to
the welfare of Mankind, should methinks incline all Men to entertain it, to
wish it true, and to give all the strength that may be to the Arguments brought
to confirm it; for he that endeavors to evade this Truth, is an Enemy not only
to himself, but to the Happiness and Tranquillity of Human Society, and does
what in him lies to destroy the Peace and Welfare of Mankind.

But when and where was this general Meeting of Mankind, in which they formed
this Notion of a Deity, and entered into this solemn Compact to Believe and
propagate it? Who summoned or called them together from all the remote parts of
the World? Or did they happen luckily to come and meet together by Chance?
Sure, some History or other of the World would have Recorded this grand
Assembly of Mankind for this purpose, which, if it ever were, was one of the
most memorable things that has been ever acted in it. But since no account
has been ever given of such a Meeting, we may conclude it to be a mere
figment, to be met with no where but in an Atheistical brain.

But if the Atheist could get over this difficulty, which is indeed
insuperable, there are many other in this unaccountable Compact, in which he
must be unavoidably intangl'd; for how came all the inhabitants of all places
and Countries, so unanimously to jump and agree together in this Notion? When
there is scarce any little Town or City, where such an entire Agreement is to
be found in matters of opinion, how incredible is it that all the People in the
World, of the most distant Places, and the most different Humors, Interests,
and Inclinations, should all agree together in framing this Notion, and so
universally conspire in the Belief of it?

Beside, how came this Notion framed by them, to be so generally received by
all Posterity ever since? was this Covenant and Compact of theirs so made, as
to bind all their Heirs and Successors for ever? Or how come all Generations so
readily to take themselves to be bound by it? especially when no Instrument or
Evidence can be produced, when and where this Argreement was ratified;
certainly, this is more than was ever known of any other Compact or Agreement
either before or since.

Moreover, are there not some Places and Persons so rude, as to be without any
Commerce or Correspondence with other Nations? And how came they to hear of
this Compact, or to think themselves bound by it? Sure, they must be mighty
credulous, who can receive a matter of so great importance upon such slender
Evidence, and take themselves to be obliged by a Contract which they never
heard of; especially in a thing that sits so uneasy upon the Minds of many,
whose interest and wish it is that it were not true: For are there not some
very desirous to rid themselves of the disquieting Fear and Belief of a God? do
not too many labor hard to cast off this Check, which tends so much to
restrain their Lusts, and abridge their Pleasures? And if this Belief depended
only on such a precarious Contract, contrived and made they know not where, or
by whom, would they not soon find a way to get out of it?

These and many other absurdities attend this Device, which he that can
swallow, may be indeed a Man of little Faith, but of vast Credulity; he must
cease to blame any for easiness of Belief, that can give his assent upon such
slender grounds; and if the Atheist can build his Confidence upon no better
Foundation, he must no longer set up for a Man of Wit or Reason, nor pretend to
any other demonstration, but that of his own folly.

How much more rational is it, to conclude the Notion of a Deity to be a
Principle of Divine infusion, than an Article of Human Contract? and the Belief
of it to be rather founded in Nature than built upon Artifice and Agreement? Is
it likely that the Idea of a Being absolutely perfect, infinitely wise, just,
and gracious, the Omnipotent and glorious Maker and Preserver of all things,
should be merely framed by Compact? or that the whole World should universally
agree to profess and worship such a Being, if there were no such thing? Is not
this at once to impose upon the Reason of Mankind, and to reflect upon the
Honor of our Maker, to make him a Creature of our own Fancies, and the Effect
of Human Contrivance? There is no Compact but what may be and has in time been
laid aside; and if this Belief neither has nor can be totally eras'd, it owes
its rise to a higher Principle, and must be more deeply rooted in the Minds of
Men. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER IX.
SIR,
HAving showed the vanity of the Atheist's Pleas in accounting for the
Universal Tradition and Consent of Mankind in the Belief of a God, if there
were no such Being;

I come now to another Device, made use of to rid their Minds of him; and that
is to deny the Notion and Being of a Spirit, as a thing impossible or
incredible in Nature, and unconceivable by the Understanding: And herein they
are the followers of the Sadduces, who denied Angels and Spirits, and thereby
the immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the dead; which great
Articles of Faith are called in question, and the Objections against them
greedily received and vented by the Modern Atheists of our Age, who take the
Notion of a Spirit for a vain chimerical thing, that has no existence but in
the deluded Fancies of some melancholy and mistaken Persons.

Now this disbelief of Spirits is only to make way for the denial of a God, who
being of a Spiritual and immaterial Nature must be set aside together with
them. And hence they would persuade the World, that Men in believing a Deity,
are only haunted with an imaginary Apparition, and merely scared with the
Dreams and Phantasms of their own Brain.

But why may not some Beings be conceived to exist without Matter, as well as
others with it? is Matter, which is but the drossy part and dregs of the
Universe, so necessary and essential to Being, that it is not possible for any
to be without it? where lies the contradiction of an immaterial Substance, that
it should be so hard to be conceived? nay, does not the Purity and Perfection
of some Beings require us to abstract from Matter in our conceptions of them?
and to ascribe the Excellency of their Operations to a Principle really
distinct from it? Is not Matter of it self an unactive, dull, and sluggish
thing, void of all sense and understanding? and does it not require a more
refined Substance to give it Motion and activity? What is the Body but a dead,
heavy, and lumpish Carcass, without a Soul to actuate and enliven it? neither
would the Angels be the nimble and swift-winged Messengers of Heaven, if they
were clogged with Matter, to check and retard their Motion. If we Mount up in
our Contemplations to the Supreme Being and maker of all things, we must
conceive of him as an Eternal, Independent and Spiritual Substance, void of all
Corporeity and Matter, and subsisting of himself, by the absolute fullness of
his own Nature; for the Notion of a God implies a Being that has all possible
Perfections, and therefore we are so to conceive of him, as to abstract and
remove from all manner of defect and imperfection: Now materiality is a great
defect in the Being to which it belongs; for beside that it is a clog to its
activity, it confines and limits it to one place, and so is opposite to the
Immensity, Omnipresence and Omniscience of a Deity, who as it made Heaven and
Earth by his Power, so must be supposed to fill both with his Presence.

Again, Matter makes a thing to be Divisible, and consequently liable to
Dissolution, which is utterly inconsistent with the Eternity, and other
Perfections of the Divine Nature: So that Reason wills us to abstract from the
imperfections of Matter in our apprehensions of a God, and to conceive of him
as a Spiritual and immaterial Substance.

But how comes the Atheist to take this for an irrational or unintelligible
Notion? Why, he tells us that all the knowledge we have of things, comes from
our Senses; and since we cannot see or feel a Spirit, nor arrive to the
knowledge of it by any of our Senses, we can form no Idea of such a thing.

But is nothing to be believed, but what we have some information of from our
Senses? How then shall we believe we have a Soul, of which none of our Senses
can give us any information? for if it be at all, it must be a Spiritual and
immaterial Substance, which cannot incur into or be discerned by any of them:
Beside, are there not many noble Effects and Operations that proceed from an
invisible Cause? Do we not find, that we can reason, judge, and infer one
thing from another, though we see not the Principle from whence they come? Have
we not an Understanding, Will, and Affections, to know, choose, and affect
things, though the Spring of them occur not to any of our Senses? Do we not find
a World made and preserved, though we see not that invisible hand that first did
the one, and still continues the other?

Indeed, had we no higher Principle of knowledge in us, than our Senses, it
would be hard to form a Notion of God, or any Spiritual and immaterial
Substance, because these things cannot be the Object of Sensation; but having a
superior Principle, that is a Mind within us, that can raise us above all gross
and Corporeal Objects; it is easy to conceive that a Spiritual Substance may be
discerned by the Mind, though it cannot be the Object of our Senses: Are there
not many Truths in all Arts and Sciences, that fall not under the Cognizance of
any of our Senses? Yea, are not the Essences of all things invisible, and
discoverable only by the Powers and Sagacity of the Mind, which from the
outward Effects, can judge of the inward Nature of the Causes? The
Understanding can penetrate much farther into the inside of things, than our
Senses or Fancy can enable us to do; we find the Mind can and frequently does
correct the Errors of Sense and Imagination, of which many instances might be
given, if it were needful to enlarge.

But this is sufficient to make it evident, that there is a higher Principle of
Knowledge within us, than that of our outward Senses; and that many things are
knowable and intelligible by the one, that are not conveyed by the other: So
that it is false Reasoning to infer, that the Mind cannot have a Notion or Idea
of a Spiritual and immaterial Substance, because it cannot be the Object of
Sensation.

Again, the Atheist tells us, that the Notion of a God supposes him to be
Infinite and Incomprehensible, and therefore it must be altogether
unconceiveable by Human Understanding, which cannot grasp Infinity, or
comprehend what is Incomprehensible.

But may not the Mind apprehend something of a Deity, though it cannot comprehend
the whole of him? Is it wise arguing, because we have not all knowledge,
therefore we have none at all? If we know as much of him, as the greatness of
the Object, and the slenderness of our Faculties will admit; that is, if we
know him to be a Being absolutely and eminently perfect, without the least
degree of defect or imperfection, is not this sufficient to create a Notion and
Belief of him? There is scarce any inferior Being that we can fully comprehend,
and because we understand not all Mysteries in Nature, shall we conclude from
thence, that we are quite ignorant, and can have no Notion or Idea of any
thing? This will lead to downright Skepticism, and make us believe we know
nothing. Beside, we may know as much of him, as it is fit for us now to know; we
are not at present able to receive the full knowledge and splendour of the
Deity, a great part whereof is reserved for the Happiness of a future State,
when we shall see God, as he is; and though we here know but in part, shall then
know even as we are known; and therefore it is monstrously unreasonable to
quarrel with the Notion and Idea of a God, or think it altogether
unconceivable, because we cannot comprehend his infinite Perfections, in this
present imperfect state, wherein we know but little of any thing else.

But how does the Atheist account for all these noble Effects and Operations of
the Mind, without the Notion of a Spirit? Why, by resolving all into Matter and
Motion: For he tells us, that some of the finer and more subtle parts of
Matter, called Atoms, being in continual motion, luckily fall into those
configurations, by which all this is performed without the help or direction of
a Deity: And that some happen to be wiser and more knowing than others,
proceeds from some of those more refined parts of Matter falling accidentally
into more happy forms and contextures in them, than they do in others, and so
instead of believing in God, they believe only in Matter and Motion. A great
piece of Subtilty indeed! to sublimate Matter into Spirit, and to ascribe the
Noblest Acts and Operations in the World, to the most unactive and sluggish of
all things in it. But whence should Matter have this Motion, which neither is
nor has in it any self-moving Principle? Why, of this no account can be given
without some Spiritual Being, that must give it all its activity. Can dull
Matter of it self infer one thing from another, and perform those reflex Acts,
which we find in rational Beings? Can it range the Universe in Thought and
Contemplation? Or dive into profound Speculations? No, these things require
another and higher Principle, than stupid and senseless Matter, and owe their
rise to some more refined, spiritual, and intelligent Being.

In short, The Notion of a Spirit is so necessary to the solving of these and a
thousand other difficulties, that none but such as are wholly immersed in
Matter can doubt or disbelieve it. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER X.
SIR,
ANother Device of the Atheist, is his taking occasion from the unequal
distribution of Earthly Things, to question both the Being and Providence of a
God: They see Good Men afflicted, and the Wicked in great prosperity; which
they think could not be, if the World were governed by so Wise, Just, and
Excellent a Being as is pretended.

This is a Quarrel of an ancient date, or an old stumbling Block, that has
trip'd up the Heels of many: We read of it in David's days, who was himself in
great danger of stumbling at it; for himself tells us, that his Feet were
almost gone, and his Steps had well nigh slipped, when he saw the Wicked in great
prosperity; that they were not in trouble like other folk, not plagued like
other Men; but were lusty and strong, their Eyes standing out with Fatness,
having as much as heart could wish; whilst better men than they looked meager
and thin, being pinched with want, and chastened every morning: This made him
begin to doubt, whether there were any wise and Supreme Being that ordered
these things: I beheld (says he) the Ungodly flourishing like a green
Bay Tree, and the Righteous Man at the same time drooping and hanging the head
like a whither'd leaf; verily I have cleans'd my heart in vain, and washed mine
hands in innocence: Meaning, that he had taken pains to be Religious to no
purpose, when others that neglected it, fared much better than he.

Again, we find these things objected in the days of Plutarch, Seneca, and
other Heathen Moralists, who by the bare help of Natural Light, went a great
way to the solving of this Riddle of Divine Providence: Though many of the Poets
concluded the World to be governed by blind Chance and Fortune, from the
promiscuous event and distribution of these things: And there are but too many
still, who observing the Miseries of Good Men, and the Prosperities of bad, are
led to arraign the Justice of Providence, and from thence to deny the very
Being of a God.

But is this any tolerable Plea for Atheism? No, in no wise; for some of the
wiser and soberer Heathens have discovered such weighty Reasons for this kind
of dealing with the Sons of Men, as are abundantly sufficient to vindicate the
Justice of Divine Providence; God's forbearing the Wicked, may be to propound
the Example of his Goodness and Patience, to give them time for Amendment, to
leave them without excuse, and to make their Punishment the more terrible and
remarkable at last. Beside,

Their Prosperity is not so great as we vainly imagine, for it is oft-times
embitter'd with the sting of an evil Conscience, and attended with fearful
Expectations of Wrath, and the Terrors of an approaching Judgment.

Neither are the Sufferings of the Righteous founded on less weighty Causes;
for these are no other than the Discipline and Corrections of a Heavenly
Father, for their future good: They are designed merely for the exercises of
patience, and the trials of their Faith and Constancy, which if manfully born,
will tend to the increase of their Reward, and add a greater weight and luster
to their Crown of Glory.

These with many other Considerations of great Moment, sufficient to solve this
difficulty, you may find insisted on at large by Plutarch, Epictetus,
Simplicius, Seneca, and others, to whom I refer you; all which being the plain
discoveries of Natural Reason, render this Objection so far from any just Plea
for Atheism, that it is a plain proof of the contrary, and may make all Men say,
verily there is a God, that judges the Earth.

But how then come Men to be so misled by this means, or where lies the mistake
in this matter? Why, this proceeds partly from a fond and immoderate estimation
of worldly Prosperity; and partly, likewise,

From some wrong Notions, that are entertained about the Afflictions and
Miseries of this present Life. For when Men so overvalue the good things of
this World, as to think it impossible for any to be happy without them; and so
mistake the Evils and Adversities of it, as to judge all Men miserable and
unhappy that fall under them; it is no wonder, if they accuse the dispensations
of Providence, and quarrel with the manager and disposer of them: He that takes
Wealth and Honor to be the sole Rewards of Virtue, and consequently to be the
proper Lot and Portion of Righteous Men, may be easily induced to complain of
the hard fare of good Men, that want them; and he that has such terrible
apprehensions of Adversity, as to look upon it as the punishment and wages of
Unrighteousness, may envy and applaud the good Fortune of bad Men, who so often
escape them. Now both these are gross mistakes, and have unhappily led some Men
into Atheism.

To Rectify which, you must know, that Affliction is sometimes a greater
Blessing than Prosperity; the one serving to make Men better, the other worse.
There be few that, in Pindar's Phrase, can (...), rightly manage great
Prosperity: Yea, too many are undone by it to Eternity, and make that, which
was designed for their good, become the Instrument of their ruin. But

Where lies the danger of Prosperity? Why,

First, It tempts many unto Pride, and makes them too apt to forget both God
and themselves; Jesurun waxed Fat and kicked, his Abundance made him bold and
insolent, and lifted up both his Heart and his Heel too against his Maker:
David observed of the wicked that prosper'd in his days, that Pride compassed
them about as a chain, and violence covered them as a garment: And this made
them speak of wicked Blasphemies, and set their talk against the most high,
Psalm. 73. 8, 9. Yea, he himself felt something of this Tumor, for he said in
his Prosperity, that he should never be moved: he began to cast off all
dependence upon God, and to rely only on his own strength: And therefore we
find Agar praying against Riches, lest being full, he should deny God, and say,
who is the Lord? Prove. 30. 8, 9.

Again, Prosperity tempts many unto Wantonness and Luxury; Men's corrupt
Natures too often turning the Encouragements to Virtue, into the incentives to
Vice, and making their Plenty the fuel of their Lust and Vanity. By which
means, their Riches serve only to inflame their reckoning, and their abused
Gifts and Talents do but sink them the deeper into Eternal Misery: The sense of
this rectified the Psalmist's mistake in this matter, and kept him from
grieving or grudging at the short-lived Prosperity of the Wicked; for when he
went into the Sanctuary, he soon Understood the end of those Men; how they were
sat in slippery places, from whence they were suddenly cast down, and came to
a fearful end; from whence he learned rather to pity, than envy that
Prosperity, which had so fatal an issue, and served merely to fatten them for
the slaughter. As you may Read at large in the 73 Psalm.

But is Adversity the cure of these Evils; and do Afflictions best tend to
prevent the danger of them? Yes; for these help to keep Men humble, sensible of
their weakness and dependence upon a superior Power, and make them look up to
him, from whom both Trouble and Deliverance come: Indeed Afflictions naturally
lead Men to consider; he that feels the smart of the Rod, will naturally look
to him that strikes, and consider too the Reason of his inflicting it; and
since Afflictions spring not out of the Dust, they direct our Contemplations
higher, and show us the Divine Hand that sends them, by which means we are
brought to hear the voice of the Rod, and of him that appointed it: In their
Afflictions (says God) they will seek me early; the Mariners in a Storm call
each upon their God, whose Being and Providence in a Calm they had utterly
forgotten: Before I was afflicted (says the Psalmist) I went astray, but now I
have learned thy Statutes; and therefore thankfully acknowledged, that God of
very faithfulness had caused him to be troubled: Adversity and trouble have
reduced many, that were miss-led and corrupted by Prosperity: Riches (says the
Philosopher) are not to be reputed good things, therefore the worst as well as
the best have them; neither are Afflictions to be reckoned evil things,
therefore the best as well as the worst undergo them.

These things are not only agreeable to, but discoverable likewise by the Light
of Reason, to which if we add the greater Light of Revelation in this matter,
you will see greater cause to dread, than desire Prosperity, and that we should
be so far from being afraid, or ashamed, that we ought rather to glory in
Tribulations. In a Word,

If we rightly consider the many and great dangers of Prosperity, and compare
them with the many and vast advantages of Affliction, we may soon see this
stumbling block of the Atheist to vanish, and that the Prosperity of bad, and
Afflictions of good Men, are so far from an Argument against the Being and
Providence of God, that they are a very strong Evidence and Confirmation of
Both. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XI.
SIR,
HAving in my last removed that ancient stumbling block of Atheism, taken from
the Adversities of Good, and the Prosperity of bad Men. I proceed now to a later

Device of the Atheist, which is, his taking advantage from the many Sects and
Differences in Religion, to lay aside all; and from Men's Disagreement about the
way and manner of worshipping God, to settle in a total neglect and contempt of
him: This is too obvious in experience, to need any proof; for may we not daily
see the sense of Religion to wear off from the Minds of Men, by the stir that
is made about it? Are not the impressions of Virtue and Goodness mightily
defaced by our Divisions? So that it cannot be doubted, but the different Sects
and Opinions of our Age are a great Cause of that Atheism and Irreligion that
so much abound in it: It Is too well known, that some Persons who have been well
enough affected to Religion, and had no small zeal for, and satisfaction in it,
have yet by falling into the ways of Separation contracted that giddiness and
instability, as to lose all; and by running from one Sect to another, have run
themselves out of breath, and made their last resort into Atheism; and others
perceiving their clashing and inconstancy, have gone the same way, and thrown
up all.

But what influence have Differences and Divisions in Religion upon the
producing of Atheism? Why great, sundry ways: As, First, Divisions tend to
expose Religion, and render it vile and despicable; for when Men behold it to
set one another by the Ears, and to engage them in endless quarrels and
disputes, they come to despise and think meanly of it; and so are easily
induced to abandon that which breeds so much discord and animosity: They are
apt to think, that Religion (if there were any such thing) would be a more
peaceable, quiet, and harmless thing, and have other Effects upon the Minds of
Men; but finding it to create little else than fewds and differences among the
Professors of it, they come to entertain low and contemptible thoughts of it;
and being made only a Bone of Contention, think it good for nothing but to be
thrown away. Again,

2dly. Divisions beget those doubts and uncertainties about Religion, that
unsettle Men's minds, and bring them into such a Maze, that they know not where
to fix: And in this tumult and confusion of thoughts, many are tempted to throw
up all, rather than wander about in such uncertainties, and lose themselves in
a crowd of endless and disputable Opinions. Moreover,

3dly. Among the numerous Sects and Parties that are in Religion, there can be
but one in the Right; for though error be Infinite, yet Truth is but one; and
where to find this among a numberless Set of Pretenders, is they think a
matter of so much labor and difficulty, that they choose rather to let all
alone, than to be at the pains and trouble of such an Enquiry. Beside,

4thly. Some persons having discovered the folly and falsehood of some darling
Opinions they formerly admired, are thereby induced to suspect all the rest:
And others having found out the Cheat and Imposture of many more, are apt to
conclude the rest to be no better: All which have an easy and natural tendency
toward Atheism, and are made use of by many to that end.

Yea all that are indifferent in matters of Religion, and, with Gallio, care
for none of these things (of which the World affords but too many) all such I
say will be glad to have so plausible a pretense and excuse for their
Irreligion; and they whose interest and design it is to have no Religion, will
be sure to lay hold of this and all other advantages against it. In a word,
Divisions naturally destroy that Love and Charity which is the Bond of
perfectness, and the life of all true Religion, and likewise necessarily beget
that Hatred, Strife, and Animosity, that is the groundwork of Atheism,
Confusion, and every Evil work.

Now here it may not be amiss to stay a while, and consider the great Evil and
Danger of our unhappy Dissentions; what unspeakable mischief they do in the
World, and particularly what an apparent handle they give to Atheism, being too
great an occasion for it, and putting too fair a color upon it. For by raising
these disputes, they do but raise a mist before the Eyes of the People, whereby
many are wrongtided and led into Atheism, and hardened in their disbelief and
contempt of all Religion; and there fore 'twas a wise and wholesome piece of
Advice of the Apostle, to mark those that cause Divisions and avoid them.

Neither will it be amiss, if the Authors and Abetters of these Divisions will
set down and consider, what account they will be able to give, for those many
and great Evils, that apparently proceed from them: For if we are forbidden to
lay any Stumbling Block or occasion of falling in our Brother's way, how will
these Men answer for all that Irreligion that has been evidently occasioned by
this means? Or what Plea will they make for all that Schism and Atheism, into
which so many are hereby betrayed? This is a Consideration of greater Moment
than some are aware of; for though offenses may and will come, yet woe be to them
by whom the offense comes.

But are these Differences and Divisions in Religion a sufficient pretense and
excuse for Atheism? No, far from it; for though such are accountable to God, that
give the occasion; yet that will not justify or excuse those that take it;
this being an Evil which they are sufficiently forewarned of, and therefore
should be forearm'd against it: So that all the Atheism occasioned from hence,
proceeds rather from an Obstinacy and Perverseness in the Will, than from any
defect of Light or Knowledge in the Understanding.

And here we find the Atheists, who would be thought Men of the deepest reach
and insight into these things, guilty of very foul and false Reasoning in this
matter: For,

First, What though some Opinions in Religion have been found to be false, will
it follow thence, that there is none true? There are some that have entertained
wrong Notions in all Arts and Sciences, yea have maintained false Problems even
in the Mathematics themselves; and will any conclude from thence, that they
are all lies and falsities? This Principle would destroy all knowledge, and
lead Men to deny and disbelieve every thing: There have been no doubt Heretics
and Schismatics in all Ages, who have espoused many Errors and mistaken
Opinions about the Worship of God; and will any infer from thence, that all
Religion is imposture? Certainly this is very bad arguing, and will lead Men to
the height of Skepticism and Infidelity. Again,

What though Men differ about some things, will it follow thence that they agree
in nothing? And if (as one has well observed) their disagreement be an
Argument of the falsehood of some things; why is not their Agreement as good an
Argument for the truth of other? The differences in Religion are commonly about
the Circumstances of it, as about the Modes of Worship and Discipline; whereas
Men generally agree in the Matters of Faith and Essentials of Religion; and
indeed there is nothing wherein all Mankind do more universally agree, than in
the Belief and Worship of a God: And is it not unreasonable, because they may
differ in some things, to suspect the Truth of that wherein they are all
agreed? He that finds himself inclined to make this bad use of Men's disputes,
and to improve these petty differences into Atheism, may do well to sit down
and consider how far Religion is concerned in them, which if he can be
persuaded to do, he will soon see that these things do not affect the Truth and
Foundation of it, in which they are all agreed, but only the beauty and
ornament of the Superstucture, they refer rather to matters of Speculation than
Practice: And if any have various Sentiments about the Ornaments and Outworks
of a Building, sure that can be no Reason either to distrust or subvert the
Foundation. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XII.
SIR,
I Showed in my last, the perverse use which the Atheist makes of the Disputes
and Differences that are found in the World about matters of Religion: I
proceed in this to Another Device much like it; which is, his taking occasion
from the Hypocrisy and bad lives of some pretenders to it, to conclude all
Religion to be false, and from thence to fall into Atheism and Infidelity.

This is a frequent and fatal practice, of which our Age does afford many sad
and doleful instances: there are some who will be at no pains to examine the
truth or falsehood of any Religion, but take it upon trust, as the Custom of the
Country where they live, or as it is derived down to them by their Parents or
Ancestors: Now these lie open to all the assaults of Atheism, and being
altogether unguarded against them, are but too ready to surrender upon any
summons, and to yield to every temptation to it: Their Faith, for lack of being
Catechized and well-principl'd in the beginning, has no firm bottom, but lies
wholly in the power of a corrupt and inconstant Will, which will move as
interest and inclination lead it, so that as soon as they become wicked enough,
to need Atheism for a Refuge, they will be ready to fly to it: And therefore
we are bid to try and examine the Truth of Doctrines, and be ready to give a
Reason of the Faith and Hope that is in us, when ever we are asked or called to
it, that being well-grounded in the Truth of Religion, we may adhere to it
against all opposition, and stand the shock of the fiercest Temptations. Again,

There are others, who think sometimes upon Religion, and make some enquiry
into it, but yet judge of the truth or falsehood of it, not by the soundness of
its Precepts, but by the Lives and Practices of those that make the greatest
profession of it: These likewise to save the trouble of a deep and impartial
search into the grounds and principles upon which Religion stands, enquire what
others think of it, who by their pretenses seem best to understand it; and
because Men's Actions are the best discovery of their thoughts and opinions of
things; they judge of what they think in these matters, by what they see them
do; so that when they see such Men's Practices give the Lie to their Profession,
and find them act as as if they did not believe what they say, this makes them
think that there is no Reason to believe it, and that Religion is nothing else
but a cunning Device, made use of by some Men to carry on their worldly
Interest and Designs. This no doubt has drawn many into Atheism, and hardened
others in it. The many vile tricks that have been played under the Mask of
Religion, the gilding of Treason and Rebellion with a specious pretense of Zeal
for God's Glory, and hiding Faction and Sedition under the colors of
Reformation, have made many suspect the whole for a Contrivance, and to cast it
off as a System of Lies and Impostures.

But is it a true and safe Rule, to judge of the truth of Religion by the lives
of those that profess it? No, a very unsafe and crooked one: For,

Though the Hypocrite that plays this game, shall dearly rue hereafter for all
the Evil done by this means; though his portion of misery and damnation will be
heavier and hotter than others, for laying such a stumbling block in their way,
by which so many fall to their Eternal Ruin; yet this will not excuse the folly
of such as suffer themselves to be miss-led and betra'y'd by it, nor justify
such Atheistical Conclusions drawn from it: Example you know is a false and
fallacious Rule to walk by; for since the generality of Men leave the way in
which they should walk, to follow them, or infer our Duty from them, is for the
most to go astray.

But they draw this Conclusion (they say) not from the loose and debauched part
of the World, that have no sense of Religion, but from the stricter sort, that
make the highest pretensions to it, and seem to have the deepest impressions of
it; and if these make it evident by their lives, that they believe little or
nothing of it, what can we think of it, but as a mere Delusion? But do not Men
act sometimes against their own persuasion? And are not too many carried away
by the sway of their Lusts and corrupt Designs, against the convictions of
their own Mind? That Men sometimes knowingly and wilfully commit great sins,
and cover vile enormities under a cloak of greater sanctity, is a matter indeed
to be lamented, but cannot reasonably be urged as an Argument against Religion:
Will any think that a Cheat, because some that do ill things are found to be
so? And if these act so bad a part, shall any be encouraged by it to act a
worse? Sure this is very bad arguing, and such as cannot well be owned by any,
that would be thought Men of Sense and Reason.

It Is not unusual for Men's words to be better than their Actions; and in such
cases the wisest course is to do as they say, and not as they do. This
direction we find given with Relation to the Pharisees, who sat in Moses's
Chair, and spoke many good things from it, though their doings ran counter to
their Doctrines; what therefore they say, we are bid to do, but not to do after
their works, for they say and do not. Certainly, it is a much better course to
learn from others bad lives to amend our own, than to take occasion from thence
to grow worse, and to cast off all fear of God from before our Eyes.

Beside, have not some Men bad designs to carry on? And do they stick at any
ways or means to promote them? May not the best things be abused to evil
purposes? And is nothing true or good, because it may be made to serve bad ends?

Now though these false tricks of Hypocrites, may be a good Reason why we should
not believe every Spirit, or be carried away by vain pretenses; yet they can be
no Argument against the Truth of Religion, no more than it would be to affirm,
that there are no true Diamonds, because there are so many counterfeits. How
then comes it to pass, that so many are caught in this snare, and misled by
such an apparent fallacy? Why, this must proceed partly

From some Men's aversness to Religion, heightened by a strong desire to follow
the swinge of their corrupt inclinations, and to be freed from any check or
restraint it might lay upon them. And,

Partly likewise, from their too great proneness to Atheism, which makes them
lay hold on any thing, though never so mean, that may give any countenance or
encouragement to it.

In short then, The Atheists great aptness to draw such bad Conclusions from
Lives may be a good Caution against all Immorality and Vice, by which the name
of God is Blasphemed; but can by no means be made a Plea for Atheism, or give
any just Cause to discard Religion as an Imposture. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XIII.
SIR,
HAving in the foregoing Letters showed the weakness of the Atheists Arguments
against a Deity: I proceed in this to another Artifice he makes use of to
undermine the Belief and Worship of him; and that is to Scoff at and Deride
Religion, and if he cannot Argue it, to endeavor to Laugh it out of the World.
This is done by those, who would be thought to be the knowing Men and Wits of
the Age; who first try the strength of their Reason, and when that fails, fly
to Art to support their Atheism, and set their Wits at work to Rally and
Ridicule Religion.

This is a degree of wickedness, which Men are not wont to arrive to presently,
for the Psalmist intimates, that they must walk a while in the Counsel of the
Ungodly, and stand in the way of Sinners, before they can set down and settle
in the Chair of the Scorner. Psalm. 1. 1. When they are seated there, and
accustomed themselves to this vile practice, they soon lose the sense of a
Deity, and so persuade themselves and others that there is no God, because they
have the impudence to scorn and despise him.

But do these Men think by Laughter to alter the Nature of Good and Evil? Or
that a God of Infinite Power, Wisdom and Justice, will be thus played or
droll'd out of his Being? Can they hope to prevail by leveling their
Blasphemies against the most High; setting their Mouth against the Heavens, and
causing their Tongue to walk through the Earth? No, certainly; this is both a
fruitless and frivolous attempt, for he that sits in the Heavens will laugh
them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision.

What end then can these Men propose in such a vile piece of Wickedness? Why,
this is done,

First, to gain to themselves the Reputation of being Wits; which they
endeavor to do, by exposing the most serious things: The life and picquancy of
Wit, (as one has well observed) lies in the surprizingness of its conceits and
expressions; and consequently to Ridicule things Sacred, which ought in Reason
to be Priviledg'd from it, is most apt to astonish and surprise the hearers;
and if any (as light and vain Persons are wont to be) are thereby moved to
Laughter, they are tickled with the conceit, and thereby please and inure
themselves to this impious practice.

This way the dullest persons (if they will be Profane enough) may be easily
dubbed Wits, by venturing to say those rude things of God and Religion, which
no wise Man would presume to utter, and this proves a strong temptation to many
who have no other way to be thought witty. Again,

2dly. This is thought by some a genteel and brave thing, to go out of the
common Road, and to cast off those fears which others are awed and terrified
withal; they reckon it a sort of Gallantry of Spirit, to be above the frights
that possess Vulgar Minds, and to shake off those Fetters of Religion, with
which the generality suffer themselves tamely to be bound; and the better to
break these Chains, they labor to break their Jests upon them. Moreover,

3dly. This is done to give the better countenance to their sinful practices
and immoralities; for if they can expose Virtue, and make Religion ridiculous,
they may act their Vices with the greater grace, and follow the sway of their
Lusts without shame or control. Beside, they think it a good Plea for their
Wickedness, that they do not therein contradict any Principle they profess,
they act suitably to what they pretend, and therefore to put the better Face
upon their Vices, they laugh at those for Fools, who do not believe and act as
they do: Thus by accustoming themselves to ridicule the most serious things,
they bring on a Contempt of God and Religion, and droll themselves into
Atheism. But is there any Wisdom or Safety in so doing? No, quite otherwise;
nothing can be more sottish or dangerous; for all such Mirth is no better than
Madness, and this kind of Laughter will shortly end in weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth.

We have heard of some, that would rather lose their Friend than their Jest;
but it is strange that this drolling humor should carry any so far, as to make
them venture the loss of the favor of God, the best Friend and Benefactor in
the World, for the sake of an idle profane Jest, which taints the Air that
gives it breath, and either grates upon, or corrupts the Ears of those that
hear it.

But because this is become a too frequent and fashionable practice, and has
betrayed many into Atheism; 'twill be requisite to lay open the folly and
danger of it. And, First, if there were nothing else, the unpardonable rudeness
and indecence of this practice, is sufficient to show it highly unbecoming any
person of Sense or Breeding; for since Mankind generally profess a high esteem
and veneration for God and Religion, it must be a manifest breach of Civility
and good Manners to scoff at and deride them: The Laws of Conversation require
to treat all Men with due respect; there is none can hear with patience his
Father or his Friend exposed to Scorn and Derision; and what an unparalled
affront must it be to Mankind, to make God and Religion (the dearest things to
them in the world) the subject of Contempt and Raillery?

Again, 2dly. The mighty influence which the belief of a God has upon the
public welfare, may convince any considering Man of the great Evil of deriding
it; he that despises Religion, cuts the Sinews of Government, and dissolves the
firmest Bond of Human Society; for when Men have laughed away the Fear of God
and the Sense of Religion, all Obligations of Conscience are gone with it, and
nothing remains to keep them to their duty, but the fear of Men, which is a
loose Principle that will vary or cease, as opportunity, interest, or humor
lead it. Moreover,

3dly. To jest at, and expose Religion, is the grossest abuse of Wit that can
be made of it; for it turns one of the chiefest Ornaments of Virtue, into an
Encouragement of Vice, and makes that which was given to recreate the Mind, and
sweeten Conversation, to become the Bane and Pest of both: Wit (as a great Man
has observed) is a keen Weapon, as apt for bad as good purposes, and therefore
a wise Man should have the keeping of it, to prevent the mischief and danger of
its ill management.

There is a good use of Wit in many Cases; as to adorn Virtue, and recommend it
to the best Advantage; to expose Vice, and render it as it deserves,
Ridiculous; to season Conversation, and to ease and relieve the Mind under the
burden of its Cares; and whilst it keeps within these Bounds, it is a useful and
commendable Quality; but when it transgresses these Rules, and breaks in upon
God and Religion, it loses its name, and degenerates into Insolence and
Impiety.

Yea, such as would be thought Wits, by jesting upon sacred and serious things,
do but betray the greatest folly; 'twas the fool that said in his Heart, there
was no God; and Solomon tells us, that none but Fools make a mock of Sin, or
think of mocking God, who neither can nor will be mocked. In a word, all
profane Wit is the height of folly, and though it have never so much Salt,
cannot be savoury, but nauseous and offensive to all wise Men. Lastly, The
unspeakable hazard the Atheist runs in deriding Religion, is enough to show the
danger and folly of this impious practice: For if the Atheist shall find at
last that there is a God, as undoubtedly he will, what will he say for those
rude scoffs and affronts he has put upon him? What account can he give for all
this impudent Buffoonry? What horror and confusion of Face must needs seize
them, when the Maker and Judge of the World shall avenge this insolence upon
them, and vindicate his Honor in their Eternal Destruction? This is a matter
well worth their serious and timely consideration, that they may repent and
return no more to this Folly: Otherwise, if they will continue to laugh on, and
scoff at Religion, God Almighty will shortly take his turn too, and will laugh
at their Calamity, and mock when their Fear comes.

In short then, this drolling upon Sacred Things is so far from giving any just
encouragement to Atheism, that it is an high Aggravation of the Impiety; and all
such Mirth will end at last in the deepest Sadness. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XIV.
SIR,
I Proceed now to the last, though none of the least Artifices to support and
countenance Atheism: For when the Atheist is beaten out of all the former
subterfuges, he has recourse to another Device, suggested to him by his
sensual Lusts and Appetite. And that is,

To charge Religion with a foolish Bargain; and that such as embrace it, act
upon slender and insufficient Motives. To prove which, they tell us,

That to part with present Certainties, for uncertain Futurities, can be no Act
of Wisdom; for in doubtful Cases the greatest Evidence should sway: Now we are
sure (say they) of what is present, but can never be so of what is future; and
therefore he charges it with folly, to deny themselves the present Pleasures,
Profits, and Honors of this World, for a few vain Hopes of better things in
another, which perhaps may never come to pass, and of which none could ever yet
give them any certain Evidence. This, though owned indeed by few, is yet the
Sense and Language of most men's Lives and Actions; which show them to be fond
to excess of these Earthly enjoyments, but to have little or no regard to the
weightier Concerns of Heaven and Eternity, and, with Martha, to be cumber'd
about many things, with the neglect of the one thing necessary. The Epicures
Song is, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die; the present time is ours,
and all that we can call so; for the time to come, we know not whose it may be,
and therefore it is wisdom to enjoy what we are sure of, and not to defer or
suspend our happiness upon any such future uncertainties.

But be not deceived (says the Apostle) Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners; yea such vain communication corrupt men's Minds, debauch their Reason,
and makes them act like Fools, when they would be thought to talk most wisely.
For,

First, The present Enjoyments of this World, (how confidently soever we may
call them our own) are infinitely vain and uncertain, and when we think to
enjoy most of them, frequently leave and lurch our expectations: Riches take to
themselves wings and fly away, when we think to hold them fastest: The
Pleasures and Delights of the World are all fleeting and momentany, yea they
are embittered with a Sting, and mingled with Sorrow: Honor is a puff of wind
that is quickly gone, and he that admires these things, sets his heart upon
that which is not: So that the Atheist is mistaken in his Supposition, for
these present things are not so certain as he takes them. Neither are they so
much the Happiness, as the Trouble and Misery of human life: the wicked Man
knows many times that he plays the Fool in gratifying his Lusts, and owns that
he ought to do otherwise; he feels a regret and trouble upon his mind, and does
not so much enjoy, as disquiet himself in indulging of them. However,

The Atheist here tells us, that the pleasures of this life affect his Senses,
he feels himself in some measure pleased and delighted with them; and why
should he abridge himself of such sensible Delights, for Future Things, of
which he has no taste, and can have no assurance?

As for the pleasures of Sense, they are in the most innocent use of them
vastly exceeded by the pleasures of Virtue and Religion; for these have a
sweeter Relish on the Mind, and leave far more lasting impressions of joy and
satisfaction, than any sensual Delights ever did or can do: And if this pure
delight flow at last into fullness of joy, and run into those Rivers of
pleasure, that are at Gods right hand for evermore, there is infinite Reason
why we should abridge our selves in these sensual Enjoyments, for the fruition
of a far more glorious and durable Felicity.

But still the uncertainty and want of Evidence for these things sticks with
the Atheist, and makes the parting with the one for the other a foolish
Bargain; for we never saw (says he) nor experienced these things our selves,
nor ever spoke with any one that did.

But what kind of Evidence is it, that he would have of these things? I hope he
does not expect more than the nature of the thing will bear, for that would be
unreasonable, and show him to be both unwilling and incapable of Conviction.
Now God being a spiritual and consequently an invisible Substance, cannot be
proved by the Evidence of Sense, for no man has seen God at any time.

Neither can a future state, which commences not till after this life, be at
present visible, or fall under the trial or experience of any of our Senses: so
that this kind of proof cannot in Reason be required in this Case, neither can
the Atheist exact it without wounding his own Cause; for neither can Epicurus's
Atoms, nor Aristotle's Eternity of the World be proved this way.

What Assurance then have we of these Truths? Why, we have the proper, that is
a Moral Assurance, grounded upon the evident and necessary deductions of
Reason, which is sufficient to beget a confident Persuasion of the truth of
them, and to remove all doubts and distrust to the contrary.

In short, we have as great an Assurance of these Things, as it is possible for
us to have, supposing that they are true, which is enough to satisfy any
reasonable man in the belief of them: Let us suppose then that there is a God,
that is a Being of all possible Perfections; how may we come to know or be
assured of it? Why, not by the Evidence of Sense; for being a Spirit, he cannot
fall under the Cognizance of any of our Senses; the only proof we can have of
him, must be either from some secret impressions of him upon our Mind, or from
some visible Effects and Operations, that can only be ascribed to such a Being;
and both these we have in this Case. Again,

Supposing there be a future state for the Rewarding of Good, and Punishing of
Bad Men, what proof can we have of it? Why, none from the evidence of Sense;
for things future and at a distance are incapable of that kind of proof; all
the Assurance we can have of it, is from the Attributes and Perfections of the
first Cause and Maker of all things, whose Truth and Faithfulness has declared
it, and whose Mercy and Justice necessarily require it; for since the
Observation and Violation of his Laws, are not usually rewarded or Punished in
this life, there must be another state where the honor of those Divine
Perfections will be more openly and thoroughly vindicated.

The truth is, it is not want of Light, but men's shutting their Eyes against it,
that miss-lead's them in this matter; it is a false heart that suggests these
doubts, and a corrupt Will that pretends lack of sufficient assurance: For Men
daily act upon far less Evidence in all other matters, and venture their Lives
and Fortunes upon things that have no higher than this Moral Certainty; what
wise Man ever doubts, whether there be such a place as the Indies, Spain, or
Turkey, though perhaps he never saw either? Do not many transfer their Estates by
way of Traffic into Foreign Countries, of which they have no other knowledge,
than from the Testimony and Relation of others? And he that should refuse to
believe or act upon this kind of Certainty, would be reckoned no better than a
Fool or a Madman: And if this sort of assurance be sufficient to justify our
discretion in the affairs of our Body; why should we distrust it in the matters
of our Soul; especially since it is not possible in our present state to have
any higher?

But though this Evidence (says the Atheist) be sufficient in Temporal Matters;
yet a greater Certainty is requisite in Divine Things, and the weightier
Affairs of Eternity. Now though this be not wanting to all that are willing to
receive it, yet what Reason can be given, why that Assurance which guides Men
in the pursuit of a Lesser Good, should not influence them much more to obtain
a Greater; And that Evidence which is sufficient to prompt them to avoid
Temporal Evils, should not more strongly incline them to escape those that are
Eternal.

In a Word, The vast odds that is on the side of Religion, shows it to be far
from a foolish Bargain; for if there be no God or a World to come, the Good Man
can be no loser, for he only parts with his Lusts, which are the shame and
scandal of his Nature, and instead of following them, is directed to do what is
most for his health, interest, reputation, and every way most conducing to the
Peace and Comfort of the present life: But if there be a God and a future
state, as it is more than ten thousand to one there are, he will be vastly a
Gainer, for beside the present quiet and satisfaction he enjoys here; he is
secured of everlasting Peace and Tranquillity hereafter, and for the poor
perishing trifles of Time; which he now parts with, shall be rewarded with the
ineffable Joys and Glories of Eternity; and sure no wise Man will charge this
with Folly: For if he who has exchanged Pebbles for Pearls, is by all thought
to have made a wise bargain, he that parts with the light Momentany things of
this Life, for an Eternal Crown of Glory in a better, will in the end be found
to have made a much wiser. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTTER XV.
SIR,
I Have in the foregoing Letters; according to promise, set forth some of the
principal Arts and Devices, that are made use of to support and countenance
Atheism; and likewise, according to your desire, laid open the Evil and Danger
of them.

But because the Request of your Letter extended not only to the Cause, but the
Cure of Atheism; it will be requisite; for a Close, to subjoyn some few
Directions to that end. And here what has been said touching the Rise of this
Evil, may help us to find out the Remedies of it; for as to know the Cause of a
Distemper, is a fair step toward the Cure, so to discover the Devices of
Atheism, is the readiest way to prevent the Danger, and to be preserved from
the Contagion of it.

But because the Rise of this Evil is more from the Will and Affections, than
from the Mind or Understanding, we are to apply our selves rather to rectify
the former, than to inform the latter; for Men are not Atheists so much for
want of Knowledge, as for lack of a due Use and Application of it. And
therefore the

First and Grand Preservative against Atheism, must be to mortify and subdue
all sinful and sensual Lusts, for these give the strongest bias to this Evil,
and draw too many into it: We observed before, that a vicious life makes it
Men's interest that there be no God, and that makes it their wish, and soon
after their belief that there is none: This is the common and ordinary Road to
Atheism, and is indeed that broad way, that leads to Destruction; which being
so easy, and suitable to Men's vile and vicious Inclinations, many there be
that find and walk in it.

But that we may not lose our selves, and walk on for Company to our own ruin,
we are to get out of this broad way, and betake our selves into the straighter
paths of Mortification and Self-denial, which lying cross to Men's wicked and
corrupt affections, is the true Reason that few there be that find it. 'Twas
wisely observed by a great Man, that the main Reason why any Man becomes an
Atheist, is because he is a wicked Man, and resolves to be so: Religion would
curb them in their Lusts, and therefore they cast it off, and put all the Scorn
they can upon it: So that to cure this Malady, we must, in the Prophets Phrase,
cease to do evil, and learn to do well: This will take off that wrong bias
that turns so many out of the way, and likewise set them right in the way that
leads to everlasting life.

Secondly, To prevent this growing Evil, let us often meditate upon the
admirable Frame and Fabric of the World, and set apart some time for the
Contemplation of the wonderful Works both of Creation and Providence; these
will afford such plain Evidence and Demonstration of a Deity, that it is scarce
possible for the most profligate Person, that will consider, to overlook them.
I have already showed you the vain Attempts of the Atheist, in going about to
solve the Phoenomena of the World without a Supreme Being, either by affirming
that it had no beginning, or that it had its beginning from Chance, or Fortune,
both which are attended with such Absurdities, as are too gross for any, but an
Atheists Faith to swallow; for which way soever we turn our selves, we meet
with the plain Prints and Footsteps of a Deity.

If we look upward, the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy Works; those glorious Luminaries of Heaven, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, which by their constant Influences cherish and enlighten the World,
mind us of that great Father of Lights, that placed them there; the exquisite
Order, Beauty, and steady Revolution of those Heavenly Bodies, which come forth
like a Bridegroom out of their Chambers, and rejoice as a Giant to run their
Course, are so many daily and Ocular Demonstrations of a Supreme Being, that
first set, and still continues them in motion.

If we look down upon the Earth, and behold the admirable Frame, Order, and
Contrivance of all things in it, we may plainly see that of the Apostle
verified, that God has not left himself without witness; every Creature
bearing their Testimony, and directing our Contemplation to him.

If we take a view of our selves, and behold the curious Needle Work and
Contexture of our Bodies, we may see there the Finger of a God; and with the
Psalmist break out in admiration of the infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
our Creator; to which, if we add the consideration of the wonderful Frame and
Faculties of the Soul, we may see the Image and Superscription of our Maker so
visibly stamped on it, that any considering Man may know whose it is, and whence
it came.

If we go lower, to the Creatures subjected to Man's Dominion, we shall find
the Birds of the Air singing forth the Praises of their Maker, the Fish of the
Sea declareing the Wonders of the Deep; and all the Beasts of the Field, so
many Heralds and Instruments of his Honor. Yea, if we descend to the lowest
rank of Creatures, and behold the Herbs, the Grass, and the Flowers of the
Field, we shall find Divinity almost visibly Imprinted there; the Beauties of
the Rose and the Lilly, which without any toil or spinning are arrayed in that
natural gayety and bravery, that exceeds all the costly Attire of Solomon, are
plain Instances of the Wisdom and Care of a Heavenly Father, who thus clothes
the grass of the field, and provides so wonderfully for all his Creatures.

These are noble Subjects for our Meditation; in which we are admirably
assisted by a late Learned Discourse (of Dr. Pelling) concerning the Existence
of God, wherein the ingenious Author has so excellently displayed the abstruse
Mysteries of Nature, and the Wonders both of Creation and Providence, as is
sufficient for ever to silence and baffle all the Attempts of Atheism: And
therefore I shall add no more on this pleasant Subject, but refer you to it.

Thirdly, To prevent this Evil of Atheism, let us hearken to the voice of
Conscience speaking within us, and beware of stifling the notices or good
motions of it: If we turn our Eyes inward, and consult our own breasts, we
shall find something there that secretly tells us when we do well, and when we
act amiss; when we do that which is meet, right, and our bounden Duty, we find
a calm and serenity upon our Mind, that chears it with unexpressible delight
and satisfaction: When we do what we ought not, we find something within that
does reprehend and fly upon us, yea, and gaul us too with remorse and anguish;
insomuch that there is none, how wicked soever, but finds sometimes a
Reluctance in his Spirit against bad Actions, even when his corrupt Passions,
Designs, and Inclinations draw him most strongly to them.

Now this proceeds from the secret calls and whispers of Conscience, which is a
kind of Deputy set up in every Man's breast, to preserve the Memory and Fear of
a Deity: And therefore, we are to take heed how we despise the Calls and
Admonitions hereof, for this will lead to a seared Conscience, and that to
Atheism.

Fourthly, To avoid this Evil, we must (as much as possible) avoid all
Atheistical Discourse and Company, for these are too apt to infuse bad
principles into men's minds, and to instill even the poison of Atheism: Custom
you know and Company have a mighty influence upon Mankind, and always leave
either good or bad impressions behind them: if we converse with wise men,
Solomon tells us, we shall learn Wisdom; we shall be benefitted by their
Discourse and Example, and as one Coal kindles another, so we may receive heat
and warmth from their Piety and Devotion: but if we delight in the Conversation
of loose and vain Persons, we shall learn their practices, and insensibly lose
the very Principles of Religion; corrupt Communication naturally tends to
corrupt good manners; frequent swearing and cursing take off from the Reverence
that is due to the Divine Majesty, and the lewd Talk and Example of bad company
gradually wear off all impressions of Virtue: Vice is infectious, and
communicates its venom and malignity to such as come near it, and therefore we
are to keep at a distance from it, and to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

Fifthly, To be armed against Atheism, we must labor to be well grounded in
the Principles of Religion, and not to take up our Faith upon Trust without
Examination. A Tree (you know) that is not well rooted, is liable to be shak'd
with every wind; and such as are not well-grounded in their Religion, are
easily tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine: He
that for want of instruction is unable to give a Reason of the Faith that is in
him, will be as unable upon any assault to give any Reason why he should keep
it; and such as take up their faith only upon trust, will be as ready to lay it
down again, when a strong temptation calls for it.

If you observe it, it is the uncatechiz'd and ill-instructed part of Mankind,
that fall into irreligion, and are carried captive by infidelity; such as
these, for want of being well seasoned in time with pious and sound Principles,
have nothing to hold them; so that as they grow up, if their Temper be Sanguine
and Jolly, they fall into Lewdness and Debauchery; if more sour and melancholy
they fall into Phanaticism and Divisions; and both, though going different ways,
meet at last in the Center of Atheism: Again,

Men's shifting of Principles, for want of steadiness in Religion, and varying
from sound and received Doctrines, is undoubtedly a great occasion of Atheism;
for when Men openly relinquish what they have publicly maintained, it makes
many call in Question the Truth of Religion it self, and to think that all
other parts of it have no better grounds than that which they have rejected as
groundless; and though it be unjust in any to take this offense, yet it is no less
unsafe for any to give it. Wherefore,

Sixthly, To prevent this Evil, we must beware of being seduced or drawn into
Sects or Parties, for this has begotten that giddiness and instability, that
has shak'd the Faith of many, and unawares led them into Atheism.

Religion has its Name from binding, and its chief Design is to keep Men firm
to their Duty to God and Man; now the relaxing of this Bond, lets Men loose in
both, and that brings on Divisions in point of Worship, and Corruptions in
point of Manners; both which naturally lead to Irreligion and Atheism; and
therefore the Wisdom and Piety of a Nation is best seen in prescribing good
Laws to prevent all looseness and extravagance in both: and as it is the Duty of
Superiors to Countenance a well-establish'd Religion, by encouraging the
Observers, and punishing the Transgressors of it; so is it the unquestionable
Duty of Subjects to keep close to the Rules of it, without corrupting its
Doctrine by Heresy, or breaking its Unity by Schisms and Divisions.

Seventhly, To put a stop to Atheism, we must take care to frequent the solemn
Worship of God, and diligently observe the stated Seasons of public and
private Devotion; the neglect of this has been an unhappy occasion of the
growth of this impiety; for the many pressing Affairs of this World are apt to
crowd in upon our minds, to engross too much of our time and thoughts, and
thereby to beget an utter forgetfulness of God, and the greater Concerns of
another life; to prevent which, God Almighty, to keep up the Remembrance of
himself for our own good, has appointed some solemn Seasons, in which he has
required us to rest from all our worldly Cares and Labors, that we may the
better attend his Worship and Service. Now the observing of these Seasons will
help to take off our Minds from an inordinate pursuit of this World, and fix
them on a better, 'twill recollect our scattered Thoughts, and preserve a due
Sense of Piety and Religion; the public Instructions of those Seasons serve to
awaken and stir us up to our Duty, and our Zeal is increased by the concurrence
and example of each others Devotion; by which means the Sense and Fear of God
is still kept alive in our Minds.

Whereas by a careless neglect of Pulick Worship, God is in a manner excluded
out of all our Thoughts, we become wholly immersed in the Cares and Pleasures
of this Life, and so naturally sink into Atheism and Impiety. So that to
continue sound and serious in Religion, we must carefully frequent the Public
Worship, and be mindful likewise of the Seasons of private and secret Devotion,
for these will withdraw our Minds from sensible Objects, which are too apt to
enveigle us, and lead to the Contemplation of Divine and Heavenly things, by
which alone the Sense of God and Religion can be preserved.

Eighthly, To this we must add the Exercises of a Holy Life, without which the
sense of Religion will insensibly wear off and decay: A Profession of Piety
without Practice, is like a Tree without Fruit, which commonly dies away, or
else is cut down and cast into the Fire; to make a fair show of Religion,
without a suitable Conversation, is but to deny God with the greater Solemnity,
and however such may seem to flatter him with their Lips, they Read a Lecture
of Atheism in their Lives, and cause the Name of God to be blasphemed. And
therefore, that we may not deny God, we must deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live righteously, soberly, and godly, in this present World. These
fruits of righteousness will redound not only to the glory of God, but to the
Credit of Religion, which is best kept alive both in our selves and in others
by this means; the light of such good works will so shine before men, as to
make them glorify God in the day of visitation; Examples are wont to have a
greater force than Precepts; and most Men like Sheep are apt to go rather
quaiter, than qua eundum: And therefore great heed is to be taken to our ways,
that we do not by bad Examples draw any from the Truth, or mis-lead them into
the paths of Error and Wickedness: And as this should be observed by all Men,
so more especially by such as have any higher Station in Church or State, for
these are like a City on a Hill, which lies open to the view of all, their
actions are more visible and exemplary, and leave either a good or bad
influence behind them, which should make them the more wary and circumspect,
that they give no offense, or be unto any an occasion of falling: By this means
we shall banish Atheism, and keep Religion in the World, and thereby at once
adorn our Profession here, and secure the Reward annexed to it hereafter.

Lastly, To cure this Evil, let us often ponder upon the extreme Folly and
Danger of Atheism; the frequent and serious Consideration whereof may help to
fortify our Minds against it, and incline us to hate and abhor so vile an
Enormity.

Now the Atheist's Folly is seen in the badness of his arguing, and his Danger
in the badness of his acting.

Of the former many instances have been given already; to which I shall only
add one more, to wit, That the Atheist, in going about to prove there is no
God, attempts to prove a pure Negative, which all wise Men know to be not only
absurd, but impossible, unless where the Being of a thing implies a
Contradiction; there indeed a Negative may be proved, for it is good Reasoning,
that a thing is not, because it cannot be; but where the Being of a thing is
not impossible, as none ever yet pretended the Being of a God to be; there,
unless our Minds could grasp the Knowledge of all possibilities, and comprehend
all things that are or may be, such Reasoning must be absurd and inconsequent;
for more things have an Existence in Nature, than in our Understanding, and
many things are and may be which we know not of. Again,

The Notion of a God implying a Being that has all possible Perfections, to
deny such a Being is (as one has well observed) to assert a possibility
impossible, which is a flat contradiction. Moreover,

To deny that God is, is in effect to affirm it impossible that he should be;
for Eternity being an Essential and inseparable Perfection of a Deity, he must
have been for ever, or else he cannot be at all; so that if he be not now, he
cannot begin to be, it being absurd to affirm of a Being that has no
beginning, that it may begin to be, which is another of the Atheist's
Contradictions, and shows him guilty of bad Reasoning with a witness.

Neither is the Folly of his arguing more apparent, than the Danger of his
acting: for he throws himself upon the greatest of all Hazards, upon the
greatest of all Uncertainties, which is a matter never enough to be considered
and lamented.

All that the Atheist builds upon, is, that it is somewhat a doubtful Case,
whether there be a God or no, and that Men may do well enough without the
Belief or Fear of him: But who but a Madman would run such a hazard, and stake
down his immortal Soul on such a Peradventure? In all doubtful Cases, a thing
may as well be as not be, and therefore matters are to be well weighed on both
sides, especially if they are of Consequence and unalterable; in which Cases
our Duty and Wisdom is to incline to that side, that has the best Evidence,
and the least Hazards.

Now for the Being of a God there are many weighty and pressing Arguments, and
as much Evidence as can be if he were; against it, there is no proof pretended,
nor is it indeed capable of any; And which way now ought a prudent Man to
determine his assent?

If there be great Conveniences and no Danger on the one side, and if there be
no Conveniences but vast Hazards on the other, it is easy to see on what side
all wise Men ought to incline: If there be no such Being as a God, it is much
for the Convenience of Mankind to believe and act as if there were, for hereby
the public Peace and Order of the World, together with every Man's private
Benefit and Comfort are best preserved; and there can be no inconveniences in
such a Belief, but the casting off a few sensual Lusts, which serve only to
make the present life troublesome and uneasy; and after this life, supposing
there be no other, the good Man will fare as well as any: But if there be a God
and a future state after this, the Conveniences of Religion will infinitely
preponderate, for they that believe and serve him will be eternally happy; and
they that disbelieve or neglect him shall be eternally and irrecorably
miserable.

To conclude all, The Notion of a God being so evident, so weighty and so
received a Truth; being a Principle of Natur^^ ^^ght, and the result of the
Common reason of Mankind; let us make him the daily Object of our Prayers and
Praises, that as we receive Life and Breath and all things from him, so we may
ascribe all to him, and thankfully return him the Glory of all his Mercies; let
us Love, Honor and Obey him in and above all things, whose infinite and
adorable Perfections justly challenge these things from us.

Let us live always in his Fear, and beware of offending him either in Thought,
Word, or Deed.

Let us make him the sole Object of our Trust and Affiance, reposing all our
Confidence in him, and committing our selves to him in well-doing.

In a Word, Let us in all respects demean our selves toward him, as becomes
Creatures to their Creator, paying him the constant Tribute of Religious
Worship that is due to him, and serving him truly all the days of our Life; so
shall we begin our Happiness here by these imperfect Praises, which will be
completed hereafter in the Eternal Fruition and Adoration of him: Which is the
hearty Wish and Prayer of;

SIR, Your Faithful Friend and Servant, A. B.

FINIS.

