Petition of ye City of London to ye Ld Mayor agt ye psent record Sr George
Jefferyes.
My Lord,
WE the Commons of London, in Common Hall Assembled, being deeply sensible,
that many of the Mischiefs and Grievances that we at present groan under, are
occasioned by the Misbehaviour, and irregular Carriages of some of the
principal Officers of this City, particularly of Sir George Jefferies, Knight,
our present Recorder, who, by very confident but false Affirmations, has
endeavored to mislead the Common Council, in Matters of highest Moment: And
also, contrary to the Duty of his Place, and the greatest Trust reposed in him,
has, as we have just reason to believe, frequently made other false
Suggestions and Misrepresentations to his Majesty, of our most Loyal and
Dutiful Actions and Demeanours. And finding, that he has maliciously
contrived, to subvert one of the great Foundations of our English Liberties, by
menacing and threatening Juries, thereby to make them bring in Verdicts, not
according to their Conscience, but his own Will and Pleasure; and discharging
others contrary to Law, before they had completed all the Business for which
they were sworn: as does notoriously appear, by his late and terrible Usage of
the Grand-Inquest of this City, at the Sessions of Peace holden in Guild Hall.
And lastly; That he does frequently affront, and most scurrilously entreat
Witnesses, appearing to give their Testimonies in the several Judicatures,
whereby they many times become affrighted and confounded: Tending to the great
Oppression of his Majesty's Subjects, to the Scandal and Dishonor of the City,
and to the disquieting of the Peace and Unity thereof; to the perversion of
Justice, and dangerous Prejudice of the Publick-Weal of this Kingdom. By which
ill Carriages, and most insolent Behaviors, he has rendered himself most
obnoxious, and insupportably burdensome in that Office.

We do therefore most humbly pray your Lordship, to consider with your
Worshipful Brethren the Aldermen, of the most speedy and effectual Way that can
be taken, for the immediate removing of the said Sir Geo. Jefferies, from the
Place of Recorder of this City, as a Person dangerous and destructive to the
Public Peace, Unity, and Prosperity thereof: To the end that some other more
fit and honest Person, learned in the Laws, of known Loyalty, Modesty,
Integrity, and undoubted Zeal for the true Protestant Religion, may be Elected
into the same: Which, We humbly conceive, may be the best and most expedient
Means, conducing to the Remedy of these Mischiefs, and Preservation of the good
Government of this renowned City.

12. Octb. 1680/

