MOTIVES AND REASONS For Dissevering from the Church of Rome And her DOCTRINE.

By Chr. Musgrave, after he had lived a Carthusian MONK for Twenty Years.

Wherein, after the Declaration of his Conversion, he opens diverse
Absurdities practiced in that Church, being not Matters of Report, but such
things whereof he was an Eye and Ear Witness.

LONDON, Printed for John Harefinch in Mountague-Court in Little-Britain. 1688.

Licensed, March 28 th 1687.

To the Most Reverend FATHER in GOD, HIS GRACE, The Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England.
MOst Reverend and Gracious Father in God: Notwithstanding that in a Public
Audience, I have renounced the Church of Rome and her Doctrine, and declared my
self most willing to embrace all and every Article of the Church of England,
because I could not at that time so fully open and lay down the Motives and
Grounds of my Conversion as I intended, I promised to explain my self more
amply, not only to that Audience, but also unto the whole World, by putting my
Motives forth in Print. Having therefore in some sort discharged my Promise, by
collecting, though not all, yet the chiefest of my Motives, and foreseeing not
only what sharp Censures, but also what great Opposition these my poor
Endeavors must sustain, and considering that a weak Body has need of a strong
support, presuming upon your Grace's favor, I thought it most convenient to
dedicate these my first Fruits unto the High Priest: Not only to the end that
this small Treatise might with more security present it self both to Foes and
Friends under your Grace's Protection, but also that the oblation of this small
Mite might satisfy for some part of the great Obligation and Duty I owe unto
your Grace, and moreover be a Testimony of my most humble Affection and dearest
Respect. Thus most humbly desiring your Grace's gracious and favorable
Countenance, and beseeching the Lord of Heaven long to protect and preserve
your Grace in all Health and Happiness, to his Honor and the Comfort of his
Church,

I rest, Your Grace's most humble Servant, Christopher Musgrave.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. COntaining the manner of his Conversion. CHAP. II. Containing the
first Motive of dislike of the Church of Rome and her Doctrine. CHAP. III.
Concerning the Oppression of Inferior Religious Men by Superior, amongst
Carthusians. CHAP. IV. Containing the dislike taken from the Point of
Transubstantiation. CHAP. V. Concerning abuses committed in Auricular
Confession. CHAP. VI. Concerning diverse other Points, as of Prayer for the
Souls in Purgatory, of Purgatory it self, Tradition, and such like.
MOTIVES and REASONS For Dissevering from the CHURCH of ROME And her DOCTRINE.
CHAP. I. Containing the manner of his Conversion.
WE read in the ninth of Saint John's Gospel, that when Christ by his
Omnipotency had opened the Eyes of a Man that was born blind, not only his
Neighbors, and the Vulgar sort, but also the Pharisees themselves, were very
desirous to know in what manner, or by what means Christ did open the blind
man's Eyes: And therefore they asked him that was restored to his sight, John
9.10.
How were thine Eyes opened? And again, in the 26 verse, How opened he thine
Eyes? It being indeed a most strange and admirable thing, yea a Miracle, the
like whereof was never heard since the beginning of the World, John 9.32.
that any Man opened the Eyes of one that was born blind. The man who was
restored to his sight, answered, and said, that a man called Jesus, made Clay,
and anointed his Eyes, and bad him go to the Pool of Syloam and wash; and he
went and washed, and received his sight.

This was a very strange Miracle, and worthy not only of admiration, but also
of all thanksgiving, love and adoration, being indeed a most evident argument
and testimony both of our Saviors Love and Omnipotency. But far more
admirable, far more worthy of Thanks, Love, and Adoration, are the Love and
Power which Christ manifests in opening the Eyes of our Souls, and
illuminating them with the light of his grace; he being sent, as the Prophet
Zachary does testify, Luke 1.
To give Light to them that sit in darkness, to wit, of sin and error. And
therefore, whenever it pleases him, out of his great mercy and goodness, to
illuminate the eyes of a man's Soul who has a long time been blinded with
superstitious Errors, and bring him unto the true Light and Understanding of
his Word: all such as have known, and been acquainted with such a man, may not
only admire, congratulate, and praise God for such a man's Conversion, but also,
may justly demand of him the manner and means of his spiritual illumination.
And because a man's Friends and Neighbors may be of the vulgar and unlearned
sort, for their better satisfaction, they may refer such a man unto the
examination of the Pharisees, whereby the Clergy and most learned may be
understood, that they also may inquire and know, how and by what means the Eyes
of his Soul were opened.

And therefore, since it has pleased Almighty God, of his infinite Love, and
by the powerful operation of his grace, after a long time spent in blind
Superstition, at length to dissipate the dark Cloud of Error, (wherewith the
Eyes of my Soul were darkened,) with the bright-shining Beams of his Grace, to
give satisfaction to all true Protestants, which (I doubt not) do congratulate
with me, and give God thanks for my Conversion; and moreover, to defend my self
from the Calumniations of Papists, whose envy is so great, that they deem me
rather perverted then converted, and to obscure the powerful operation of Gods
Grace, impute my leaving of them and their Doctrine, unto want of Wit, or a
touch of Frenzy, or unto desire and hope of Preferment; I will sincerely and
briefly set down the means and manner of my Conversion.

Thus I answer to such, as out of love desire to know how, and in what manner
the Eyes of my Soul were opened, and also unto such as think and say out of
envy, that the Eyes of my Soul are rather obscured, then any way illuminated;
That a man called Jesus made Clay, and anointed mine Eyes, and said unto me, Go
unto the Pool of Syloam and wash, and thou shall see; and I went and washed,
and do see. And because men may ask of me, what Jesus did unto me, I must
confess, how that after the liking and affection, which (through the weakness
of my Understanding and Judgment at that time) I did take toward the Church of
Rome and her Doctrine, and also that particular Affection and liking unto the
Order of Carthusians, wherein I put my self first to probation, and afterward
tied my self by profession: After some years spent, with as great Zeal and
Industry as I could, (being always desirous, according to my little
Understanding, and penury of time, to search and find out the Grounds and
Reasons of all Ceremonies and Observations,) it being a thing not permitted in
a man's Noviship, lest perhaps coming to understand things aright, he should
alter his mind, and if it were permitted, yet the obligation a Novice has to
learn the Ceremonies and Observations of the Order, which are both many and
very difficult, will not afford a Novice to do any thing else, but only to
dedicate himself wholly to the practice of them, which to do well, will require
three or four years Labor and Industry.

Being freed from that Inconvenience, and stealing time even from that little
time which was limited for rest, to wit, the space of six hours in a Night; I
betook my self to earnest consideration of every thing, wishing and desiring
that it might please Almighty God, to show me the means and way how to attain
unto such knowledge. And he that is always most ready to help such as fly unto
him for Aid, to wit, Jesus, who, according to the Interpretation of his Name,
is the true Shepherd, and Savior of our Souls, vouchsafed to make Clay, and
anoint mine Eyes, by laying a great number of serious Observations before the
Eyes of my Soul, wherewithal my Eyes were not a little dazeled at the first,
until it pleased the same Jesus by the Inspiration of his Spirit to bid me go
to Syloam, indeed a twofold Syloam, one of the Holy Scripture, and the other
of Ancient Fathers, and there to wash my Eyes, and undoubtedly I should by
practice of them be restored to my sight, and understand aright those doubts
and difficulties, wherewithal I was perplexed, and be able to discern Light
from Darkness, and Truth from Falsehood.

And betaking my self to the reading of the Scriptures and ancient Fathers, and
comparing the State of the Primitive Church, with the present State and
Government of the Church of England, and of the Church of Rome, I soon
perceived, how far the Church of Rome had plunged her self into that noisome
puddle of Superstition, and was quite fallen from her wonted Purity (and as I may
term it, Innocence) and now polluted with a multitude of Deformities, which
have sprung from out the roots of Ambition, Avarice, and Hypocrisy.

On the other part I considered, how that our Church of England (howbeit for
many years past, our sins having deserved that scourge, it had adhered unto the
Church of Rome,) had now not only shaken off the Yoke of Superstition, but also
lymphed her self of all those Deformities which any way did stain her ancient
Beauty, and was restored to her former Purity, and Splendour of the Primitive
Church; Mine Eyes being opened, I saw an infinite number of Absurdities, and
how far I my self had been deceived, and into what great danger both of Soul
and Body I had cast my self, by undertaking that course of Life, wherein great
Piety is pretended and prescribed, but great Dissimulation and Hypocrisy
practiced, as I shall briefly with Examples (whereof I have been an eye
Witness) justify.

CHAP. II. Containing the first Motive of dislike of the Church of Rome, and
her Doctrine.
THE first thing that moved me to search and look into the Errors of the Church
of Rome: was the consideration of the great Insufficiency and want of Learning
in many Persons of the Order of Carthusians, there being indeed in most
Monasteries of that Order, diverse admitted, not only to that Order, but also
unto the dignity of Priesthood, which can hardly read, much less understand
their Mass, but to speak or write Latin altogether unable. I could nominate
diverse, both Englishmen and Strangers of this stamp, whose Names for their
honors sake I conceal. But wondering with my self, what should cause Superiors
of that Order to admit such insufficient men, and asking familiarly of some
grave and wise men, what might be the reason, they gave me a twofold reason;
The first, that* Carthusians living a solitary and retired course of Life, and
not going abroad to Preach, and converse amongst Seculars, had not need of any
great Learning. But I answered, that they were bound, both by the Canons of the
Church, and also by their Statutes, to admit none but such as were sufficienter
docti, sufficiently learned.

The policy of Superiors to keep their Places.
The second Answer was, that it was the policy of many Priors in that Order, to
admit simple and unlearned Men to be Monks, to that end, that the Priors
themselves might keep their places of Superiority the longer, and with more
security, whilst there were no Persons sufficiently qualified for to supply
such Places.

This gave me a great distaste: for howbeit I my self was too too presumptuous
in taking the Dignity of Priesthood upon me: nevertheless, I could never endure
that Men more unfit than my self should be admitted, howbeit diverse by shifts
and sleights were admitted, which are not only in respect of their ignorance
burdensome both to themselves and others, but also, according to that saying,
that Learning has no greater enemy than Ignorance: So no men are more envio^
more full of spite, more malicious, and more troublesome, than such blind
Buzzards, which cannot give the definition of a Priest, nor construe three
lines of their Mass.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Oppression of Inferior Religious Men by Superiors
amongst Carthusians.
ANother dislike that I did take, both of the Order of Carthusians, and of the
Church of Rome, did arise from the ordinary Oppression of poor honest-hearted
and zealously-minded Men, howbeit not according to knowledge, I mean of such as
out of a true desire to observe regular Discipline, (being also bound by their
Statutes thereunto) did at any time inform against the dissolute and debaucht
living of their Superiors, such Men, as in respect of their true fervor, and
earnest desire to keep their Order and Statutes, deserved both Love and
Commendations amongst Men of their own Profession, were sure to find all
bitterness and persecution, vsque ad internecionem. And howbeit their
complaints were clariora Luce meridiana, clearer than the Sun, notwithstanding
Sup^^^ours of that Order, one to support another, would make them more obscure
than Darkness it self, and so devise all means possible to oppress their
Inferiors. And hereof I will put down one or two Examples.

Johannes de Sancto Huberto, sometime Vicar of the Carthusian Monastery of
Martins Busse in Flanders, being most certainly informed of many irreligious
actions of his Prior, and amongst other matters, that his Prior had got a Maid
with Child; he being Vicar, thought himself bound in Conscience (as he was
indeed) to inform against his Prior, unto the Superiors of that Order: and
being desirous to have the Advice of Father Brullot, who had sometime been the
Proctor of Martins Busse, and was dwelling at Lyre, did write unto him: and his
Letter being intercepted, and opened by the Prior of Martins Busse, who
perceived that his Vicar intended to prosecute that business against him, the
Prior sent for the Visitors of that Province, to complain against his Vicar,
how that he had defamed him, by writing such a Letter unto Father Brullot. The
matter came to scanning, and Joannes de Sancto Huberto did produce two Priests
of the same Monastery that gave witness against the Prior. But they were not
accepted by the Visitors, and both the Vicar and the other two religious men
were censured by the Visitors to be imprisoned for defaming of their Prior, and
the Vicar and one of the two were both put in Prison, but the third was not,
because a Canon of Gant, who was his Kinsman, did write a very threatening
Letter unto the chief Visitor, warning him not to meddle with his Cousin, nor
to punish him any way, because, if so be that he should do it, he would easily
prove that business, whereof the Prior was accused, to be true, both to the
Visitors and Priors shame, and ignominy of the whole Order.

Notwithstanding the Prior was borne out by the Visitor, and the poor Vicar
being innocent, was cast into Prison, and lost his place; and the Visitor (whom
otherwise I did know to be a very honest man, yet at that time and in that
business dealing not honestly) being demanded by a Friend, wherefore he did so
much oppress the Vicar? his answer was, Propter honorem Ordinis, to save the
Honor and Reputation of their Order; Thinking it better to offend God, by
violently oppressing a poor honest man, then that the abuses and absurdities of
that Order (which indeed is accounted most strict and holy in outward show,
howbeit full of secret and hidden sins from the sight of men, though not from
the Eyes of God) should be manifested and made known unto the World. And thus
much I can say and justify upon my Conscience, that Father Anthony a Fine, who
had been twenty years Prior of the Carthusian Monastery of Lyre, and died Vicar
of the same House, did tell me the Woman's Name (to wit, Petronilla,) which had
that Child by the Prior of Martins Busse.

Again, Johannes Briall, being instituted Prior of the Carthusians of Liege,
after a year or two of his Residency, gave himself unto all lasciviousness of
living, and especially to continual Feastings and Banquetings, in so much that
many complaints were made of him unto the Visitors, and also unto the General
of the whole Order. And I being then at Liege, and seeing his bad and
irreligious Life, was much offended and scandalized, and so much the more, in
respect that the Prior having been professed in great Carthusia, which is the
chiefest House of the whole Order, and where regular Discipline is most
strictly observed, was expected to be most exemplar, and proved most debauched
and irregular, making no more scruple of Drunkenness, then as if it had been no
sin at all.

He continuing in this course, and presuming altogether upon the favor of the
General, had danted all the Monks of that House, that, except one, few there
were that durst write or complain against him, because they had no hope to
obtain Justice. At length I my self did inform against him unto the General,
and did urge the business so far, that the General sent a Commission unto the
Prior of Gant, being then newly instituted Visitor of that Province, that he
should come to examine the business and do Justice. But Jacobus Dionysii, for
that was his Name, being a most corrupt man both in Body and Mind, (and being
himself in danger to lose his place, because he had been accused by his Vicar
for frequenting of Bawdy-houses at Midnight, when as he should have been at
Mattens with his Monks,) to get favor at the Generals hands by favoring the
Prior of Liege, whom he knew very well to be much respected by the General,)
coming to Liege to examine the business, would not examine any such as he
thought would truly and justly give Testimony against the Prior, but by his own
Authority would give sentence for the Prior against me, howbeit both my self
and others had been Eyewitnesses of the Priors often Drunkenness, and that
great notice was taken in the City of the Priors misbehaviour in that point, as
a Proctor of Liege, Brother-in-Law unto Father Henry Christian, a Monk of that
Monastery, did with great grief of Mind certify and tell him of.

Besides, the Popes Nuntio, having heard of that Priors bad Life, was ready, by
the Popes Authority, to have deposed the Prior from his Office; notwithstanding
the General and the Visitor did so much and so long support him, that he became
shameless, quia peccator cum in profundum venerit, contemnit, and in fine, did
fall into such gross and enormous, yea, indicibilia peccata, sins not to be
nominated, that he was glad to fly, and leave both the Monastery of Liege and
also his Priorship. Howbeit, that before not only my self, but also Johannes
Aucelinus, and Peter Latermius, both Priests and Monks of that House, had been
much oppressed and punished for writing and complaining of his wicked and most
unchristian Life. These are the proceedings of that holy Order wherewithal the
Eyes of the whole are blinded, the Superiors being for the most part both
Licentious and Covetous, and the Inferiors Envious and Contentious.

CHAP. IV. Containing the dislike taken from the point of Transubstantiation.
FOrasmuch* as the things before mentioned spectant mores, and non fidem, are
matters of Manners, and not of Faith, to give and manifest the reasons and
motives that moved me to alter my Opinion in matters of Faith, I must
acknowledge, that finding such deformity of Manners and Conversation even in
the firstborn and fairest Flowers of the Church of Rome; I was much afraid,
and not a little danted, fearing that I had built my House upon the Sand, and
not upon a Rock, and that the Tree that bears such rotten fruit, must of
necessity be rotten at the root; I mean, that the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome could hardly be Authentical, seeing that the Conversation of her holiest
Children was so Diabolical.

And upon this fourth Consideration I began to reflect upon those points of
Controversy, wherein we and the Church of Rome do most differ and dissent; And
beginning with the point of Transubstantiation, howbeit the Papists are not
ashamed to affirm, that the true Church has always taught, that as soon as the
Priest has pronounced the words of Consecration, that the former substance of
Bread and Wine is changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, so that no other
substance remains but only Christ's Body and Blood, the accidents remaining
without a Subject; both Scripture it self, and also the use of the Primitive
Church, and Opinion of the most ancient Fathers do contradict this Opinion: for
in Scriptures we find, Mat. 26.29. Mark. 14.25.
that even after that blessing which Christ himself gave over the Bread and
Wine, he termed it the Cup of the New Testament. And also it is most different
from the Doctrine of ancient Fathers: for St. Augustine in his Book de Doctrina
Christiana, Liber tertius, cap. 16. says, that these words, Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, etc. are a Figure, commanding us
to partake of the Passion of Christ, and profitably to remember that his flesh
was crucified for us; according as Christ himself warned his Disciples, saying,
Do this in remembrance of me; And St. Chrysostom, ad Cesarium Monachum, says,
Bread, before it be sanctified, we call Bread, but when the Divine Grace
sanctifies it, it is delivered from the name of Bread, and it is thought worthy
the name of the Lords Body, though the Nature of Bread remain still. Dialog, in
mutat. and Dialog inconfusus.
This is Theodorets Opinion, who says, that the mystical signs, after
Consecration, do not depart from their Nature, but abide in their former
substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched as before: And
moreover, this Opinion is so far dissonant and differing from the Opinion of
the Primitive Church, that it is generally confessed, that before the Lateran
Council, about four hundred years ago, no man was bound to believe it, as
Tonstall in his Book de Veritate Corporis and Sanguinis Christi, says, that
before that time it was free for all men to follow their own conjecture, as
concerning the manner of the real presence. And also Byel and Scotus, two
ancient Schoolmen (as Swarez does affirm in his 3. Tom. distinct. 5. and also
Sotus in his 4. book, distinct. 9. q. 2. art. 4. does affirm) did hold this
Opinion to be very new and lately brought into the Church, and believed only
upon the Authority of the Laterane Council. And Peter Lumbard was so far from
being of this Opinion, which the Church of Rome now holds, that in his fourth
Book of Sentences, distinct. 2. he says of himself, If it be demanded what
manner of Conversion this is, whether it be formal or substantial, or of
another kind, I am not able to define. Finding therefore this difference
betwixt the Church of Rome and the Primitive Church, yea betwixt the Church of
Rome and Christ himself in this point, I thought it more secure for my Souls
health, to adhere unto the Opinion of him that cannot err, then unto the
Opinion of Pope Innocent the third, upon whose Shoulders our new Opinionists,
in this point, are glad to lay their Burden: having no other warrant for their
novelty, but a poor sinful man's Authority, who to make himself great, is not
ashamed to derogate from Christ's Authority, and Exposition in this point, who
tells us, that so often as we eat or drink of this Bread or Wine, we shall do
it in remembrance only of him, feeding on him in our Hearts by Faith, with
Thanksgiving; telling us in the sixth of John, verse 36. The Flesh profits
nothing; it is the Spirit that quickens. And under correction, I would demand
of a Papist, whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was instituted for the
feeding of our Souls, or of our Bodies, or of both? Now if they answer, That it
was instituted for feeding and nourishing of both, or of the Soul especially,
then they must confess a thing most contrary to their own Tenants; that is,
That the Body and Blood of Christ is spiritually in the Sacrament to feed the
Soul, and not substantially to feed the Body, because the Soul of man being a
Spiritual substance, cannot feed upon corporal food, which must needs follow,
if so be that the Body and Blood of Christ be corporally in the Sacrament.

Now again, that it is only a Spiritual, and not a Corporal food, to feed the
Soul, and not the Body, Christ himself insinuates in the sixth of John, verse
51. saying, I am the Bread of Life which came down from Heaven; if any man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever: which is meant of the Life of the Soul,
we being almost certain that this our corruptible Body must be dissolved, and
cannot live for ever, but so far as at the day of Judgment it shall participate
with the Soul of perpetual Joy, or of perpetual misery, sustaining in the
interim a dissolution; because, according to our Bodies, Earth we are, and into
Earth we must return again. And therefore to preserve our corporal Life, we
need not the Food of the Body and Blood of Christ, we have other material and
natural Food sufficient. And to feed our Souls therewith, we cannot eat it
corporally, but only spiritually by Faith, the Soul of man being incapable of
any corporal Food.

And again, if so be that the Body and Blood of Christ be corporally in the
Sacrament, we cut off one Article from our Creed, wherein we Confess that
Christ sits at the right Hand of God: for he being with a true natural Body
upon the Altar (as the Papists hold) is not sitting at the right hand of his
Father in his Humanity. But because we believe that he is ascended into Heaven,
and sits at the right Hand of his Father in his Humanity, we must also
believe that he is only spiritually in the Sacrament by his Omnipotency.

And out of one absurdity they infer another; for by holding that Christ's Body
and Blood is corporally in the Sacrament, they make that which is no Sin to be
Sin, defining, that if so be that by any accident or misfortune, a Priest
should let a consecrated Host fall, or shed any of the consecrated Wine, it is
a mortal Sin, be it never so much against your will. Now how absurd this is, I
refer both my self and others unto the Judgment of Saint Augustine, who says,
that Omne Peccatum est voluntarium, and adeo voluntarium, quod nisi esset
voluntarium, non esset peccatum; that is, that every sin (understanding actual
sin) must be voluntarily, that is committed. This consideration concerning this
point of Transubstantiation, was a great motive unto the alteration of my
Profession.

CHAP. V. Concerning Abuses committed in Auricular Confession.
ANother motive of dislike of the Church of Rome and her Doctrine, did arise
from the consideration of those manifold absurdities and abuses committed under
the color of Auricular Confession: It being a thing which the Church of Rome,
without any warrant of Gods Word, and quite contrary to the practice of the
Primitive Church, has taken up at her own hand. For first of all, to prove
that they have no warrant of Scripture for it, their own Canon Law in the 5.
distinct. de poenitentia, in the Gloss says, that Auricular Confession was
taken up only by a certain Tradition of the Church, and not by any Authority of
the Old or New Testament. And Petrus Oximensis, sometime Divinity-Reader at
Salamanca, many years ago, publicly taught, that Auricular Confession had the
beginning from a positive Law of the Church, and not from the Law of God; of
the same mind was Bonaventure, Medina, and others.

And to prove that the Primitive Church did not use it, both Erasmus in his
Annotations ad Hieron. de obitu Fabiol: and Rhenanus in his Annotations, ad
Tertul. de poeniten. (being both at that time learned Papists,) did affirm,
that neither Christ did ordain Auricular Confession, neither the ancient Church
used it, which is confirmed by the act of Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople,
Historia Tripar. lib. 9. cap. 35. Socra. li. 5. cap. 9. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 16.
who, as the threefold History does testify, when as auricular Confession did
first begin to creep in, put it down in his Church, and all the Bishops of the
East did the like in theirs, as being not only a Novelty, but also in their
Judgments, so far from being a sovereign Medicine for Sin, Niceph. lib. 12.
cap. 28.
(as some men hold it,) that it was found rather to be a Nurse of sin, Churches
being converted into Stews, Confession playing the Pander unto the Priest and
his Penitents, there to parle, and consult, I mean, under Confession, how to
effect and practice their carnal Affections and Designs: which indeed was the
chiefest thing that moved Bishop Nectarius to thrust it out of Constan^inople,
to prevent such wickedness, as by a woeful experience of a Gentlewoman that was
ravished, he ^und to be practiced.

And I can speak upon my own knowledge, thus much: That I have not noted any
thing that has opened a wider gate or way unto sin, than Auricular Confession.
My Reason is this; First, that many care not what they do or say, think it
sufficient (be they never so great swearers, slanderers, or blasphemers, or
whatsoever actual sins they commit) to go once a year to Confession: and
moreover, most Villainies and Conspiracies, which are either intended or
practiced against either Princes or Countries, (some whereof I could specify
in particular, if so it might be well taken) are for the most part opened and
consulted upon in Confession: for Men not daring to open such things out of
Confession, and being desirous to have advice and direction in them, propound
such businesses in Confession, and then under pretense of confessing their
sins, they maliciously consult how to effect and practice their sinful purposes.

And besides that experience which I my self have had of these things in that
time that I heard Confessions, but only amongst a handful of primest r^ligious
Men (so reputed) amongst whom in their daily Confessions, I found continual
plotting and practicing of Inferiors against their Superiors, and such as
were in any office, and of Superiors against their Inferiors, how to quit and
rid themselves of such religious Men as they found to be zealous. Biel, in his
Canon: lect. 77. says of his time, that it was an usual thing for Men and
Women to turn their Confessions into Babblings and Curiosities, mingling
profane talk concerning vile things. Now besides these absurdities, and
notwithstanding that there is no warrant of Scripture for it, neither was any
use of it in the Primitive Church: there be diverse, and those very Learned,
that hold it not necessary at all. Page 256. edit. Venit. 1603.
And amongst others, Michael Bonon, in his Exposition upon the 29 th Psalm
says, that seeing Justification is the infusion of Grace, whereupon sin is
remitted, it follows, that Confession is not necessary either for the
obtaining of Pardon for our sins, or for our Justification; for, according to
the true order of things, Confession in time follows Contrition; and
therefore seeing Contrition it self is not without Justification, the said
Justification may be had without Confession; of this mind is Cajetan. Tom. 3.
q. 8. art. 4. saying, That a man truly contrite and sorrowful for his sins,
stands clean in the Judgment of God, and is a formed member of the Church
Militant. And Peter Lumbard, in his fourth Book, Distinct. 18. and diverse
others with him, hold, that the Priest has no power to forgive sin, or to work
any spiritual effect by virtue of the Keys, which is the Tenent of our Church
of England, (which not disallowing Confession upon just occasion,)
notwithstanding holds, that the Priest cannot give the penitent any spiritual
Grace, neither absolve him otherwise, then declare the penitent, upon his true
Contrition to be absolved, through the Mercies and Merits of Jesus Christ. This
Consideration of the little necessity men have of auricular Confession, and
likewise of the great Abuses and Absurdities committed under Confession, was a
great motive to withdraw my Affection from the Church of Rome.

CHAP. VI. Concerning diverse other Points, as of Prayer for the Souls in
Purgatory, of Purgatory it self, Tradition, and such like.
MAny other Motives to dislike the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, did offer
themselves unto the Eyes of my Soul, the which I will only briefly set down,
without any long Discourse, lest I should offend the Reader with Prolixity.
Another Motive did arise from the absurdity of that Tenent of the Church of
Rome, which teaches and commands to pray for the Souls in Purgatory, having
no warrant of Scripture for it, neither being able to prove by Scripture, or by
Tradition, that there is any Purgatory at all; for Baronius, in the first
Volume of his late written History, going about to patronize Prayer for the
Souls in Purgatory, out of the second Book of Maccabees, chap. 12. verse. 43.
which is Apocrypha, he infers to prove Purgatory, saying, that since the
Church has admitted Prayer for the Dead, there must of necessity be a
Purgatory, otherwise, it were to no end to pray for the Dead. But to warrant
this Doctrine either of Purgatory, or Prayer for the Dead, he has only this to
say, 1 Vol. Annal.
Pie creditur traditum esse ab Apostolis, that is, it is a charitable belief
that the Church has this Doctrine by Tradition from the Apostles.

And after that I began to reflect upon Tradition, especially finding in the
fourth Session of the first Council of Trent, chap. 1. that the Church of Rome
does equalize Tradition with Holy Scripture, and that Baronius in his late
written History, is not ashamed to prefer it before Scripture, saying, An. 53.
Videas quanti ponderis sit ipsa Traditio, ut ex ipsa Novi Testamenti scripta
omnia Authoritatem acceperint; Consider, says he, of what force and authority
Tradition is, seeing that the New Testament is authorized by it. And it
follows, Traditio fundamentum Scripturarum, in eoque istas excellunt, quod
illae nisi Traditione firmentur, non subsistant, hae vero etiam sine scriptis
suam obtineant firmitatem, that is, the ground or foundation of Scripture is
Tradition, and herein does excel it, because Scripture cannot stand without
Tradition, but Tradition can stand without Scripture. Looking upon the Opinion
of Ancient Fathers touching this point, I found that Basil the Great, an
Ancient Greek Author, writes to this effect: Regul. Contrac. 95.
It is necessary and consonant to Reason, that every man learn that which is
needful out of Scripture, both for the fullness of Godliness, and lest they be
inured to humane Tradition. Where, out of this one man's Opinion, a man may
sufficiently gather, that Tradition in the Primitive Church was of small
Reputation, but rather suspected as an Invention to subvert true Religion; for
when as the Church of Rome began to vary from the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church, and to bring in these Points of Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead,
Auricular Confession, Pardons, Plenary Indulgences, Praying to Saints,
Hallowing of Beads, Medals, Crosses, Agnus Deis, and such like Fooleries, which
are mere humane subtle Inventions, arising from the avarice and ambition of the
Clergy, which by these means glean the common People, and pick their Pockets,
under pretended Piety, whilst they make them pay so much for every Pardon, so
much for Masses that are said or sung for the Dead, give this or that to the
Church for to have an Annual or Anniversary Mass for themselves and their
Friends, and entice men to buy hallowed Medals, Crosses, Agnus Deis, and such
like, persuading them, that laying such hallowed things upon an Altar where
Mass is said or sung, they shall deliver a Soul out of Purgatory; Having no
warrant of Scripture for any such thing, but only their Tradition, depriving
indeed the Laity of the use of Scripture; yea, and from reading of any Books
whatsoever that do not agree with their Doctrine and Discipline, impose upon
them the Yoke of Tradition; and by this means keep them not only in blindness
of Conscience, but also in slavish Obedience, it being, as they teach, Anathema
for any man to contradict or reject whatsoever the Church shall impose or
enjoin under the Title of Tradition, it being indeed the chiefest and strongest
Pillar they have to support their Positions; insomuch that Andradius speaking
of Tradition, says, Orthodox. explicat* lib. 2.
Quam Traditionum Authoritatem si tollas, nutare jam and vacillare videbuntur,
that is, many points of the Romish Faith would reel, if they were not supported
by Tradition. The due Consideration of this point, bred a great distaste in my
Soul; and no less dislike I took of Romish Doctrine and Discipline, when I
began to consider the great Ambition of that Church, which is so far gone from
the Humility of the Primitive Church, that whereas in former times the Bishops
of Rome lived in great Humility, Patience, and Poverty, attending unto that one
thing which is most Necessary; and before the time of Constantine the Great,
and many years after, were so far from assuming any secular Authority upon
them, that without the Emperors favor and assent, no man was admitted to be
Bishop of Rome; now are so far gone from the path of Humility, that they sit
upon the Pinnacle of Arrogance, assuming more Authority by many degrees both
spiritually and temporally, then ever Christ gave unto his Apostles, or unto
Peter, whose Successors they challenge themselves to be; insomuch that as
before, no man could be Bishop of Rome without the Consent of the Emperor, so
now, no man can be Emperor but by the assent of the Pope, otherwise he shall
be excommunicate; yea, and the Pope is now of that Authority, or at the least,
takes so much Authority upon him, that he makes no scruple to depose
Emperors and Kings, and to dispense with Subjects for withdrawing their
Allegiance from their true and natural Princes, which are any way opposite unto
the Church of Rome. These things are sufficiently known both by Ancient and
Modern Histories, which mention both Ancient and Modern Examples to this effect.

Again, reflecting upon the bad behavior and living of Romish Priests, it did
breed a great distaste in my Conscience, to consider how Priests, which, as
they hold, have vowed Chastity, lie wallowing in the sordid puddle of Lust. And
if any man shall think or imagine that I speak out of spleen, and not of
sincerity, I could refer him for proof hereof, unto the very Place, a great and
populous City of theirs, wherein he is not accounted a Noble and Worthy
Gentleman that is not descended from a Priest, either secular or religious, the
most part of that City being descended from Priests; such is the Incontinency
of that Place. And not only there, but also in all other places it is a common
practice of Churchmen, under the pretense of keeping spiritual Daughters, to
keep damned and common Courtezans, or else make little or no scruple at all to
frequent dishonest Houses; as a little before my coming away from Macline, a
Priest at Brussels did verify, by going in the Nightime to a dishonest
House, and missing the Door, went unto a wrong House, where knocking at the
Door, the good Wife came to open it, and seeing the Priest, told him that he
was deceived, and that that House was not a House of that quality he took it to
be. The Priest for anger drew his Knife upon the Woman, which had a Child in
her Arms; the Woman crying out, her Husband came in, and reprehended the
Priest, whereupon the Priest cut him with his Knife quite over the Belly, and
hurt both the Woman and the Child. Many such Examples might be produced both of
seculars, and religious Priests and Nuns.

The due consideration of these things, and of many more, of which I cannot now
intend to discourse; as also the daily reading of the Scriptures and Ancient
Fathers, together with the assistance of Gods Grace, restored me to sight
again, which through my own Folly I had lost. And when I clearly perceived how
far I had done amiss, not only by assenting unto the Church of Rome, but also
by betaking my self unto such a course of Life as that was; I was wonderfully
sorry, and much afflicted in Conscience, most willing, if Opportunity had
served, to have given over all, and retired my self unto my Mother Church; only
the Consideration of my Profession did somewhat daunt me, thinking that I
should be accounted an Apostata; until it pleased the Lord to send me this
Resolution, that an undiscreet Vow is better broken then kept, especially when
it tends to the endangering of a man's Soul.

And because some may ask of me, wherefore I did not consider these things at
the first, in the time of my Probation, I must answer as I did in the
beginning, That in the time of a man's Noviceship, he is so much employed in
learning the Ceremonies and Observations of that Order, that he has no time
vacant to look after other matters; and besides, he is not permitted to read
any Books, but such as the Prior and his Master shall appoint; which commonly
are Books fit only to nuzzle a man in blind Devotion, not to instruct him in
Matters of Religion. Having therefore lived a long time in great Perplexity,
and not finding any comfort or rest of Conscience in that Sea of Disquiet and
Perturbation, I resolved with Noe's Dove, to return unto my Mother Church, the
which by Gods good Assistance I have obtained, unto the great comfort of my
Soul; and do with all my Heart embrace all and every Article of the Church of
England, being most ready, according to my Ability, to impend all the Power and
Strength both of my Soul and Body, yea, and my dearest Blood, for the Assertion
and Promotion of them, desiring and wishing no greater Blessing at Gods Hands,
but that I may be found worthy and able (though in the meanest degree) to do
God and my Sovereign Service in the Ministry.

FINIS.

