A RATIONAL PRACTICE OF Chyrurgery: OR, Chyrurgical Observations Resolved
according to the Solid FUNDAMENTALS OF TRUE PHILOSOPHY.

By JOHN MVYS, Doctor of Physic in ARNHEIM.

In Five DECADES.

LICENSED, November. 12, 1685. Rob. Midgley.

LONDON: Printed by F. Collins for Sam. Crouch, at the Flower-de-Luce at the
Corner of Popes-head-Alley in Cornhil. 1686.

The Spirit Divine is an Alkaly Stout
which Conquers the D -- the World throughout.


TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe following Treatise of Chyrurgick Observations coming casually to my hand,
and finding it pathetical to what my proper Genius has of late years led me
to, I could not let it pass without an English Dress, that thereby all those
that are born with a Genius fit to understand Reason (though not instructed in
the Latin Tongue) may have the advantage of perusing the Judgment of another
harmoniously concurring with theirs. For it has not seldom happened that many
good Apprehensions of things have been quickened, and Midwifed into the World by
such Publications as these of our Author, which (otherwise) would never have
seen the Light; but have died and perished with the Womb in which they were
conceived.

That the following Observations are (in my Judgment) likely to prove
serviceable to my Native Country, appears plainly by this my Undertaking: For I
doubt not, but that (after perusal) they will be found Consonant to the Reason
and Experience of every Rational, Unbyassed and Unprejudiced Chyrurgeon; but
more especially to such, the Foundation of whose Practice is grounded upon
Reason and Experience only; not upon a Parrotlike, Emperical, and Pore-blind
Doctrine.

In Physic and Chyrurgy the Case is the same, as in Divinity. For there are
some whose Faith is so streight-laced, that if you ask them the Grounds
thereof, their Answer will be; They believe as the Church believes; and so
there is an end of the Argument. But others there are who are not contented with
this Implicit Faith, their Religion being grounded on right Reason and
Experience. Such is the true Chyrurgeon, that makes not the least Application
to any part or Member of the Body, but can give a Reason Anatomically (or
distinctly) why and wherefore, he does the same: otherwise he deserves not so
much as the Name of a Surgeon.

But that this Author was a true Medico-Chyrurgeon, is plainly apparent by his
curiously delineated Observations, which (I am sure) are neither obscure nor
dark to the Ingenious. For his highly-to-be-commended Doctrine of the power of
Alcalies over Acidums, is of so great use and energy, that all Ingenious
Practitioners will confess (if they have made any Observations on their own
Practice) that there is no Dolor whatsoever, incident to the Body of Man, that
has been by them subdued, but the Remedy thereof has been of an
Alcalic-nature; it being apparent to all genuine Artists, that Diseases
generally take beginning from Darkness, Anger, Terror, or Madness, from which
all Acidums do arise; and that the only means of pacifying these Furies are
Light, Sweet, Soft, Smooth and Friendly Medicaments, the Nature of which is
comprised under that general Word Alcali.

All that I know the Artist has to do, is in the first place to consider and
learn what those things are which fall under his Observation, that are more or
less of an Alcalizate Nature; and secondly, to understand their Power and
Operation on Acidums; that thence he may be ascertained of their true Mixtion
and Dose: as in case of the Loadstone, a piece of a Pound weight of which is
capable to draw and hold fast a piece of Iron of an Ounce or two, but not of a
Pound or two. Even so Errors often happen, not so much in the Medicine it
self, as in the mis-application of the same either in Quality or in Dose.

Thirdly, he should consider the Patient or Accident, or both; for Acidums are
of diverse natures, and therefore require Alcalies equally differing for their
subversion.

In the last place he should likewise consider how to eschew and relinquish all
such things as promote Acidity, and excite Anguish, as generally do Catharticks
too frequently used, Tents and Dorsils in Wounds, making of large Orifices in
Imposthumes, subjecting Wounds and Ulcers to the Air, and all sorts of unctuous
Medicines.

More might here be added, but to avoid Prolixity I forbear, least the entrance
prove too large for the House, concluding with the Authors Apology for what I
have done; only adding that golden Saying of Van Helmont.

Whatsoever thou would do to the Sick, do first to thy self, and in thy
Medicine separate the Pure from the Impure; by which means thou art made a fit
Agent for the Administration of those peculiar Gifts and Endowments of Healing,
granted only to them that are Alchalizated to the Fear of God: Which that we
may all be, is the hearty Prayer of thy real Friend,

J.W.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
IN the solid Judgment of a generous Mind, all the Goods of Fortune are
out-weighed by Truth, which is the true Food of the Soul; which, though most
sweet, and an hundred times tasted of, yet never creates any loathing, as
Corporeal Foods are wont to do; which the sweeter they are, the sooner (if
often eaten) prove displeasant to the Palate.

He that buys Venison of another, and eats the same well and delicately dressed,
does (I confess) conceive and find in his mind a certain Pleasure and Delight.
But he who exercises Hunting himself, follows, pursues, and at length takes an
Heart, Boar, Hare, or other Wild Beast, he is not only delighted, in eating of
the same well dressed; but also (and indeed more especially) is filled with
very great pleasure, whilst he follows the flying Beast, and (after various
labors and difficulties overcome) takes the same.

Even so the matter is with Truth, which indeed (when tasted) is savoury and
grateful to him who receives the same from another; but he who imploys himself
in pursuit of Verity, and in his pursuit at length takes the same, must needs
be filled with greater pleasure in his pursuing and taking it, than when he
feeds upon it.

He who would rightly exercise this hunting of Verity, he ought by serious
Meditation, and an attent Obedience to pure Reason, apply to the Chase, and
warily follow and take the same by Experience. If any Physical or Medicinal
Verities (by me pursued) in all these Five Decades, have fallen into my Nets, I
must needs freely acknowledge them to be obtained by the means aforesaid.

In the four first Treatises I chiefly speak of Simple Cases; but in the Fifth
Decade I proceed to Histories of Affects more compounded. For it seemed good to
me thus to make progression; as in Arithmetic we begin with the number of
Unity, and so are devolved to Numbers very much compounded. After the same
manner in the Mathematick Science, we begin with a Point, and then proceed to a
Circle, Triangle, and other Figures.

How compounded and perilous those Cases are, which I have treated of in the
Fifth Decade, and how badly they are (for the most part) handled by others, I
forbear here to mention, entirely leaving the censure of this matter to the
well-meaning Reader.

But I already seem to hear some of my intimate friends saying to me; Friend,
why do you proceed thus in Writing? Cease, forbear, and bid adieu to your
Studies, by which you can scarcely effect any thing, except it be very great
molestation to your self, from Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and others.

To these I answer: I have not written to satisfy others; for I judge that to
be wholly impossible, seeing the Sacred Volumes which were written by the
Instinct of GOD himself, are traduced by several Impious and wicked men; which
way then shall I that am a mere man, and judge nothing that is Humane alien
from my self, be able to expose any thing to public view, which shall please,
content, and satisfy all?

From what motive then am I induced thus to write? I answer; I had attained to
the Degree of Doctor in Medicine, and was sometimes sent for to Sick Persons;
and, notwithstanding this, in the mean while, I was conscious to my self with
how great Prejudices and Ignorance in the Medicinal Science my Mind was
affected; I was ignorant of many things, and doubted of more. My tender
Conscience daily suggested these Words to me: Either wholly reject the
Medicinal Practice, or with all thy might drive from thee thy own Ignorance,
Either one or the other must be done, if thou intendest to enjoy Tranquillity of
Mind. What could I do, being constituted in such a Labirynth? I turned over and
perused the Books of ancient Physicians, but there found very little that could
satisfy my Mind coveting true knowledge. I familiarly discoursed with the
Chyrurgeons of this Age; but from them I reaped little or no benefit; for they
either could not or would not instruct me. Therefore, urged by extreme
necessity, I was compelled my self to dissipate the Clouds of my own Mind,
remove the Prejudices, with which I was blinded, and become my own Instructor.
And this Instruction of my self is only by me here proposed in my Writing.
This is what according to my Wish I have obtained. No other thing did I promise
my self before, nor do I at this time expect any other.

Wherefore let the Malevolent abstain from their Calumnies, with which (without
cause) they endeavor to blast my Repute. I hurt no man, I offend no man, I
teach my self, I learn of my self, I am Teacher and Learner in the same person,
I am Teacher and Learner of my self. If I be a Physician, it is lawful for me
to heal my own Diseases; and by consequence also my Ignorance and Prejudices,
which are Diseases of the Mind sufficiently perilous, and had already taken so
deep root in my Mind, as it would be great imprudence longer to defer the
Eradication of them.

Therefore take in good part these Five Decades of Chyrurgic Observations,
which (if GOD permit) shall hereafter be followed with mere.

Well-meaning Reader, Thine John Muys.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Physical Dictionary, in which all the Terms relating either to Anatomy,
Chyrurgery, Pharmacy, or Chemistry are very accurately explained. By Stephen
Blanchard M.D. and Physic Professer at Middleburg in Zealand. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Youths Introduction to Trade: Showing them the way of Contracting and Writing
Short most. English Words; Of making Receipts, Releases, Bills of Debt, and
Bills of Parcels, incident to most Trades; with Forms of Apprentices Letters,
in answer to Country-Chapmen on several occasions; with an Appendix of
Arithmetical Questions, very useful and necessary, for a Scholars Practice, by
which they will be enabled to apply their Writing and Arithmetic to business
when they come to serve their Masters, either as Merchants, Shopkeepers, or
other inferior Trades. By John Airs. Price 1 s. Both Printed for S. Crouch at
the Flower-de-Luce in Cornhil.

The CONTENTS.
DECADE. I.
OF an Ophthalmy induced by a Fungus. 1 Of the use of an Issue, and its way of
perating. 6 Of a Gangrene. 12 Of a Sphacelus of the Foot. 16 Of an Erysipelas
of the Leg. 21 Of Varicous Ulcers of the Legs. 23 Of a Wound of the Eye. 34 Of
a Suppurated Tumor and Rotenness of the Bone. 48 Of a Fracture of the
Shin-bone. 61 Of a Dislocation of the Shoulder. 65
DECADE II.
Of the Puncture of a Nerve. 70 Of Dolor of the Head 75 Of the Contracture of
a Tendon, after a Fracture of the Shoulder Bone. 80 Of a Vein cut. 83 Of the
cracking of a Tendon. 88 Of an Haemorrhagia, from a varicous Ulcer of the
Tibia. 90 Of a vast Contusion of the Arm. 92 Of a Ganglion in the Hand. 98 Of a
movable round Tumor of the Lower-lip. 100 Of an affect of the Mouth, vulgarly
called De Water-Kanker. 103.
DECADE III.
Of a Coadnate Tumor of the Forehead. 108 Of an Ulcer with Rottenness of the
Bone. 112 Of a Wound of the Leg inflicted by Gunshot. 118 Of a very strange
Ulcer. 123 Of a vast Tumor of the Neck. 128 Of a wonderful Abscess. 130 Of a
small Stone contained in the Urinary Passage. 133 Of an hard Tumor of the
Abdomen. 138 Of the Scurvey. 140.
DECADE IV.
Concerning the Indisposition of the Gum 144 Of an Ambustion. 147 Of the
Hernia. 151 Of a Suppurated Tumor of the Breast. 157 Of an hard Tumor of the
Breast dissolved. 159 Of a very great Tumor of the Abdomen. 161 Of a Bleeding
Teat. 161 Of an exceeding great dolor of the Ear. 165 Of the Cubit displaced
by Relaxation of the Liments. 168 Of a Gonorrhaea contracted from impure
Contact. 171.
Decade V.
Of a Wound of the Head. 175 Of a Wound penetrating the Thorax. 191 Of a
penetrating Wound of the Abdomen. 205 Of an Artery of the Arm wounded. 218 Of a
Fracture of the Tibia with a Wound. 222 Of a Dislocation of the Talus, or
Ankle-bone, with a Wound. 232 Of a Nose hurt by Winters Cold. 237 Of an
Atrophia; Imbecility of Motion, and an Algor of the Arm. 241 Of the Uvula and
Tonsils evily disposed. 244 Of an Hair-Lip. 246.
John Muys His Rational Practice of SURGERY.
OBSERVATION I.
Of an Ophthalmy induced by a Fungus.

IN the year 1680, on the first day of August, a Boy about Twelve years of Age,
playing with another, received into his Eyes (through the hollow stalk of a
Mully-puff or Fuz-ball, which in the Dutch Idiom is called even boevyst) a Fume
or Dust blown by that other Boy, by which in less than Two hours space his
Eyelids were so swetted, that he could not open his Eyes. His Eyes waxed red
all over, no otherwise than as if they had been covered with a red Cloth, and
so colored did the interior Superficies of his Eyelids also appear; which
Symptoms were attended with very great dolor. The Patient neglected the use of
Remedies for two days, and in the mean while the aforesaid Symptoms increased;
and besides these, there was a continual Flux of sharp Tears.

A thing to be admired indeed, and which I cannot call to mind I have any where
read of. But which way could that Fume excite such horrid Phoenomena's? Answer,
Thus: The Stalk being hollow within, and perforated only with a very small
hole, and also outwardly compressed on every side by the Boys hand, the more
volatile and less cohering Particles; were forced from within outward; but
seeing all those could not at once pass out together, the one urged the other,
and so were driven out far more swiftly: No otherwise than as we see Water
forced out of a Syringe, though the Pistil be but gently (or very slowly)
thrust forwards: or as we discern by an easy compression of the sides of
Bellows, the Air through the Pipe (or Nose) thereof is driven out with very
great force.

But some one may perhaps ask me, of what nature those dusty Particles are? To
him I answer, They are Accido-corrosive, and sharply cutting. That such
Acid-Particles are in this Stalk is sufficiently evident, by the frequent use
thereof in stopping Blood. For when a small part of this Stalk is put into a
sanguiferous Vessel wounded, the Blood is stayed, partly by reason of the
stringy Particles folded one within the other, and closing the Orifice of the
open Vessel; and partly by reason of the Acid-Particles of that hollow Stalk,
which coagulate the Blood, as Milk is coagulated by an Acididity infused.

Therefore these Acid-Particles, with great force driven through the aforesaid
Stalk, deeply penetrated into the Pores of the Eyes, and interior-Superficies
of the Eyelids; and so, with their cutting sides excited the Nervous Fibers
(there dispersed) to a motion more vehement; by which Vehemence the Mind first
perceived the sense of pain, which was augmented by that Distention, which took
beginning thus: The Pores being obstructed by the Particles of that Stalk, the
Vapors wanted their natural Exit, and so were collected within the small Pipes
of the Membranes in the form of Humor, which in a very short time waxed sour,
by reason of the Acid-particles of the said Stalk, acting as a Ferment, no
otherwise than as we see any sour Ferment (taken in a small quantity) to
convert a great mass of Dough into its own Nature.

These Acid-Particles (I say) with the acuteness of their sides, forcibly
striking upon the Nervous-Fibres, drew to those parts a more copious influx of
Animal Spirits than usual; whence arose certain slight Contractions, which
notwithstanding proved sufficient in some measure, to impede the Circulation of
the Blood and Humors, circulating through the small Veins of those circulating
parts. For they were, in this case, helped by the Vapors within the Veins of
those parts converted into Water.

When the Blood contained in the Capillary Vessels, and the Humors in the
Veins were thus stagnized, they likewise (in the aforesaid manner) waxed sour
and were coagulated, and by that means rendered more unapt for Circulation.
Hence it is sufficiently manifest, whence the Redness and Tumor of the Eyes
and Eyelids had their Original.

But whence proceeded that continual efflux of sharp Tears? From the aforesaid,
the true cause thereof is easily gathered, and it is thus. Certain
Acid-Particles, forced from within that hollow Stalk, had entered the Pores of
the Glandules and Lachrymal Vessels, and there, by their irritation, exciting
certain Convulsions, did continually force out Tears: But whence were they
imbibed with a more than usual sharpness? There is no mortal Man, who (by the
taste only) finds not Tears to be Saline; wherefore these, in their passage
with the acid Particles there inherent, were invaded with a certain sudden
Effervescency.

These things being by me for some small time considered of, I soon ceased to
admire that that Fume should be the cause of so great Evils thence ensuing; and
also at that time discerned, that the Cure would not be difficult; For I knew
that hot Milk coagulated by an Acidity, if digested with, some fit Salt, would
again be dissolved in the space of one hour. Like wise I knew Vinegar was
easily deprived of its sharpness, by infusing Crab's-eyes or Lithargyry therein:
Also I understood the reason of that Effervency which is excited by commixion
of the Saline Oil of Tartar with the Acid Oil of Vitriol.

Hence I concluded, that the Blood coagulated by Acidity, might again be made
fluid, and the sowreness temperated by Crab's-eyes, Lithargyry, and many other
Medicines containing much Salt; such are White-Vitriol, Gum Ammoniac,
Sagapenum, Galbarum, etc.

Therefore I (being called the third day after the Boy was hurt) instilled hot
into his Eyes some Drops of a certain Collyrium, compounded of White-Vitriol,
and other things mixed with convenient Waters; and upon the Eye I applied a
Plaster of Gum Ammoniac, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Lithargyry, etc. spread upon a
Linen Cloth. This I changed daily twice, and commanded the Boy should be kept
in a dark place; by which means, in the space of two Weeks he recovered his
pristine Sanity.

OBSERVAT. II.
Of the use of an Issue, and its way of Operating.

A Young Maid Thirteen years of age, had for several years been afflicted with
dolor and redness of her Eyes, and tumor of her Eyelids, which (after sleep)
were closed together by a viscous Humor, concreted into a Rosin-like matter.
This Ophthalmy, for a long tract of time, was attempted to be cured by two
Surgeons, but not overcome.

I being afterward sent for, judged the cause of the Disease to be the too
great Acidity of the Blood, and a Ferment of the same nature produced from that
Blood, and firmly inherent in the Pores of the Eyes and Eyelids, there causing
the Blood in the Capillary Vessels, and the Humors in the small Veins, to
become too acid, and be coagulated and stagnized: For from these few signs it
was not difficult to judge of the aforesaid apparent Symptoms.

Moreover, I firmly persuaded my self that the Maid might soon be cured,
provided that Acidity could be temperated and expelled by the Pores of the Eyes
and Eyelids, and that acid Blood purged out of the Body; wherefore I used a
Collyrium, consisting of Medicaments containing much Salt, and besides that
applied to the Eyes a Plaster made of like things.

But I did little good by this method; for, so soon as any part of that Ferment
was rendered temperate and cast out, shortly after a new Ferment, arising from
the Blood, succeeded in place of the former: Seeing this, I for several weeks
purged the maid twice a week, but in vain: At length I found the Assertion of
the famous Silvius, which is written in the first Book of his Praxis, Chap. 2.
in the 26 Section, to be most true, viz. That there are scarcely any purging
Remedies (at least known to us) which can purge out acid Humors from the Blood.

Finding the matter thus, I judged it high time to betake my self to the
searching out of better Remedies; and whilst I was occupied in consideration
thereof, the following Experiment came seasonably into my mind, and it is this:

When you have a Compound of Water and Oil mixed, and would separate the one
from the other, proceed thus. If you would have the Oil to pass through a
Filter of Paper, the Water remaining in the Filter, you must first anoint the
Paper with Oil; but if you would filter the Water only, and have the Oil
remain in the Paper, then you must first well moisten the Paper with Water.

But what is the cause of this Phoenomenon? The Pores in Oil are otherwise
figured than in Water; therefore that most subtle matter of the World, which
flows through the branched particles of the Oil, much differs from that which
passes through the moist and smooth particles of the Water. Suppose to your
self Water put into Paper first imbibed with Oil, and you will easily discern
that the same must necessarily be debarred entrance, by that most subtle
matter, proceeding from the Oil contained in the Pores of the Paper, and not
able to enter through the Pores of the Water (otherwise disposed) as also by
the most subtle matter of the Water unable to enter the Pores of the Oil
inherent in the Paper. But if Oil hasten to pass through Paper, before moistened
with Oil, then the most subtle matter of either of them holds parallel, and
what passes out from one part, enters through another, and on the contrary. So
Oil approaches to Paper anointed with Oil, and is filtred through it; and if
it happen that any aqueous Particles poured in should in any measure obstruct
this Filtration, they must be removed to the sides, and so taken away.

Often pondering this Experiment in my mind, and the reason thereof, I at
length cut a small Wound (called a Fontinel or Issue) in the sick Maids Arm,
and kept it open by a-Pea put in and dairy renewed; and by this means many
Humors freely circulating through the Veins of the Arms, by reason of those
passages interrupted by the Wound made, concentred in that Issue, were changed
into Pus, and by long staying there waxed acid, and like a sour Ferment
infected the Pores of the Veins nigh to the Issue.

Therefore, whenever certain bitter, sweet, or other Particles of the Blood,
endeavored to enter the aforesaid passages, the Pores of which were filled
with that acid Ferment, they were repelled by a most subtle Matter, every way
unlike themselves, no otherwise than as in the above-recited Experiment, we
have even now explained; but when the acid Particles of the Blood approached,
they had access without repulse, and entered the passages nigh the Issue, which
were before infected with the acid Ferment; but if Particles of another nature
intruded themselves, they were repelled by the same most subtle Matter, which
admitted the acid Particles (like it self) to enter those passages imbibed with
Acidity; no otherwise than as one Magnet is seen to approach to another, by
reason of particular Rays, which proceeding from one Magnet, enter the other
without impediment, and so exclude all intermediate Air.

By this means I happily effected that, which I had before in vain attemped by
Catharticks. For the Blood was daily disburthened of a large quantity of
Acidity by the Issue; and this Evacuation the better succeeded, because what
was in the mean time externally allied, rendered the acid Ferment more
temperate, and attracted it through the Pores of the Eyes and Eyelids, which
(being too much enlarged and distorted) were again restored to their natural
state by gentle Astringents. This last work I effected with a Cataplasm,
prepared only of Wild-Tansey or Silverweed, boiled unto softness in Water. For
this Herb contains in it self much volatile Salt, which first evaporating from
the Cataplasm, did temperate the acid Ferment, and attract it through the
Pores; but the more gross and astringent Particles which (besides its volatile
Salt) this Herb possesses, came forth last, and being gently Astringent,
closed the Pores of the Eyes and Eyelids as was fit; almost after the same
manner as we see Cinnamon and Nutmeg in a Diarrhaea, by their volatile and
aromatic Salt, first to temperate and extract from the Pores of the Bowels,
the acid and irritating Ferment; and afterward, by their more gross Particles,
with gentle force to constringe the (too much dilated) Pores of the Bowels and
Vessels.

Thus this young Maid, within one month after her Issue was made, recovered her
pristine state of health, and so remains to this day. After this Maids Cure was
in this manner completed, I cured many others according to my wish.

OBSERVAT. III.
Of a Gangrene.

IN the year 1680, September 7. A Woman Sixty years of age was suddenly
afflicted in her Back, Breast, and left Arm, with many Blisters rising,
containing a limpid Water, and very painful; yet in the mean while she could
eat well, and was not sensible of any internal dolor. Therefore she neglected
Remedies for two days, which being elapsed I was called. Then I opened the
Blisters, and found the subjacent Skin and Flesh black and gangrenenate.

For that very acid and corrosive Ferment lay hid unmoved, and indeed very deep
within the Pores of those parts; and whilst it lay so unmoved it could infer no
dolor, because pain is excited by motion of the Fibers of the Nerves more than
usual; and the Body being unmoved, another part cannot move.

But when that acid corrosive Ferment was expelled from its own Pores, by the
Humors (issuing from the Pores of the Arteries, and circulating through the
Veins of the Parts) very great dolor was suddenly excited, and the Humors
circulating were speedily coagulated, and by that Ferment changed into a
corrosive Acidity.

Now, the more slippery, flexile, and smaller Particles of those coagulated
Humors, were (by the Humors following them) driven up to the Superficies of
the external Cutis, which (because the Pores were constringed by the cold Air)
they could not penetrate, therefore elevated the same on high in form of
Blisters; but the more gross, more acid, and more ponderous Particles remained
in the bottom, and so corroded the small Fibers of those parts, that the
circulating Humors could no more enter into them; and hence the Gangrene of
those parts took beginning.

It being now obvious to me, that the aforesaid corrosive Acidity was peccant
in this case, I could readily conclude what Remedies were fit to be applied,
viz. Such as I had known to render like Acidities more temperate: And, because
I knew that Spirit of Nitre, and the Acidity of Salt, would wax sweet by Spirit
of Wine adjoined, therefore I made a Lavament of Spirit of Wine, to which I
added Lethargyry, Crabseyes, Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Chalk, and other things
resisting Acidity. I often in a day applied this Lavament with a Linen Cloth
four double; and in the mean time the Patient every two hours took two
Spoonfuls of the following Mixture (temperating Acidity) that part of that
coming through the Arteries to the parts affected, might contribute help to the
Remedies externally applied.

. Water of Bawm, iij. Treacle-water. Mathiolus his Aqua Vitae, of each i. Sugar
Perlat. iij. White Coral prepared, j. Crab's-eyes prepared, j. ss. Bezoardic
Dinerale, j. ss. Spir. Hearts horn, xx Drops. Oleaginous Volatile Salt, xxv
drops.
Make a Mixture.

Using this Lavament for one day, and finding little benefit by the use
thereof, I scarrified the parts affected, and washed them with Unguentum
Egyptiacum mixed with Spirit of Wine; I did not at all fear any damage to accrue
from the Vinegar which is put into this Unguent, because in the boiling that is
all evaporated. Also I anointed the exterior Circumferences of the affected
parts with Oil of Tyles, called Oil of Philosophers. Lastly, I applied a
Cataplasm of Rue, Wormwood, Dittany of Crete, Root of Galangal, and Calamus
Aromaticus, Flower of Lupines, Metheglin, and other things temperating Acidity.

By use of these aforesaid Remedies good Pus began to be generated, which (by
its gently cutting Particles) brake in sunder the remaining intermediate
Fibers, which as yet had retained the dead and living flesh together, and by
this means the parts affected with the Gangrene were separated. Seeing this, I
applied Common Turpentine, mixed with Basilicon and the White of an Egg, by
which all the viscous Particles were removed, which were otherwise wont to
obstruct the Pores of the Arteries, and cavities of the Veins. By this means
several Particles came forth from the Arteries, and adhered to the Ulcers, by
reason of the similitude of their Superficies; and soon after all the Ulcers
were discerned to be filled with flesh: then I applied dry Lint scraped, and in
a short time induced an Eschar by that only. For that imbibed all the Pus
which otherwise would have corroded, and wholly closed the Orifices of those
tender Vessels.

Thus our Patient was completely restored to her pristine sanity, October. 21.

OBSERVAT. IV.
Of a Sphacelus of the Foot.

A Man of Seventy years of age, that had all his lifetime devoted himself to
Wine and Venery, and by frequent intervals was afflicted with a Spasmus of his
right Leg, in the year 1681, February 22, was invaded with a small Fever not
vehement. On the 26th day of February his prostrated appetite seemed to return,
wherefore on that day he twice eat a great quantity of very sour Butter-milk,
and the same day (about nine at night) he began to complain of a very great
pain of his right Foot, and (soon after) of a Stupor and great coldness of the
same; and the same Dolor, Stupor, and Algor, in two hours space ascended above
the Knee. The 28th of February I was called, and by Scarification found, that
the Sphacelus had ascended an hands breadth above the Knee; for so far was
present that extreme Cold and Rottenness, and in Scarification no sign of
Dolor appeared, nor did any Blood issue out, except a very little very black
and coagulated, breaking out in one part or other.

Very attentively considering all these things, I concluded, that the abuse of
Wine and Venery, had rendered the Blood of this Man (its more subtle and more
volatile part being absumed) too viscous and acid; and when certain acid and
viscous Particles of this Blood, were by Circulation come to the right Foot,
perhaps they there stagnized, and afterward pertinaceously adhered, and by
their stay there acquired greater sharpness.

These Particles inferred no Dolor so long as they remained unmoved; but when
by intervals they were forced from their residence by the Humors circulating,
and by them excited to motion, then they became the cause of the Spasmus of the
right Leg, irritating and cutting the small Fibers of those parts, and so gave
occasion to a greater afflux of the animal Spirits.

But the continued excess of Wine and Venery had left scarce any thing in the
Blood of this man, except a Caput-mort (as I may call it) that is, nothing
besides Blood very viscous and acid, which could no longer duly exercise its
proper effervescency in the Heart, nor circulate through the parts; yet this
Blood, when it had by a small Fever received greater motion, and was rarefied
more than usual, did sufficiently open the Pores of the Arteries, so that many
acid and viscous Particles issued out, and stayed without; and this happened
rather in the right Foot than elsewhere, because there resided the acid and
viscous Ferment, which caused the Acidity and Viscosity contained in the Blood,
to draw nigh to it self in such a way as we explained in the Second
Observation; and perhaps a great cause was that abundance of acid Butter-milk
eaten, because this happened the 27th day of February, rather than at any other
time.

Those acid and viscous Particles that passed out from the Pores of the
Arteries on the 27th of February, settled in the Veins of the right Foot, and
conjoined themselves with the acid Ferment therein contained, and there (by the
acuteness of their sides) impressed on the small Fibers a very vehement motion,
and so produced that Dolor; but the small Fibers, being not long able to
sustain that violence, were soon after wholly cut in sunder, and by that means
the sense of pain, notwithstanding the Scarification then made, was totally
annihilated, and the broken Fibers (enfolding themselves each within the other)
had so obstructed the veiny passages of the right Foot, that the Blood and
Animal Spirits could not enter; this was occasioned by the coagulation of
Humors in the Foot, produced by the aforesaid Acidity. Hence I discerned the
Original of the Sphacelus of his right Foot: also that it must needs take
beginning from Acidity, is confirmed by that black and coagulated Blood which
in scarifying had its Exit: For every man knows, that the Blood waxes black
and is coagulated by Acidity.

This Sphacelus had by this time transcended the Knee, and soon after (a little
above the part affected) the Patient felt an intolerable pain.

I, considering with my self the fore-passed dessolute Life of the Sick-man,
his Age, his Leg above the Knee infected with this Sphacelus, and his whole
Mass of Blood grievously tainted; and moreover calling to mind that I never
knew any Old men infected with this Disease to escape, did boldly predict the
inevitable death of the Patient; yet in the mean while I promised I would
mitigate the dolor as much as I could, and (if possible) prevent the further
ascent of the evil.

In order hereunto, I commanded the Patient should every two hours take two
spoonfuls of a mixture tempering Acidity, consisting of Borrage and
Bugloss-water, Treacle-water, Sugar-perlate, Crab's-eyes, Coral, Mineral
Bezcardic, and other things infringing Acidity, and attenuating Viscosity.

Also I caused a Decoction to be made, consisting of Water, Wine, Roots of
Calamus Aromaticus, and Enula Campane, with Rue, Dittany of Crete, Wormwood,
Flower of Lupines, etc. which I applied hot with a double Cloth; by which
Application some ease of pain was induced: For the Acidity, inducing dolor by
its accuteness, was thereby rendered more temperate. Therefore when the Cloth
was dry, I again moistened it in the same Liquor; and this reiterated
Application I continued for several days.

Now, when the 7th day of March was come, I saw that Down or Mossy Lanugo
(which is vulgarly called Mouldiness or Mucor) dispersed through the whole
internal part of the Leg, from the Ankle to the Knee; and had I at that time
had at hand a good Microscope, I might have there discerned many Plants, with
their Stalks, Leaves, and Flowers, in excellent order disposed, springing up
from the Leg of the man yet living, no otherwise than as a Fungus (or Mushroom)
is wont to arise from the Earth.

The Sick-man in the mean while eat not any thing, and was every day afflicted
with a Fever often coming and vanishing. At length on the 14th day of March, at
four in the Morning he slept well, his Pulse before death often intermitting,
which also may easily be understood to proceed from Acidity.

But his whole Mass of Blood was infected, therefore here Phlebotomy could in
no wise be admitted; for three days before the Sick-man died, his left Foot
also (from the great Toe to the Ankle) was infected with a Sphacelus; and both
his hands for 24 hours before his death were cold as Ice, though after return
of the Fever they again waxed warm.

Now, that to this Evil I applied convenient Remedies, will (I suppose) be very
apparent by this, viz. that the Sphacelus, which at first (good advice being
neglected) had, in four hours space ascended from the great Toe to above the
Knee, after the application of my Remedies, had not ascended in the space of
two Weeks above one hands breadth.

OBSERVAT. V.
Of an Erysipelas of the Leg.

A Man Forty years of age was invaded with a Fever, which vanished the 12th
hour after the Assault; then the Sick-man began to complain of pain and redness
of his right Leg.

In some solid part of this man lay hid a a certain acid Ferment, which (by
some cause or other) was thence expelled and forced into the Mass of Blood, in
which it excited that Inimical Fermentation, which is known by the name of a
Fever.

But when that Ferment was circulated with die Blood, perhaps certain Particles
thereof stagnized, and inhered within the Cutis of the right Leg; which
Particles in a short time, compelled all the other Particles of that acid
Ferment to recede from the Blood and approach to them, almost after the same
manner as one Magnet causes another to approach to it self.

Those Particles there inherent, and sufficiently corroding the small Fibers,
excited dolor in the Leg: But the Redness took beginning from the Blood
stagnized in the Capillary Veins, by reason of the coagulation beginning and
proceeding from Acidity; as we perceive a sufficiently intense redness in the
Face, when the Neck and Veins there contained are by a Collar (or any other
thing) too much constringed.

To this affect we give the name Erysipelas. But how came the Fever so soon to
vanish when the Erysipelas appeared? I answer: Because at that time the
Sanguinous Mass was freed from that acid Ferment, which then passed into the
Leg.

This Disease I entirely cured in two days space, with one only Lavament
(temperating the Acidity) which consisted of Spirit of Wine, Camphire,
Lithargyry, Chalk, Salt-prunella, etc. being firmly persuaded, that these
Phoenomena's had derived their Original from Acidity.

OBSERVAT. VI.
Of Varicous Ulcers of the Leg.

A Virgin aged Forty years, having for a long series of time devoted her self
to an ill habit of Diet; and, among other inimical Foods, she too much
delighted to eat things viscous, Vinegar, and other sour things, in the
Summer-season also often putting her Feet into cold Water; she had now for
Fifteen years been afflicted with a Varix of her left Leg, extending it self
from the Sole of the Foot up to the Knee; and also with two Ulcers (nigh the
inward Ankle of the same Leg) deep, sordid, and very dolorous, and for the most
part filled up to the top with a certain sharp and thin matter, and often
having round about them an Erysipelas attending. Many Physicians and
Chyrurgeons, for a long time in vain attempted the cure of these Ulcers; yea,
also that most famous Practitioner of Feium, Lord of Cranenburg.

From the too great quantity of acid and viscous Meats assumed, the Blood of
this Maid was rendered gross and apt to stagnize; wherefore a certain portion
thereof, conveyed to the left Leg, there stayed and resided about the small
Valves of some Vein, the Membranes of which, by a great abundance of Blood
(there congested) were so distended, that the Humors passing out from the
small Arteries, dispersed among the Membranes of that Vein (for among the
Membranes of the Veins, you may by a Microscope discover small Arteries, Veins,
and Nerves, and undoubtedly there are also present small Lymphatick Vessels)
and wandering through the small Cavities of the same Membranes, could not freely
pass, but stagnized there, and thrust themselves between the Interstitiums of
the small Fibers, in so great abundance, that they not only enlarged those
Interstitiums, but also denied passage to the Animal Spirits from the small
Nerves, gliding into the aforesaid small Cavities, and otherwise in some sort
constringing the Vein, and in it producing a certain Peristaltick motion, for
promoting the Circulation of the Blood in the Vein; and so the Blood in that
Vein (in some sort) stagnizing, and above measure distending the Membranes
thereof was the cause of the aforesaid Varix.

But why should that Varix rather present it self to sight in the Leg than
elsewhere? I answer: Because die Veinybloud must there ascend, by a
Perpendicular way, to the Horizon; and besides, this way is in some measure
closed up by the Garters we are wont to use to retain and keep up our
Stockings; so also the same was here occasioned by this Maids too often putting
her Feet into cold Water.

Therefore the Blood, in greater abundance than was fit, congested in this
Vein, distended the less resisting parts of the Membranes of the same more than
other more gross parts, and so formed to itself certain Recesses, and
especially about the small Valves, in which die Blood (now of its own nature
become much too acid) contracted to it self a greater Acor, because it stayed
too long there without Circulation.

But many of the more acid Particles of this Blood penetrated the more
distended (and consequently more rare) parts of die Varix; that is, through
those Recesses, and so the small Fibers being there irritated and afterward
cut in sunder, great dolor was excited, and soon after two very painful
Ulcers, which by the breaking of more-small Fibers, were rendered very deep.

Those acid Particles, pertinaciously adhering in the pores of the Lips and
bottomes of the Ulcers, they converted the as yet sincere Humors into acid;
which being unable to continue their Circulation, were (by the Humors
continually following them) forced outward into the Cavities of the Ulcers,
which they usually filled almost up with a sharp acid and thin Humor; yet not
so thin, but that (in the mean while) certain more viscous and more stringy
Particles were mixed therewith; which, with their strings (entangled each within
the other, and sticking in the Superficies of the Ulcers) rendered them very
sordid.

Thus far we have explained how certain and acid Particles have passed through
the aforesaid Recesses unto the near adjacent Flesh; now it is time to observe
that many more acid Particles were, from those Recesses, forced into the
sanguineous Mass, circulating with which they entered into the Ulcers, rather
than into other parts, by reason of the acid Ferment lurking there, after the
same manner as we showed in the Second Observation: Thus was the abundance of
acid Humor (filling the Ulcers, and from them proceeding) augmented.

The Erysipelas, which for the most part surrounded the Ulcers, derived its
Original also from the Acidity there inherent.

When I had for sometime well weighed all these things in my mind, I at length
converted my endeavor to the cure of the Varix, (as the first Original of the
Evil) which, if in things profitable it be lawful to use the Terms of Art, may
be called the Procatartick or primitive Cause; therefore from the Varix, opened
with a Lancet, I drew forth several ounces of stagnized Blood, acid and black.

Then I proceeded to the sanguineous Mass, infected with the acid Ferment,
which may be called the anticedent Cause (according to the subtilty of die Wits
of our time, which more regards the Pomp of vain Words, than things themselves)
and by a good Diet instituted began to correct that (prohibiting all things
viscous and acid) by a Powder temperating Acidity daily taken, consisting of j.
of Crab's-eyes, and the same quantity of White Coral.

After this I set about the Ulcers themselves, in the bottoms and Lips whereof
lay hid an acid Ferment, which (if it be the pleasure of some) may be called by
the Name of a Conjoined Cause.

The principal thing that remained for me to do, was to temperate and remove
that Ferment, and gradually and without sense to depress the Lips of the Ulcers
to the bottom; for from this last business I promised to my self a threefold
Utility.

First, I knew that the cavities of the Ulcers being thus removed, none of that
acid, and at least in some part Viscous, Humor could be there collected, which
by reason of its viscous and stringy Particles, had before rendered the Ulcers
sordid, and (through its acid and cutting Particles) daily more and more
excavated them; there being always in the Cavities of them a great abundance
thereof continually congested. But if this Humor have access to the Ulcers, it
must be cast out presently after its coming there, to the sides of the Ulcers,
their Lips being strongly depressed by some hard and heavy Body superposited.

Secondly, I was certain by this means to restore the Circulation of the Blood
and Humors, in which is sited a great part of the cure of Ulcers: For the Lips
of the Ulcers being not prominent (as before) over the Superficies of the
bottoms, I could discern it was possible to be effected, that the Humors
(circulating through the small passages contained in the Lips of the Ulcers)
which before, by reason of those passages obstructed, did flow into the
Cavities of the Ulcers, would now find out their own way through other passages
in the bottoms of the Ulcers, and so again renew their Circulation, which
cannot (as before) be impeded by the ambient Air, because that is sufficiently
repelled by the same body which depresseth the Lips of the Ulcers, that being
sufficiently thick, solid, and hard, to answer my purpose.

Thirdly, In cure of Ulcers and Wounds, I have often observed, that an Eschar
to be generated never took beginning from the Center or any adjacent parts of
Ulcers or Wounds; but always begun from the extremity of the ambient Cutis, by
reason of the similitude of Superficies which is found between the Cutis and
the Eschar. Hence I firmly persuaded my self, that the Ulcers, first freed from
their acid Ferments and Filths, and rendered plain in the aforesaid manner,
(their pristine Circulation being restored) would in a short time be covered
with an Eschar.

Therefore I prepared certain fit Medicaments (temperating Acidity) to resist
the peccant Ferment, lying hid in the Ulcers; and that (as the saying is) I
might with one Brush whiten too Walls, I formed of them two Cakes, sufficiently
hard and thick, and somewhat larger than the Ulcers, so that they would also
cover a small part of the Lips, and those I laid upon the Ulcers, and with a
sufficiently strict Ligature firmly bound them on, and left them so for 12
hours; which being elapsed, I could soon discern, that the hope I had of them
conceived failed me not: For I found the Ulcers wholly plain, freed from all
filths, and conspicuous, with a pleasing redness, and little or nothing
painful. Whereby, being almost wrapped into admiration, I concluded that the acid
Ferment in the Ulcers for the most part was, and the remainder would in a short
rhyme be temperated.

After a few days, Circulation being restored, certain well-known Particles,
passing out through the Pores of the ambient Cutis, firmly adhered to the
extremity thereof, having a like Superficies with the Cutis it self. Thus we
plainly understood the certain Rudiment of that Eschar, which had in the space
of five Weeks fully closed either Ulcer; for it every day increased more and
more.

Afterward I every year once opened the aforesaid Varix, and drew from it lib.
j. of Blood, by which means those Ulcers never after opened any more.

In the mean while, to the Erysipelas which I had almost forgot, I applied a
four-doubled Cloth moistened in a mixture prepared with Water of Elder-Flowers,
Spirit of Wine, Camphire, and Saccharum Saturni, for temperating the peccant
Acidity, which being effected, all Symptoms of the Erysipelas ceased, together
with the burning before induced by the acid Particles, when with the acuteness
of their sides they, oftener than usual, invade the small Fibers.

But whence was it that these Ulcers could not be healed in so great a space of
time, by so many Physicians and Chyrurgeons, though men well in years? I
answer: Those men, by reason of their age, contemning the solid Reasonings of
others, would never approve of any thing but their own experience.

Experience without true Reason can profit little: For as among a thousand
humane Faces, no one is found exactly in all things like to another; so among
so many Diseases there is not one which in all things wholly agrees with
another. Moreover it is very credible, that the Blood and internal Parts of one
man do no less differ from the Blood and internal Parts of another than the
External. Whence again arises the various Temperament of men, the variety of
which requires various Remedies, and (besides Experience) sound Judgment in
the Physician; that he may know how to make choice of this or that, and other
Remedies instead of either.

Now, plainly to show the Case as it is, those Physicians and Surgeons,
directing their Conceptions according to a certain vain and unprofitable Theory
and Philosophy, could neither find out the Cause of the Varix nor its Effects,
much less the Remedy of the same.

For they deduced almost all Diseases from their Four Humors, viz. Choler,
Phlegm, Blood, and Melancholy; though in the mean time they understood not what
any one of them is, or of what Particles it consisted. Hence it came to pass,
that it was impossible for them to find out true Remedies. They had much more
prudently acted, if they had in a special manner had respect to the various
Particles of the Blood, which differ each from other in Figure, Magnitude, and
Motion; as also to the Acidity and Salt (as well as they might have done)
whether of these holds dominion in the Blood: If it were Acidity, then
Purgations by the Belly could in no wise be thought convenient.

In like manner, they too much confounded their Conceptions, when they thought
those Ulcers were first to be cleansed by certain peculiar Medicaments, then by
others incarnated: lastly, that (again) by others the Eschar must necessarily
be induced. Now that this too anxious distinction is very unprofitable, will be
plainly evident by this, viz. That I, with my one only Placentula in a short
time cured both Ulcers.

Likewise they in the Cure had respect to their own Axiom, which says,
Contraries must be cured by Contraries; and discerning great heat in the
Erysipelas surrounding the Ulcers, they endeavored to expel that by cold
things which stopped the Blood and Humors, and by that means did in no small
measure augment the burning hear of the Erysipelas: But these men were abused
by their own Axiom; which had they endeavored to make a right use of, they
should first have considered that burning Heat to be only the Effect, and
owned for the Cause certain acid Particles, by reason of Obstruction inherent
about the Ulcer, which (with their cutting sides) struck the Nervous Fibers
with a more than usual trembling, and then they had more rightly cured
Contraries with Contraries, viz. applying such things which they had by
experience found fit to resist the corroding Acidity, and remove the Viscosity
obstructing.

OBSERVAT. VII.
Of a Wound of the Eye.

IN the year 1680, on the 21th day of November, I was commanded to be sent for
by a young Nobleman leading a Military life, who three days before was wounded
with a Leaden-Bullet, in that part of the left Eye which is between the Iris
and Pupil; so that the Bullet had penetrated even into the Eye, and soon after
the Wound made, no small quantity of aqueous Humor flowed out. I found the
Orifice of the Wound closed with a certain fibrous and white Matter. The Iris
with the Pupil wounded waxed very livid, and the remaining part of the Eye
(thus hurt) was intensly red and swollen, attended with burning Heat, and a
proflux of sharp Tears. The dolor was continual, except that it was more
remiss, when the Patient held his head backward; but as often as he held his head
down the pain augmented. The Sight of the Eye hurt was wholly lost, and the
right Eye (though it remained untouched) was red and much pained. A certain
Surgeon to that matter, closing the Wound, had applied sharp things, and to
the remaining part of the Eye cold things: This was done three days before I
was called.

It will perhaps seem strange to some, that all the aqueous Humor issued not
out by the Wound; but their wonder will soon cease after they have well weighed
and considered the following Reasons.

First, Let them consider, that the Bullet (in its inferior part) was more
strongly forced into the Eye than in its superior part; and so it broke the
inferior part of the Membrane of the Eye, the superior part of that Membrane
remaining entire. By this means part of the Membrane broken turning inward,
formed a certain Aperture, through which part of the aqueous Humor issued out,
and in its efflux again turned outward the before turning inward Membrane,
which then like a Valve, turning from without to within, not from within
outward, again closed the Aperture of the Wound, and so impeded the outflowing
of the aqueous Humor from die Eye.

Secondly, That fibrous and white shining Matter closing up the Orifice of the
Wound, falls under our consideration. But whence had this Matter its Original?
Should I now, with the Company of vulgarly-learned men, fly to the accustomed
Asylus of Ignorance, I could readily subjoyn a Reply, saying only, that Nature
was so provident in this case, that she in a short time filled up the hole with
fit Matter; not only that all the aqueous Humor might not issue out, but also
that the most cold ambient Air might not penetrate to the parts and endamage
them. But such an Answer seems to me no less rediculous, than if I should ask;
why in boiling hot Broth exposed to the Air a thin Skin is generated on the
Superficies? And another should answer; The nature of the Broth is so
provident, that it presently forms a Pellicle on the Superficies of the hot
Broth, lest the cold Air, having access to the internal Particles, should hurt
them; and that the heat in the Broth might be longer preserved, and (the
otherwise flying) Vapors retained and constringed within the Broth by the
superposited Membrane; whereas he should rather have said, that many of the
more thin parts of the Broth, apt for motion, having figures fit for the same,
easily evaporated into the Air, and in their flight carried with themselves up
to the Superficies of the Broth, certain Particles more gross, stringy, and
less fit for motion, which (their motion being terminated by the ambient Air)
acquiesced in the Superficies of the Broth; where, with their small Fibers,
folded one within another, they concreted into that Cuticle which covered the
Broth.

But, returning to our purpose, we shall by a better right answer in this
manner: Some Particles passed out from the Pores of the Arteries, and
circulating in the small passages of the Membranes of the Eye, were carried to
the end of those passages interrupted by the Wound, and so indeed the more thin
parts evaporated, but certain more stringy Particles, prolapsed without the
said passages, their motion (by the extreme coldness of the Air at that season)
being taken away, by their stringy Fibers infolded themselves one within the
other, and so concreted into a certain fibrous and white Matter; not unlike to
that, which is often seen in that Water, into which flows the Blood from a Vein
of the Foot or Hand.

That leaden Bullet could not enter into the Eye, but very much contused it,
and broak certain small sanguiferous Vessels, from which the Blood flowing (by
reason of the cold was stagnized) and infected the Iris and Pupil with a livid
color.

This Wound could not be made in the Eye but many small Fibers must needs be
broken, and being broke, retire together into Curls, and so obstruct many
passages, in which the circulating Humors (accumulated) did press the
sanguiferous Vessels nigh, so that the Blood in the Vessels stagnized, whence
the tumor and redness almost all over the Eye had their beginning.

The Blood stagnizing in the Capillary Vessels, especially that which lay
extravasate in a short time assumed Acidity, and then (with its cutting
Particles) sooner than usual, and more vehemently shook the small Fibers nigh,
whence that burning heat and dolor derived their Original.

Moreover, the acid Particles of the same stagnized and coagulated Blood, by
their irritation excited certain light Concussions in the Glandules of the Eye;
whence the Liquors contained in them, viz. Tears, were expelled almost
continually, which were more sharp than usual: For they, being saline, in their
eflux excited a certain sudden effervescency, with the acid Particles of the
Blood stagnized inherent in the passages.

But the Dolor, of which I spoke, did not only proceed from the acid and
cutting Particles, but also from the Leaden-Bullet within the Eye, turned now
hither and then thither again; and this was that Dolor which remitted when the
Patient held his head backward; because then that Bullet lay unmoved, and
rested upon the Bony Orbit of the Eye: But when the Patient inclined his Head
to his Breast, then a very acute dolor was perceived, because the Bullet was
again moved and pressed the wounded part of the Eye.

A great part of the Pupil was covered with that fibrous and white Matter, so
that Globuli Coelestes the Celestial Globes could not enter through the Pupil
to excite the small Fibers of the Optic Nerve (dispersed through the bottom of
the Eye) therefore no man has cause to wonder that the Patient was wholly
deprived of the sight of his wounded Eye.

But it may rather be cause of admiration, that the right Eye, which was not
hurt by the Bullet, should in the mean while be vexed with redness and dolor;
yet I shall endeavor to remove this cause of Wonder.

There is no man but sometimes experimentally finds in himself, that one Eye
being moved, he can scarcely retain the other unmoved. The reason of this is,
because the Animal Spirits suddenly passing from the Brain, through the Nerves,
into the Muscles of one Eye, can scarcely be terminated, but some of them will
(at the same moment of time) pass into the Muscles of the other Eye. Whence it
is manifest, that when one Eye is pained; that is, when in it is present a more
vehement agitation of the small Fibers than usual, then I say, a greater
abundance of Animal Spirits (by reason of the Pores in the Brain then more
open) must needs flow, not only into the Eye affected, but also into the found
Eye, in which, by this means, are produced certain light Contractions, which in
some measure constringe the small Passages and sanguiferous Vessels; and by
that means the Circulation of the Blood and Humors is in some sort obstructed,
so that they in a short time wax acid, and by their cutting Particles infer
dolor, which is attended with Redness, proceeding from the Blood stagnized in
the Capillary Vessels.

Things standing thus, I predicted to the sick Nobleman, an impossibility of
recovering the sight of his wounded Eye, in which he readily acquiesced,
saying, He would give me eternal thanks, provided I could preserve the fight of
his other Eye. This I suddenly promised him.

Therefore, proceeding to the Cure of this Wound, I judged my principal work
was to restore the Cireulation of the Blood and Humors impeded, and then to
repress the external Air, and temperate the Acidity.

In order to this, I first, for temperating the Acidity, instilled hot into
both his Eyes some few drops of the following Collyrium twice a day.

rx;. Water of Eyebright, Of Celandine, of each ij. Of Hysop j. Crabs eyes
prepared Coral prepared, of each j. Troches alb. Rhasis ij. ss. Saccarum
Saturni j. ss. Tutia prepared ij.
Make a Collyrium.

Then I applied to the Eyes two small Bags, filled with Faenugreek, Hysop,
Lavenderflowers, and other things abounding with volatile Salt; afterward,
instead of these, I applied Plasters containing much Salt; such as is found in
Gum Ammoniac, Sagapenum, etc.

And at length I so bound both Eyes, that they remained unmoved, and kept the
Patient in an hot and dark place.

But, to take away all occasion of wonder, which some one or other may perhaps
conceive, because I had so much trouble to cure the right Eye, which was not
wounded, I purpose here to subjoyn Reasons (which I judge) sufficiently valid.

I did not this that I have done so much in respect of the right Eye as of the
left. For if the right Eye had remained open, the sick man would often have
moved it, and seen with the same.

That external motion of the right Eye scarcely ever happened but the left Eye
was also moved; and hence how much the dolor in the wounded Eye would have
been exasperated, he can easily conjecture, who has at any time experienced
with how great dolor a wounded Hand or Foot is moved from place to place.

Moreover, if the right Eye had not been closed, without doubt it would with
the sight have touched many Objects at one time or other; and that could not
have been without the producing of some internal motion de novo (by the
Celestial Globes) in the small Fibers of the Optic Nerve; because indeed the
least fiber in the opticknerve in the right Eye cannot be moved, but at the
same time the small Fiber of the same Order in the Optic Nerve of the left
Eye, must necessarily be moved also. This is evidently apparent by the
following Figure, which the famous Rohaultius also used in his Physical
Treatise, (never to be sufficiently commended) but for an end far other than
mine. He shows the way by which two Images (whereof one is described in the
right Eye, the other in the left) when they come to the Brain, might give
Conception to the Mind of one only Image.

optic nerves

In this Figure each Eye has delineated only five small Fibers, that thereby
the matter may be more easily conceived. But what is here spoken of five small
Fibers, may be understood of many more, viz. that there is no small Fiber of
the Optic Nerve of the right Eye can be moved, but the Fiber of the same Order
in the left Optic Nerve will presently be moved also. The reason is, because
these Fibers join together, and are terminated into one point.

Thus, to the right Eye, in a short time, both pristine Sanity and entireness
of sight returned; but the left Eye could not be healed before the Month of
March in the Year following. About that time all Tumor and Redness passed
away, the livid color being long before discussed. The Bullet stuck fast to
one part or other of the Eye, and so remained unmoved, and to the Blood and
Humors their free Circulation was restored. And then the Humors, by the Wound
interrupted, circulating through those small passages, continually deposited
certain Particles to the sides of the Wound; which Particles, by reason of the
similitude of the Superficies, did adhere and were aglutinated, and so formed
an Eschar, which covered the Wound, and drove out that fibrous and white
Matter. But because it was so thick that it prohibited the Celestial Lights,
therefore the fight of that wounded Eye remained lost.

But in the mean while this Eye (as to bulk) scarcely differed from the right
Eye, though it had cast out no small part of the aqueous Humor when the Wound
was first inflicted, because certain smooth and slippery Particles flowed
through the Pores of the Arteries into that Cavity, in which the aqueous Humor
is contained, and so supplied the defect of that Humor.

In time of the Cure I always abstained from cold things, because they obstruct
the very small passages and Pores of the Eyes: For the same cause I here also
reject fat things, being such as, with their small Branches, do so profoundly
and pertinaceously infold themselves within the most small Pores of the Eyes,
that you cannot (without very great difficulty) expel them again.

But why could not this Wound be sooner healed? I affirm this happened partly
through the error of the Chyrurgeon, and partly of the sick Lord himself.

For he too much indulged both Venery and Wine, whence his Blood was very much
disturbed; and what was so disturbed (in no small quantity) ascended upwards,
as by a more strait path, and there struck upon the obstructions of the wounded
Eye; which notwithstanding (by reason of their pertinacy) it could not break,
and by this means the dolor increased.

Besides, in most deep Snow falling from the exceeding cold Air of that Season,
he would sometimes ride, on hunting whole days with his right Eye (against my
will) open; and hence the Obstructions were rendered yet more pertinaceous and
numerous.

The Chyrurgeon, who for the first three days, applied Medicines to the Wound,
erred in this, viz. that to that fibrous matter which impeded die afflux of the
aqueous Humor (and therefore should not have been taken away) he applied sharp
things, which the Eye it self cannot bear; also to the remaining part of the
Eye he applied cold things to stay the afflux of Blood and Humors, as he
himself said. But, are you ignorant (good Sir) that this afflux of Blood and
Humors is to the Eye, and also to other parts, both natural and necessary? and
had your Medicaments operated according to your wish, a Gangreen would
certainly have immediately followed. You see Blood and Humors (in greater
abundance than is fit) to be present in the Eye; but you reason amiss when you
think this to be caused from a greater afflux than usual; whereas it rather
proceeds from Obstructions which prohibit the reflux of Blood through the
Veins, and of Humors through the Lymphatick Vessels, whence the Blood and
Humors were, in greater abundance, collected into the Eye, stagnized and waxed
acid. Wherefore you should rather have applied things temperating Acidity,
which would also have been convenient for taking away the lividness of the Iris
and Pupil, produced by the clotted Blood: For it is certain, that clotted and
coagulated Blood cannot be restored by cold things, but are unavoidably rendered
more gross, and the peccant Obstructions (by this means) not removed, but
augmented.

But before I put an end to this Observation there remains yet one Phoenomenon
to be discoursed of relating to Wounds.

It is undoubtedly true, That the Cause being taken away, the Effect cease.
But why then the Sword, Knife, or any other thing wounding, being taken away,
is not the dolor in the wound presently removed, but sometimes persists very
long? Dolor in the part hurt is not, unless there be a Concussion of the small
Fibers, more vehement than usual, which cannot be unless by another body put
into motion. Therefore what shall I say of the dolor, which sometimes is
portracted whole days, yea, whole weeks after the Wound is inflicted, when the
Sword, Knife, or any other thing wounding, has been long before laid aside?
Let me circumspectly consider, whether I can find any thing that can excite the
small Fibers of the wounded part to a greater agitation than usual. Behold! I
have found it. When certain small Fibers are cut in sunder by a Sword, then
suddenly they crisp up on heaps, and obstruct the small passages of the wounded
parts, so that the Humors cannot freely circulate, but strike upon those
Obstructions; whence is excited dolor, which still increases, when those
Humors begin to wax acid, and (with their cutting Particles) yet more and more
irritate. Besides, many small Fibers, which before were covered with skin,
after the Wound inflicted, are exposed to the ambient Air, which affects them
with more vehements trembling than is fit, whilst it communicates somewhat to
them from its own motion, by which indeed it is continually and powerfully
enough agitated.

OBSERVAT. VIII.
Of a Suppurated Tumor; also of Rottenness of a Bone.

A Young Maid ten years of Age, afflicted with a burning Fever, soon after the
Fever felt a pain, and (quickly after that) a Tumor in her Shoulder, which was
of the same color with the skin and somewhat hard.

The Blood more than usually agitated by the Fever, from the recesses of this
or that solid part, washed off many acid and viscous Particles, which
circulating with the Blood, did part of them pass out from the Pores of the
Arteries, at that time too much dilated (by reason of the heat of the Fever)
into the small passages about the Shoulder, sited far within the Cutis; in
which passages they adhered and excited dolor, whilst with their pricking
sides they more vehemently than usual made a commotion, and by this means in
some measure distorted the bordering passages; whence also the Humors there
stagnized, which (though they were before pure) by a small delay there, waxed
acid; hence also the Blood stagnized in many Capillary Vessels, but so deeply
sited within the Cutis, that the redness could not be apparent through the
skin, and therefore appeared of the same color with the Cutis.

But whence was that hardness of the Tumor? for it was Liquor that was
contained therein; and such liquor, as (being fluid) and gently touched with
the hand, offering no resistance, could not be judged either hard or soft.

A great quantity of liquor is contained in an Apple, and may be pressed from
it; yet in the mean while it is found to be somewhat hard, because that Liquor
is very much divided, and abides separated in several small passages and Pores
of the Apple, distinct each from other. Therefore the hand touching the Apple
meets with the first small passage; whence the Particles of Liquor (in that
contained) do indeed in some measure recede; but approaching to the subjacent
passages they find resistance. Hence the hardness of the Apple is made
manifest, and by consequence also the hardness of the Tumor.

Therefore, being persuaded that in this case the viscous Particles
obstructing, and the acid, cutting, and irritating, I judged nothing could be
more conducent for altering them than things aperient and temperating Acidity.
Wherefore to the Tumor I applied Paracelsus his Stiptick Plaster; but (I am
willing briefly to note this) the Magnet in it seemed to me superfluous in this
case, that being added only to attract things hurtful to it self. Yet the
Magnet cannot draw to it self all bodies without distinction, but another
Magnet and Iron only; and it wholly loses this attractive power, when reduced
to powder (as Rohaultus found by experience) because then the striate Pores are
broken. This same Rohaultus reduced a very good Magnet to powder, which he put
into Lint, and rubbed the powder well in to join with the same, and by
Application found the pristine virtues in the Magnet to be totally vanished.

But to return to our purpose, I left the aforesaid Plaster several days upon
the Tumor, hoping by this means the Acidity would be temperated, and the
viscosity so attenuated, that it might be partly restored to its pristine
Circulation, and partly evaporated through the Pores of the Skin; but the evil
was too pertinaceous, and frustrated my hope. What was to be done then? The
Acidity, with its cutting Particles, had broke the small Fibers, and several
concave passages, so that the Liquor in the Tumor contained, flowed all into
one place; then the Tumor was no more hard but soft, no otherwise than as the
Liquor before expressed out of an hard Apple, and received into some Vessel,
exhibits it self soft to the touch. In that I judge the Suppuration made in the
Tumor to consist.

Now I seem to hear our vulgarly-learned men exclaiming against me, saying, I
proceeded not in cure of this diseased Girl according to Art; that is,
according to their false and unprofitable Theory, which commands first of all
to apply to Tumors repelling Medicines. But this clamor is easily silenced by
only saying, that the cause of almost all Tumors is Obstruction, which
(according to their proper Axiom, viz. that Contraries are cured with
Contraries) must be removed by Aperients, but not multiplied by repelling
Medicaments (vulgarly so called) viz. by cold and astringent Remedies.

But what if I should beat the Adversaries with their own Weapons, and convince
them by two Arguments, that repelling Medicaments (vulgarly so called) in the
beginning of almost all Tumors, very rarely, yea never, can be profitably
useful. I will at least attempt it.

Their will is, that repelling Remedies be applied in the beginning of Tumors,
yet they except two Cases. The first is when the Tumor is made by Congestion.
The second, when it is found in an Emunctory.

As to the first, it is known to every man (not plainly blinded with prejudice)
that no Tumor is made by a Fluxion, as such, provided it be natural; but every
Tumor is made by Congestion; that is, when the flowing of Blood and Humors is
impeded by Obstruction, by reason of which the Blood and Humors must be
somewhere congested and accumulated; hence it most evidently follows, that
repelling Medicaments can never be available in Tumors.

As to the other, for brevity sake, let us take one only Emunctory, by them
vulgarly so called. They affirm repelling Medicaments not safe in Tumors of the
Groin, because that is the Emunctory of the Liver; that is to say, because by
it the impurities of the Liver are expelled; but this in truth is a most false
reason: For the Lymphatick Vessels conveigh their contained Liquor upwards from
the Groin, so that nothing remains but Nerves and Arteries, through which the
Excrements of the Liver are deposited; but though the Nerves eject some
Excrements by the Groin, yet it does not follow that that is the Emunctory of
the Liver, but rather of the Brain and Spinal Marrow: For the Nerves, of which
there are very few found in the Liver, receive nothing from it; and although by
the Arteries (which also receive nothing from the Liver) certain Recrements are
driven into the Groin, and by that expelled; the Groin does not therefore
deserve to be called the Emunctory of the Liver, but rather of the whole Mass
of Blood. Therefore if repelling Medicaments be not to be applied to Tumors of
the Groin, because that is the Emunctory of the Blood; then by consequence, it
will be unsafe to repel in any other part of the Body; because every where many
Particles of the Blood are eevacuated and exhale through the Pores of the Body.

But it is now time we should return to the, purpose from which we have too far
digressed.

Because the Tumor was ripe, and the Pus contained therein, so deeply sited,
that it could not break through the superposited Skin and Flesh, I therefore
made an Apertion in that part of the Tumor, which appeared more soft and more
eminent; this peared more soft and more eminent; this being done, not a little
Pus issued out. But behold! I then found a black and putrid Subject (rendered
such by the Acidity contained in the Tumor) which had cut in sunder the small
Fibers of the Periosteum, and after that had corroded the Bone it self, and
corrupted its volatile Slat, which is natural to Bones, and is found abounding
in them, as is evident by the distillation of the Humane Craneum, from which is
forced out much Spirit, and no small quantity of Volatile Salt in a dry form.

But if any man be not as yet fully satisfied with these my Reasonings, let him
apply to his Teeth Oil of Vitriol (which is very acid) and he will by proper
experience find them not only to rot, but also to fall out by piecemeal.

Yea, this was well understood by Fabritius Hildanus, that most famous and
highly-experienced Chyrurgic-Physician; therefore he, in rottenness of the
Bone, condemned nothing more than acid Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, Aqua
Fortis, etc. and indeed deservedly.

I long since knew, that Ulcers attended with rottenness of die Bone, could not
be healed, unless by restoring the Bone first to its pristine condition;
therefore I here first took in hand to cure the perished Bone.

I also was not ignorant, that Fat things were very hurtful to the Bones,
because they (with their stringy Particles) do easily obstruct the small Pores
and passages of them, and indeed pertinaciously enough. For which cause I here
shunned all Fat things, worse than I would a Dog or Snake, and upon the
putrified Bone I strewed Rowder of Euphorbium, which contains much Volatile
Salt, and that indeed very tart. By this means, in a short time all the
rottenness was gradually removed from the Ulcer in form of an impalpable Powder.

That the Fatness of Euphorbium is not acid, as some perhaps may conjecture,
but saline, is manifest by this, viz. because it so vehemently excites
Sternutation, no otherwise than as Spirit of Sal Armoniack, which every man
owns to be saline. On the contrary, apply to your Nostrils the acid Spirits of
Nitre, Vitriol, Salt, and Sulphur, and you will find them, though most sharp,
yet not to excite Sternutation.

Now, that with External Medicaments I might help the Internal, whilst I was
using the Euphorbium, I gave to the sick a Decoction made with China,
Sarsaparilla, and other things containing much Volatile Salt.

When I saw the rottenness would not give place to these, I applied red-hot
Iron which is by some called an Actual Cautery, to distinguish it from that
which is called a Potential Cautery, but very improperly; For there is no such
thing as a Potential Cautery. Every Cautery; that is, every thing that burns,
acts. If that may deservedly be called a Potential Cautery, which though it
cannot presently burn, yet in a short time will effect the same; then Ice, by a
better right, shall be accounted a Cautery, because that may be reduced into
boiling Water; but how improper such a saying is, I leave to the judgment of
others.

But burning Iron in rottenness of a Bone, for two causes helps. First, it
communicates so much by its own motion to the Acido-corrosive Ferment (inherent
in the Bone) that it can evaporate as Spirit of Vitriol is (in distilling) by
Fire elevated on high. Secondly, it can temperate that part of the
Acido-corrosive Ferment, which is left in the rotten Bone. For Iron egregiously
resists Acidity, as is evident in preparation of Vitriol and Mars; in which is
excited a sufficiently manifest Fermentation, when the Spirit of Vitriol is
infused upon the Filings of Steel; and so in a short space of time the Spirit
of Vitriol loses much of its acor and corrosive force; yea, it waxes sweet.

The rottenness of the Bone removed, the remaining Ulcer was in a short time
filled up with flesh only by Common Turpentine applied with the White of an
Egg; and Skin was induced by dry Lint only, that continually imbibed the Pus,
which (left in the Ulcer) did not a little hinder the generation of the same.

There are many that suppose, that Arteries and Veins partly cut off can never
be regenerated, because they are Spermatick parts, (so by them vulgarly called)
but they are deceived. Why may not the Blood, issuing from a small Artery cut
off, thrust to the sides certain Particles stringy and less apt for motion
(enfolding themselves each within the other) there form the rudiment of some
Tunick, which may deserve the name of a small Artery? and why may not the same
Blood in its course, impeded by somewhat offending, be reflected, and so the
stringy Particles being again cast to the sides, there produce the rudiments of
some Vien? no otherwise than as may be seen in an Egg (after Incubation for
some days) in which both Arteries and Veins after the same manner proceed from
the liquid matter of the same Egg? This case is indeed very easy to be
understood.

Yea, a very light contact of that tender flesh, with which the Ulcer is
filled, presently causes Blood to issue out, which certainly could not be,
were not the Arteries and Veins so far prolonged.

But if there be yet found any one that shall be so incredulous as not to
belive what I have written, him I refer to the Medico-Physical Collections of
the industrious Blankart, wherein he declares, that either himself or some
other man, in Ulcers first hollow and afterward filled up with new flesh, has
(by a Microscope) discovered Veins and Arteries; yea, by his Eyes only,
without a Mycroscope, if the part healed was first sucked for a little time.

Thus far proceeding, I have now (as I judge) so clearly explained the
Phaenomenons occurrent in this little Maid, that her Case may by all be
understood; having acted far otherwise than the anxious Sectators of old
Authors were wont to do. For should I ask them, Whence that Tumor of the
Shoulder (of which I spoke even now) derived its original in the sick Maid?
They would presently answer, Nature had discharged her self in that place. But
I judge this equally as absurd as if I should ask why Beer newly boiled casts
up its Dreg through the Bung of the Cask? and another should answer. The nature
of the Beer, in that place, and by that means, frees it self from its burden;
whereas it should rather be said, the Beer forments; that is, there is a
certain intestine motion in the small Particles of the Beer, and by them the
stringy and other Particles, not sufficiently apt for like motion, are thrust
out by the Bung, where they are not compelled to a motion so swift.

Moreover, should I ask them why that Tumor rather exposed it self to sight in
the Shoulder than elsewhere? they would readily thus answer: This happened by
reason of the debility of the expulsive Faculty in the Shoulder. An excellent
way of reasoning indeed! containing as many Chimaera's as words.

If any one from a large Vessel pour any Liquor, with a small and equally
continued Ray, through a small Tunnel into a narrow-mouthed Bottle, and see the
Liquor to pass out with the same celerity as it was poured into the Tunnel, but
afterward observes the liquor in the Tunnel to be more and more accumulated,
does he not egregiously expose himself to the derision of every man; if he
produce as a cause of this the debility of the Expulsive Faculty in the Tunnel;
whereas the cause is some obstruction (in the inferior small Pipe of the
Tunnel, or in the narrow Neck of the Bottle) induced by some more gross body by
chance contained in the Liquor? Whosoever shall diligently weigh all these
things in his mind, will find the matter to hold parallel in either case, and
discern the reason of either side alleged to be equallyridiculous.

Before I put an end to this Observation, there remains yet one Problem to be
discussed by me, and it is this, viz. Whether an Ulcer or hollow wound may not
be filled up with some other Flesh, whether that Flesh be taken from some other
part of the same man, or else from another man, or from some Beast? especially
seeing we often find that the Spurs which Cocks use in fighting one with the
other, cut from their Legs are not only agglutinated to the head, but also
largely increase in a short time; as we daily see the like when Cocks are
castrated; yea, almost every man has (at some time or other) seen how a Branch
cut from one Tree, does grow together and unite with another.

But the reason here is far unlike; for the passages (or Pores) existing in the
Spurs of Cocks, and Branches of Trees, are constant, so that the Section of
them distorts them not; wherefore the circulation of Liquors through them is
easily renewed, although inserted into another part or another Body. In our
flesh it is otherwise, the small passages there are very tender, so that by
Section or any other force, they are presently distorted, and their sides (by
this means) do almost close together, and so at that time the circulation of
Humors through the same is wholly impeded.

OBSERVAT. IX.
Of a Fracture of the Shin-bone.

A Man Thirty years of Age leaping out of a Coach, suffered an oblique Fracture
almost in the middle of his Shin-Bone, which was attended with inequality of
the Leg, grating of the Bone, dolor and imbecility of morion.

For one extremity of the Shin-bone, by reason of the Fracture, tended this
way, the other that way, (whence was the inequality of the Leg) and when those
two extremities hit upon each other, the grating of the Bone was heard; and
when they with their sharpness pressed the Periosteum and adjoining parts, the
first cause of dolor discovered it self; but the second cause, when the
extremities of the broken Bone, by their pressure, compelled die Humors in the
small passages of the bordering parts, to stagnize, wax acid, and irritate the
small Fibers.

But when the Fibrils were thus disturbed by the points of the Bones and acid
Humors, the Animal Spirits could not be determinated rather into this than
into that Muscle, but without distinction, rushed into all disturbed parts; and
if (though but in a small quantity) they approached nigh to certain Muscles,
they could not enter and flow in, by reason of the passages of those Muscles
obstructed by the stagnizing Humors. And although some Spirits had flowed into
the same Muscles, yet all their tendency was was to move one extremity of the
cutting broken Bone to this party, the other to another; whence proceeded
nothing but Vellication, Pressure, and Renovation of the dolor. Hence the
cause of the imbicility of motion is sufficiently manifest.

I, being called presently, set the Broken Bones, and then my principal end was
to restore the circulation of the Blood and Humors; for without doubt the
Blood was here and there stagnized. Therefore, to temperate the peccant
Acidity, I washed the affected part with Sprit of Wine, in which a little Gum
Ammoniac was dissolved; and for the same end I applied a Plaster composed of
Diapalma, Bolus, Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Camomil: Then for retaining the
Bones so lately set, I used Ligatures and other things fit, renewing these by
certain intervals; and so the Patient in six weeks time could again walk.

I am not willing in this place to say, that a Fracture made transverse may
more easily be retained than an oblique Fracture; nor that it is for the most
part accounted a good sign of restriction, if the great Toe of the Foot
directly respect the Knee, seeing these things are well known. Nor shall I
endeavor to render a reason why the dolor is mitigated after the Bone is let;
because it is known that this is effected by removal of the first cause of the
Dolor of which I so lately spoke. But, before I conclude, I purpose to show
how the Callus is induced which conglutinates the fractured Bones.

When the Circulation of the Blood and Humors is again restored, as well in
the fractured Bone as elsewhere, then certain Particles, issuing from the Pores
of the Arteries, pass through the small passages of the Bone; and when they
come to the extremity thereof, they can proceed no further by a right Line,
because the passages were interrupted by the Fracture; therefore they turn to
the sides, where (adhering to die Bone, and each to other) they constitute a
Callus, which again conjoyns the Bones.

This Callus in the aged and weak is difficultly generated, by reason of the
gross and viscous Blood, which cannot pass through the straight passages of the
Bones. Therefore, in such a case, the more gross Particles of the Blood must be
attenuated by j. of the Stone Osteocolla daily taken. Yea, it will not be
injurious, if powder of the same stone be mixed with the Plaster that is
externally applied.

But in our Patient the matter was far otherwise: For the Callus extended it
self to a very unseemly bulk; wherefore I applied a Plaster of Frogs with
Mercury, to the end that this Plaster should so attenuate certain Particles of
the Callus, that they might fly away; and also a good Ligature, that it might
so compress the Callus, as nonothing new might have access thereunto.

Thus I put an end to this Observation, after I shall have told you, that I
commanded the Sick-man's Leg always to lie extended; and took care that the
Sole of the Foot might rest upon a small Pillow, in the middle of which was an
hole. For otherwise (as experience testifies) a Gangrene might have invaded the
bottom of the Foot, because the Vessels and small passages of the parts are
vehemently compressed by long lying.

There are some who in a Fracture of the Tibia (as this was) commend viscous
things, which I reject as noxious; because in a body without exercise
Obstructions do not a little augment, which (on the contrary) should rather be
diminished.

OBSERVAT. X.
Of a Dislocation of the Shoulder.

A Man Thirty two years of Age, falling from a Coach, suffered a Dislocation in
his left Shoulder, so that the head of the Bone, fallen into the inferior
part, was the cause of a certain eminency there; whilst, on the contrary, in
the superior part, was discerned an unusual Cavity. The Patient complained of
very great pain, and could not move his hand by the anteriour part to his
Forehead, nor by the posteriour to his Neck.

For the Bone, fallen from its seat, compressed the Periosteum and adjoining
parts, whence arose pain, which was augmented, because in the small passages of
the parts, compressed and distorted, the Humors stagnized, waxed acid, and
shook the small Fibers.

He could not move his Arm as formerly, because the head of the Bone, thrust
from its former Cavity, no longer (as before) enjoyed an hollow and slippery
place, requisite for its motion; also hence was the occasion that the Animal
Spirits could not enter (through the small passages obstructed by the
stagnizing Humors, and compressed by the dislocated Bone) into the Muscles and
excite them; hence it happened that no motion could be, because the head of the
Bone did more and more compress the parts adjoining; whence arose a new
excitation of dolor, which also induced no small impediment to the due
performance of motion.

I, being called to the Sick, reposited the dislocated Bone, and then the
motion presently returned; there was indeed some dolor present, because the
acid Humors stagnizing did (as yet) in some measure irritate the Fibrils;
nevertheless the pain was very much diminished, because the head of the Bone,
now contained in its proper Cavity, did no longer press upon the sensible parts.

The Bone being set, I endeavored (by things temperating Acidity) to dissolve
the stagnizing Humors, and restore to them their due Circulation; wherefore I
washed the affected part with Spirit of Wine, in which Gum Ammoniac was
dissolved; and applied a Plaster, (composed of Spirit of Wine, Bolus,
Diapalma, and Oil of Camomil) and then put Lint wrapped up like a Ball, under the
Arm-pit; and by this means the Patient was healed in a short space of time.

Peter Pigraeus a French Author, and Chyrurgeon worthy of praise, commends
Astringents to a Bone lately reposited; but (be it spoken with the leave of so
famous a man) in this he is egregiously deceived: For Astringents augment
Obstructions, which should rather be diminished.

Paulus Berbette wills, that the influx of Humors (in this case) be
prohibited, but improperly; because that influx being natural, should not be
stopped. That man undoubtedly saw in 2 Dislocations, the near adjoining parts
often elevated into a Tumor. Also he observed by frequent experience, that
Frankincense, Mastich, Bolus, and the like, removed this Tumor: But when he
judged this Tumor to be produced from an influx more copious than usual; and
when, according to this stated opinion, he thought his Medicaments did
therefore help, because they prohibited that Influx, then (I say) he erred. For
Obstructions were the cause that the Humors were coacervated and elevated into
a Tumor, and so waxed acid; and the said Medicaments only profit, because
they remove the Obstructions, and temperate the Acidity.

Having now spoken of the Dislocation of the Shoulder suddenly happening; there
is yet another Dislocation slowly invading, and more slowly sanable, viz. when
by External force the Ligaments of the Shoulder are contused, so that the small
passages are distorted, whence the Humors (circulating through the Ligaments)
do there subsist, and in process of time insinuate themselves into the Pores of
the Fibrils (of which the Ligaments consists) and extend those Pores, not
according to the breadth, but according to the length of the Ligaments. For the
Ligaments, when motion is, are often extended in length: even so, the
Ligaments, which otherwise were wont to contain the head of the Bone in its
Cavity, are now so far prolonged, that the Bone falls out of its proper seat.

This Dislocation is easily restored, but the Bone reposited is very
difficultly retained in its place.

External Medicaments, helpful to retain a Bone reduced to its place, are such
as consist of much Volatile Salt; because Volatile Salt can attenuate the
Particles inherent in the Pores of the Ligaments, and so force them out, and
restore the circulation of Humors. But the cure will be rendered more easy,
and in less time accomplished; if we contribute help to the external
Medicaments, by a Decoction to be inwardly taken, consisting of Lign. Guaiacum,
Root of Sarsaparilla, China, and other Medicaments abounding with much Volatile
Salt.

The end of the first Decade of Chyrurgick Observations.
DECADE II.
OBSERVAT. I.
Of the Puncture of a Nerve.

A Young Man aged Twenty years, exercised in Chyrurgery, with the Puncture of a
Lancet hurt the middle Finger of his left Hand, about the middle Article;
whence arose pain at first not very great, but by the next morning it was
vastly augmented; and besides redness invaded the whole Finger, attended with
burning heat and swelling, and the Cutis (in places nigh the Wound) was
separarated, pallid, and insensible.

After I had accurately considered the Phaenomena's, I concluded the Nerve to
be hurt by the Razor, whence at first arose but small pain.

But by reason of the small passages bordering on the wounded Nerve, Humors
(interrupted by that small Wound) otherwise freely circulating, were
constrained to subsist about the Wound, and there became acid, and so by the
Humors following them were driven to the wounded Nerve, where (permixt with
the Animal Spirits hastening through the Nerve) they excited a certain
effervescency, by reason of the Volatile Salt, contained in those Animal
Spirits; and by this means the acid Particles (constituted in motion great
enough) with the acuteness of their sides, egregiously vellicated the Fibrils
of the wounded Nerve, and so excited that grievous dolor I even now spoke of.

The acid Humors thus forced into an effervescency with the Animal Spirits,
not only irritated and disturbed the Fibrils of the wounded Nerve, but also
the Fibrils of the adjacent parts (yea of the whole Finger) whence many small
passages were so distorted, that the Blood and Humors settled in them, and (by
a short delay there) assumed the nature of Acidity, whence the heat and tumor
of the whole Finger, or inflammation of (...) same, were readily induced.

The same acid Particles, exercising their Effervescency, had wholly cut in
sunder those Fibrils which knit the Skin, sited round about the Wound, together
with the subjected part, and so the Cutis was separated, pallid, and
insensible; because those (often-cited) acid and cutting Particles had cut in
sunder very many Fibrils constituting the same Cutis; which Fibrils crisping on
heaps produced so many and so pertinacious Obstructions, that the circulation
of the Blood, Humors, and Spirits through the Cutis was totally impeded.

Things being thus, I judged the Wound sufficiently dangerous, and therefore
the cure thereof to be diligently set, about; having long before seen a French
Soldier, whose Nerve about the Cubit of the Arm was but lightly pricked with a
Sword; who after a long series of time, and many difficulties overcome, was
with very great care and pains at last restored to his pristine state of
health: Yea, I also saw an Husbandman, the Nerve of whose Thigh was wounded
with a Leaden-bullet shot out of a Gun; this man (a Convulsion being excited)
died in a short time after the wound was inflicted.

I had often before mixed Oil of Turpentine with the acid Oil of Vitriol, and
saw an Effervescenc^ ^o arise thence; yea, with my hands I ^ave felt sufficient
heat, produced in the Glass containing those Liquors: Hence I did without
difficulty perceive how powerfully Oil of Turpentine did resist Acidity, and
(by consequence) how excellently serviceable it would prove in this our case;
wherefore I poured Oil of Turpentine (before made sufficiently hot) into the
Wound, that so the Parades thereof of (put into greater motion) might more
easily and more profoundly penetrate, and consequently act more powerfully in
temperating the peccant Acidity. Then I applied Paracelsus his Stiptick
Plaster, which also temperates Acidity. Afterward on the Finger, and indeed
all over the Hand, I laid a doubled Cloth moistened with a Lavament consisting
of Spirit of Wine, Water of Elder, Camphire, and Salt-prunella; changing these
twice a day, and with an Instrument removing the Cutis, already separated from
the subjacent flesh: Thus our Young man was cured in a short time.

In the mean while it is worthy observation, that I saw a necessity of being
industriously careful to prevent the access of the ambient Air; because that
contains in it self Acidity, which is apparent thus, viz. because it coagulates
Milk; yea Blood it self when extravasate, is in a short time coagulated by the
Air; whereas the same is found to persist in its wonted Fluidness for several
days, if it remain in the Vessels of any Carcass where it is free from the
ambient Air.

By the aforesaid it is sufficiently manifest, why there is much less dolor in
a Nerve wholly cut off than in that which is only pricked, or but lightly
wounded: for when a Nerve is totally cut in sunder, one Extremity is retracted
to this part, the other to another, and is absconded by the flesh, so that the
acid Humor (inherent in the Wound) and the ambient Air, cannot have access to
the Nerve.

The famous Sylvius deduceth extreme dolor, and other Phaenomena's occurring
in a Wound of the Nerve, from a far other cause than I do. For he thinks some
of the Fibrils in the Nerve being cut, the other (as yet entire) suffer so much
the more by a continued stretching produced by the Animal Spirits; and that
hence arises Dolor, Convulsion, and other Evils frequently observed in such
cases: But (with the leave of so great a man) this Cause pleases me not,
seeing from it I cannot conclude that the pallid and insensible Cutis is
frequently separated from the adjacent part. This Cause of his is repugnant to
Experience, which teaches that the Puncture of a Nerve is more dangerous than
if the Nerve were cut to the midst: For in a Nerve cut to the midst many more
Fibrils are cut, than in a Nerve pricked, in which often but a few Fibrils only
are hurt. But it is certain that Sylvius did himself believe his own reason not
sufficient, seeing in the same Twenty third Chapter of his Second Book he
says, that Phaenomenons exhibiting themselves in the Puncture of a Nerve, seem
to him more like a Dream, than to any observation made by the Senses.

Therefore, that I may put an end to this Observation, I say, that in the wound
of a Nerve Acidity is peccant, and that such Medicaments should be applied as
infringe Acidity: For this Cause is commended Oil of Wax, and Ear-wax; but acid
things are not fit here to be used, which was well observed by Felix Plaiterus,
who (in his Book of Observations, page 468) says, Acidity is very inimical to
the Nerves.

OBSERVAT. II.
Of Dolor of the Head.

A Man Forty two years of Age was vexed with a most vehement dolor of his
Head, and indeed that only about the Temple of one side, where it remained
fixed; which Affect if any one will for this cause insignize with the name of a
Clavus, let him for me.

I judged the cause of this Dolor to be an Acido-corrosive Humor, there lying
hid and stagnizing by reason of Obstruction very pertinaceous.

There was one (studious of Medicine) present, who persuaded himself that the
cure of this Affect would be best performed by Sudorificks; which, by reason of
the pertinacy of the Obstruction in this Disease, I judged equally as
impossible as in the Panaritium, which I never heard to have been healed by
Sudorificks, though the same Affect derives its original from an
Acido-corrosive Humor: for it is but a very small portion of the Sudorifick
that can arrive to the pained part.

Therefore I rather applied to the affected part Powder of Cantharides (with
his own Spittle formed into a Vesicatory) about the evening, and left it on all
night.

The famous Sylvius to Cantharides adds Vinegar, thinking there would thence
arise a certain Fermentation, and so the Vesicatory operate the better. Yea the
most Learned Willis also adjoyns acid things to many forms of Vesicatories;
which I my self have often imitated, but as often observed, that after the
space of a whole day no Blisters have been raised by the Cantharides, when I
mixed them with Vinegar, viz. for this reason, because the Volatile Salt of die
Cantharides was enervated by the Vinegar, in which Salt the principal Virtue of
them consists.

Coming the next day, I beheld a large Blister raised by the Cantharides, and
understood that the sick-man was wholly eased of his pain.

But I could not persuade my self that this dolor was removed by the Blister
raised, and by reason of the Water flowing from the same when opened. For the
Water that issued out, was neither sharp of taste, nor could be such; because
had it been so, it must needs have inferred some dolor on the subjected skin
before apertion of the Blister, which notwithstanding it did not, although the
Cutis (the Epidermis being by this means removed) be of it self sufficiently
sensible, as is apparent, because it is often hurt, and feels pain, by the
ambient Air.

What was it then that removed that Dolor? The Volatile Salt of the
Cantharides, which (by the Vapors passing out through the skin) stirred up to
a sufficiently swift motion, penetrated to the Acidocorrosive humor, and
temperated and cut the same, and took away the obstruction.

But whence then did the Blister derive its original? I say, that in the mean
time, when the more volatile Particles of the Cantharides had penetrated far
enough for correcting the peccant Humor, other more gross and more acid
Particles subsisted about the Cutis, in which they brake certain Fibrils, which
(crisping up together) did so obstruct the small passages, that the Humors in
circulation were partly impeded, and so gathered together in the Superficies of
the Cutis, and elevated the Cuticle into the form of a Blister; which might
easily happen, because the Fibrils which join die Cutis with the Cuticle were
now broken in sunder by the aforesaid more gross and more acid Particles of the
Cantharides.

But some one may perhaps here say, that that Water should not have been there
congregated, but rather have passed out by the Pores of the Cuticle, by which
we so often see Sweats to issue out. To him I answer, the most gross Parts of
the Cantharides remained and adhered about the Cuticle, and very much
constringed the Pores thereof; which should seem strange to no man, who (even
but once in his lifetime) has seen how easily by heat of fire Parchments may
be crumpled up, and that the common Fire which so crumples them, does also
sometimes excite small Blisters, wholly like those that are raised by
Cantharides; but because the Pores of the Cuticle were so closed, therefore the
Vapors (otherwise freely exhaling) were accumulated, and augmented the
abundance of Humor contained in the Blister.

If any man, not as yet plainly convinced by our way of reasoning, believes
that the long lying on of the Cantharides (by reason of the Blisters raised)
helps until his mind be altered by the Authority of some approved Writer, I
would have him go to Lazarus Riverius, who (in his Third Century, Observation
4.) declares, that a Vesicatory left on but a quarter of an hour, had in that
time wholly removed the dolor of a Bees sting, no Blisters being raised by
reason of so short delay.

Francis Redi, in a Treatise of Insects, affirms, that he had seen a white
shining Humor (undoubtedly Acido-corrosive) flowing out from the Stings of
Scorpions; and it is very probable, that such an humor (in the Punctures of
Bees) does in like manner flow from their Stings, which is the cause of dolor.
Hence it is now manifest, that the dolor, of which Riverius speaks, vanished,
because the acid Humor which flowed out from the Bees Sting and excited dolor,
was temperated by the Volatile Salt of the Cantharides.

But that the Stings of Bees are hollow, no man will wonder, who has at any
time seen the Glass-Pipes made by Art, which are used for examining and
beholding the Blood and other Liquors through a Microscope; seeing they, though
small as an Hair, do notwithstanding enjoy a certain Cavity.

OBSERVAT. III.
Of the Contracture of a Tendon after a Fracture of the Shoulder Bone.

A Young man, aged Twenty two years, after a Fracture of the Shoulder Bone
healed, could not extend his inbowed and rigid Arm.

The more remote cause of this Evil was the Surgeon's negligence, who left the
Arm inbowed for five or six Weeks; whereas he should, as often as, and every
time he bound up the Fracture, have frequently extended the same, as a thing of
special note in Chyrurgick Practice.

But this is not therefore a wonder, seeing we daily see a Bow which has for
some tine remained unbowed, not to be easily bowed again: Yea, who does not
sometimes experience in himself, how difficultly he is able to go and extend
his feet, after he has sat unmoved in a Coach but for one only day.

But forasmuch as this Comparison does not as yet sufficiently illustrate the
matter, my purpose is somewhat more narrowly to search out the cause of the
same.

When the Arm was inbowed about the Cubit, the Tendon of the two-headed Muscle,
bowing the Cubit, was contracted (but what is here spoken of the Tendon of the
two-headed Muscle, may be understood of other Tendons of Muscles bowing the
Cubit) and so the Pores of the Fibrils, of which the Tendon consists, before
round, are changed into oval, so that the greater Diameter of the Pores has
respect to the Latitude of the Fibrils.

In the mean while the Humors passed out from the Pores of the Arteries, which
(by reason of motion often instituted) freely perfected their circulation, now
(by reason of rest) did in some sort subsist in the Tendon. Yea, in a short
space of time, certain gross Particles of those Humors, deeply insinuated
themselves into those Oval Pores of the Fibrils, and conserved and confirmed
them in that oblong Figure; and in process of time those recited Particles so
pertinaceously adhered in the abovenamed Pores, that they could not by any
means be expelled thence: Henee the Tendon of the two-headed Muscle was made
shorter; no otherwise than as we see new Ropes, or new Cloth, sprinkled with
Water to shrink.

Hence also the said Tendon appeared hard and rigid; whence it is (as I judge)
sufficiently manifest why the Arm could not be extended: for the Muscles,
extending the Arm, could not perform their wonted action, being before
contracted; these could not be contracted, but the Tendon with its two-headed
Muscle must needs begin to cease acting. This was impossible, by reason of the
Pores of the Fibrils (obstructed by the aforesaid Particles) by which the
Tendon was tumified.

The cause of this Phenomenon, by this means found out, the method of curing
was without difficulty understood, viz. that it was behooful to expel the
Particles obstructing the Pores; wherefore I used a Fomentation of Wine, in
which were boiled Herbs, and other things abounding with much Volatile Salt;
and then I applied a Plaster of Frogs with Mercury, and (after I had continued
that for several days) I often commanded the Patient to hold some weight in his
hand, that so the Particles inherent in the obstructed Pores, and by the
aforesaid Medicaments in some measure macerated (in the Dutch Idiom los
gewyckt) might by a certain force be ejected. By this means the Patient
recovered his pristine Sanity in a short time.

OBSERVAT. IV.
Of a Vein Cut.

A Man, aged Thirty six years, commanded a Vein to be cut in the Flexure of his
Arm; the next day several Ounces of Limpid Humor flowed out from the Orifice of
the Vein cut, and that Efflux continued for several days after; but the Arm in
the mean while was neither affected with dolor nor with redness. A rare
Phenomenon indeed! which I cannot remember ever to have happened in all my
Practice.

Perhaps some small Lymphatick-Vessel lay above the Vein to be cut, which in
cutting the Vein was wounded, and (by certain Particles stagnizing and waxing
acid nigh the Orifice of the small wound made) irritated and continually gently
convulsed, sent forth this abundance of Lympid Humidity. I temperated the
peccant Acidity nigh the Lymphatick-Vessel with Oil of Turpentine poured in
hot; and so compelled the Aperture to close, and the Lympid Humor (in a short
time) to subsist, or rather again to circulate by a natural way.

I likewise knew a certain Tyro in Chyrurgy, who in Section of the Median-Vein,
wounded a subjected Tendon, whence arose dolor and redness, which being
removed, at length was inferred so great a Contracture of the Tendon of the
two-headed Muscle, that the Arm having now for a long time been inbowed, could
not be extended by the Patient, whose Cure was effected even after the same
manner as I showed in the foregoing Observation.

That is to say, some Humors stagnizing about the wounded Tendon, waxed acid,
and (irritating that Tendon) caused the Animal Spirits to flow in greater
abundance than usual; by which means the Tendon (with the Muscle annexed) was
contracted, and the Arm incurvated, which afterward remained so inbowed, by
reason of certain Particles which obstructed the Pores of the Fibrils in the
Tendon, after the same manner as I (in the precedent Observation) have largely
explained.

But dolor and redness, which often attend the Puncture of a Tendon,
acknowledge the same Cause, and require the same Cure that I proposed in the
Puncture of a Nerve.

Many Chyrurgeons, when they would evacuate gross Blood, make a large Orifice
of the Vein; and when they purpose to let out Blood more subtle, a lesser
Orifice; but evily. For if the gross Particles of the Blood (mixed with the more
subtle) can accurately enough circulate through the Arteries and Capillary
Veins, is it not more clear than the Sun that no Orifice (in the cutting of a
Vein) can be made so very small, but that with the more subtle part of the
Blood, that which is more gross may be exp^lled by the same. Which the most
acute Bail (perhaps Boil) did well observe.

The famous Mr. Leeuwenhoeck, by a Microscope, discovered Humane Blood to
consist of small red Globes floating in a Chrystalline Humor; which, when the
Blood (after cutting of a Vein) received in a Porringer, was coagulated, their
motion being lost, descended to the bottom, the Chrystalline Humor (through
which they were before moved) floating above.

Certainly a strange and pleasant Invention, but of no use in the Medicinal
Practice. For they, who (from this ground) endeavor to deduce the Causes and
Cures of Fevers, and other Diseases, seem to me to trifle out the time, and
lose all their labor; whereas rather, had they respect to Acidity, Salt,
Bitterness, Sweetness, and other properties (undoubtedly contained in the
Blood) they would certainly thence reap far greater understanding in cure of
the sick.

Many Authors prescribe the opening of the Cephalic-Vein, rather than of the
Median or Basilic; but unadvisedly. For I have often found by experience, that
that Vein easily recedes from its proper place, and so when it is cutting shuns
the wound intended.

I have often observed in fat Boys a Vein (presently after the usual Ligature)
to be sufficiently tumid and manifest; but if not quickly opened has soon
disappeared, viz. when the Blood pressed downwards the subjected and
readily-yielding Fatness, that so (notwithstanding the Ligature) it might again
freely pass through the Vein.

After the cutting of a Vein, when the Vein seemed sufficiently closed, I have
often beheld the Blood issuing out thence with great violence; and indeed from
no other cause, than that the Chyrurgeons first applied their Ligature and Lint
compressing, and afterward inbowed the Arm: For by this means, the Lips of the
Orifice, which before (in the extension of the Arm) were conjoined, again
separated each from other when the Arm was inbowed.

Oftentimes a certain Lividness is found left after the cutting of a Vein, the
cause of which is too frequently the evil use of Vinegar, in which is imbibed
the Lint compressing, which is put upon the Aperture of the Vein; whereas it is
indeed sufficiently manifest, that the Blood is coagulated by Acidity, and
acquires a Livid and black color.

Before I put an end to this Observation, I think fit to add the counsel of
Peter Pigraeus, that we may thence (if possible) reap some further benefit.

That very famous and most dexterous Chyrurgeon commands, that after the
cutting of a Vein, the Aperture should be anointed with Oil, if it be intended
again to extract Blood the same day from the same Orifice without a new made
Aperture.

But if Oil can, though for a short time applied, hinder the closure of the
Orifice of a Vein cut, how evilly do they act, who use Oil in the cure of
Wounds; and for no other reason, than because they have seen the same thing
done by their Masters? As for Example: Oil of Saint-Johns-Wort: For if
Saint-Johns-Wort profits Wounds, by reason of its Volatile Salt temperating
Acidity, why do they not rather extract the Tincture of Saint-Johns-Wort by
Spirit of Wine? into which it much more easily and more copiously transfers its
Volatile Salt, than into Oil, which hurts Wounds; because that obstructing the
Pores and Passages, stops the Circulation of the Blood and Humors; whereas that
Circulation should rather be excited, to which excitation Spirit of Wine is not
a little available. For it egregiously temperates Acidity, which usually
coagulates the Blood and Humors in Wounds, and renders them unfit for
Circulation. But least I should be found too prolix in this matter, I here put
an end to this Observation.

OBSERVAT. V.
Of the Cracking of a Tendon.

A Woman, aged Forty three years, after greater Labor than usual, in her right
Hand suffered an impotency to motion, with Tumor and Dolor; and when the
Tendon, sited in the Hand, was pressed with the Finger, it gave a sound.

This is an Affect, which often occurs in the Practice of Chyrurgy, though it
has hitherto been treated of by no man, (that I have heard of) therefore I
shall call it Crepitus Tendinis, or the Cracking of a Tendon.

By this Woman's unaccustomed Labor, the Fibrils of the Tendon were so
distorted, that the Humors (impeded in their Circulation) there subsisted and
were coagulated; whence the Impotency of Motion, Tumor, Dolor, and Cracking of
the Tendon, were most readily induced.

I feared, that the Humors stagnizing in the Tendon, would be daily more and
more coagulated, and thence that Tumor take beginning, which is known to many
by the name of a Ganglion.

Yea, I suspected that certain Particles of the subsisting Humors would be
received within the Pores of the Fibrils, compounding the Tendon, and obstruct
them so, as (in the Third Observation of this Decade) we showed to be apt to
render them too propense to induce both Contracture and rigidness of the Tendon.

Wherefore, judging it high time to set about the Cure, I ordered Spirit of
Wine to be enkindled in such wise, that the Vapor arising thence might
surround the hand affected; and this being done, commanded a Plaster of Frogs,
with Mercury, to be applied. By this means the coagulated Humors were
dissolved, the Obstructions removed, and the Patient (in a few days) restored
to her pristine state of health.

OBSERVAT. VI.
Of an Haemorrhagia, from a Varicous Ulcer of the Tibia.

IN the right Tibia of a Woman aged Forty years, from an Internal cause, an
Ulcer was formed upon a sufficiently large Varix, which yielded to no Remedies.
This Evil was also attended with a Tumor, and a large Erysipelas very
troublesome, which in like manner could not be removed by any Medicaments.

After a few days the Varix was unexpectedly opened (by the Acido-corrosive
Humor there inherent) from which issued out at least lib. ij. of black and (as
the standers by affirmed) very stinking Blood.

I ordered that Placentula (in a form somewhat hard) composed of Medicaments
temperating Acidity, which I commended in the Sixth Observation of the First
Decade, to be applied by the Chyrurgeon, and so not only closed up the Varix,
but also temperated that Acidity inherent in the Ulcer, which otherwise (by its
corrosion) would easily again have opened the Varix, and besides have much
impeded the cure of the Ulcer.

It was wonderful to see, that after the Varix (unexpectedly opened) had cast
out so great abundance of Blood, the Erysipelas and other Symptoms soon
vanished, and the Ulcer daily showed it self in a state more and more
meliorated; so that within the space of three Weeks (by the only help of the
aforesaid Placentula) it wholly closed.

I now intend not here to treat of the Original and Cure of the Varix, Ulcer,
and Erysipelas, having accurately enough discoursed of that in the Sixth
Observation of the First Decade; because a dish of Crambe twice cocted was
always deadly to me, if to any other man.

But my intention here, is to confirm what I have spoken by Experience, and
has been before by me treated of (in the said Sixth Observation of the First
Decade) viz. to show that undoubtedly the Erysipelas and Ulcer derived their
Original from Acidity, and likewise how opportunely I instituted the Section of
the Varix in that varicous Ulcer of the Tibia.

But from the Example before-alleadged these Conclusions may easily be drawn:
for neither the Erysipelas nor the Ulcer would give place to any Remedies, so
long as that Varix was replete with so great abundance of black and
(undoubtedly by its long delay) acid Blood, which no sooner issued out, but the
Erysipelas vanished, and the Ulcer closed in a short time after.

OBSERVAT. VII.
Of a vast Contusion of the Arm.

A Matron, aged Fifty six years, after a Fall from on high, complained of an
unaptness to motion, and very great dolor of her left Arm, which appeared very
much swollen, although of the same color with the sound skin. I perceived by the
Pulse a more than usual swiftness of motion in the Blood, viz. by reason of the
Terror which the Patient had conceived by the Fall.

After we had very acurately inquired into the cause of the Evil, we could not
(through the whole length of the Arm) find either Fracture or Dislocation, but
a very great Contusion of the whole Arm; so that much of the Extravasate Blood,
and also of the Humors (adhering in the small passages of the Arm distorted by
the Contusion) stagnized, and in a short time waxed acid; whence that
Imbecility, Tumor, and Dolor, may rationally be concluded to have derived
their Original.

Some, to render the motion of the Blood more pleasing, do here presently cut a
Vein; whereas I, on the contrary omitted the opening of a Vein, and gave to the
Patient an Anodine Tincture (prepared of Opium and other things) which much
more securely, and with greater Utility diminished the motion of the Blood.

After some few hours, I exhibited to the Sick a sudorifick Powder, which would
also temperate the Acidity of the Extravasate Blood and stagnizing Humors; this
I repeated the two following nights with good success. This Powder consisted of
Diaphoretick Antimony, Crab's-eyes prepared, Salt-prunella Antimoniat, and other
things; and hereby the dolor was in no small measure remitted, and the
Extravasate Blood was driven out to the Cutis, which then (all over the Arm)
from the Shoulder to the Fingers was very livid, yea waxed black.

The Chyrurgeons, that were present with me, did in the beginning of the Cure
(without my consent) anoint the whole Arm with Oil of Roses, which hurts not so
much by reason of the Roses, as by reason of the Oyl-Olive. For although this
might do some good, yet it could not profit, unless it could have penetrated to
that place, where the Extravasate Blood and stagnizing Humors lay; but so far
it could not penetrate, unless in form of Vapor, and the heat of our Bodies is
too weak to convert Oyl-Olive into such Vapors; seeing indeed a sufficiently
strong Fire made of Wood and Coals, is not of force sufficient to reduce the
Particles of Oyl-Olive (put into a Pot) into the form of Vapors.

Therefore the Oyl-Olive was so far from doing good, that (as I judged) it
rather did hurt, because by its stringy Particles it augmented the
Obstructions, and so caused the Blood and Humors yet more to stagnize; and
besides (by its closing the Pores of the Skin) it hindered the access of other
Medicaments to the place affected.

If common Roses be cold as many think, I should reject them in this case; but
because from their bitterness and penetrating Odor the contrary may be judged
by those who (laying aside their prejudices) will rather follow Verity than
Antiquity. Therefore I in this case condemn Oil of Roses, by reason of the
Oyl-Olive, but not by reason of some Particles of the Roses mixed therewith.

The same Chyrurgeons applied to the whole Arm (anointed with Oil of Roses)
that Defensive Plaster, the description of which is found in the Ultrajectine
Pharmacopoeia; which indeed I do not here wholly reject, because it contains
many Ingredients temperating Acidity; as Bolus, Terra Sigillata, Lithargyry,
and other things; but to what end should here be added Myrtle-Berries, Oil of
Myrtles, and Austere Red-Wine? These indeed bind up the Pores of the Skin, and
so wholly impede the penetration of other fit Ingredients to the affected part.

Experience did in a short time confirm the truth of my Assertion, when many
Pustles (dispersed through the whole Arm) came in sight.

Wherefore I prescribed the following Lavament, which I substituted instead of
the Oil and Plaster, as being a Medicament that would powerfully resist
Acidity, and consequently well dissolve the coagulated Blood and Humors.

. Roots, Of the Flower de Luce. Of Calamus Aromaticus, Of Bryony, of each ss.
Herbs, Rosemary, Betony, Sage, of each M. ss.
Berries, Of Juniper, Of Bays, of each iij.

Boil these in a close Vessel with French-Wine, and to two pound of the
Colature add

Of Gum Ammoniac ij. Of Salt of Tartar j. Make a Lavament.
By this means the Pustles vanished, the Dolor was diminished, the motion of
the Arm gradually returned, and the Livid color was turned yellow.

Then (the Chyrurgeons willing the Medicaments should be changed) instead of
the Defensive Plaster, which they again proposed, I prescribed a Fumigation
temperating Acidity, which consisted of Bay Berries, Juniper Berries,
Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, and other things. For if these latter could help
in the aforesaid Plaster, where they lay bound up by the Suet and Wax, they
must needs be much more profitable, when (in the form of Fume) they could fly
up and surround the Arm, its superior part being covered; and so, being
forcibly enough agitated, could enter the Pores of the Arm, by that time well
opened by the heat.

After this I commanded Spirit of Wine to be burnt, the Vapor of which
ascending to the Arm, and entering through the Pores infringed the Acidity,
which had in no small measure coagulated the Blood and Humors; and by that
means the Patient was healed, the dolor and yellowness removed, and the motion
of the Arm restored.

I most assuredly persuade my self, that the Contusion would not have been so
great, if a Fracture of the Bone in the Patients Arm had also been concomitant:
For the Bone when broken, recedes and contuseth no more; but when the Bone
remains entire, and consequently (by reason of its hardness) makes strenuous
resistance, and when there is (on the other part) a solid Body contusing, then
the interstanding Flesh is no otherwise pressed on either part, than as if it
were put under a Press, and so it is in a strange manner contused.

And this is no more than what our daily practice confirms; in which I have
often observed a Contusion, where the Bone has been broaken, to be much less
than where the Bone has remained unhurt.

In this Cure my fear was, that the Extravasate Blood should be so much
coagulated, that it could not be afterward dissolved; and so might at length
become so very acid and corrosive, as to infect the adjacent parts with a
Gangrene. For it was not long before that I was called to a young Man, who had
for eight days neglected a Contusion of the Tibia; after that I was called, and
(seeing how it was) compelled to open the contused part with a Lancet, I
perceived many sufficiently large Clots of Blood, firmly coagulated, black and
putrid, which had (in some sort) infected the Cavity in which they were
contained, with a Gangrene; which notwithstanding I in a short time removed by
washing it with Spirit of Wine, and by inspersing the Pouders of Myrrh and
Aloes.

OBSERVAT. VIII.
Of a Ganglion in the Hand.

A Youth, aged Sixteen years, complained of a Tumor hard and painful, which
(sited in the upper part of his right Hand) in magnitude equallized an
Hazel-Nut, and was of the same color with the Cutis; and there was now near
three Months passed since the Patient (by unaccustomed labor) was affected
with this Evil.

The Tendon lay in the upper part of the Hand, the small passages of which were
(by that unusual labor) so distorted, that the Humors in their circulation
meeting with many Obstructions, stagnized in those passages of the Tendon, and
then (by the Humors following them) were forced up to that Membrane, which
invests the Tendon; where, having formed a Cavity for themselves, they were
collected, and the more viscous Particles were (in some sort) concreted, the
more thin Particles in the mean while passing out. Hence the Tumor (of which I
here treat, and is by many distinguished by the Name of a Ganglion) derived its
original.

I, with my Thumb, strongly compressed this Tumor, and saw it, by this means,
suddenly to vanish, viz. when the Humors (constituting the Tumor) were again
thrust out on every side through those small passages of the Tendon. But
because the Obstructions could not be so removed, I feared their return:
therefore (for attenuating the Viscous Humors, and removing the remaining
Obstructions) I applied a Plaster of Frogs with Mercury, and upon that a
sufficiently strait Ligature, which prevented the Viscous Humors, from
gathering again (as before) in the aforesaid Cavity.

But when this Tumor had continued for some years, then it could not be removed
by pressure of the Thumb; but I was constreined to use a Wooden Ferula, not
differing from that which Schoolmasters use in chastizing Boys, (only that in
the midst thereof a certain portion of Lead lay infused) and with one only
stroke of such a Ferula (the Patients Face being turned backwards from his
affected hand) I saw the Ganglion wholly to vanish, which had full three years
vexed the Patient, whose Cure was then completed in a short time after, by the
aforesaid Plaster, and a strict Ligature.

OBSERVAT. IX.
Of a moveable round Tumor of the Lower-Lip.

A Young man Twenty three years of age, showed to me a round Tumor in his
Lower-Lip, movable and somewhat painful, which (in the mean while) was not a
little troublesome by reason of its bulk, that equalized one of those Balls
with which Children are wont to play; but its color differed not from the
color of the Lip.

This Patient, three Months before, had with his Teeth bit his Lower Lip, and
from that time he perceived this Tumor. Now there is scarcely any man (skilled
in Chyrurgy) that knows not how many very small Glandules are inserted, not
only in all the other parts of the Mouth, but also in the Lower Lip; one of
which was undoubtedly so hurt, that the Humors (passing but from the small
Artery, their passage being shut up) settled in the Glandule, and by that means
the small Glandule increased to such a large Tumor, as is here (in this
Observation) by me described.

Although this Tumor often occurs in the practice of our Art, yet I know no
man that has explained the Cause thereof, and and but One only that has by
Example described the Cure of the same, viz. Job Van Meeckeren Chyrurgeon of
Amsterdam, who (if my memory fail me not) to this Affect gave a name, which (in
the Dutch Idiom) is even steen knoop.

But why do you wonder? that so very small a Glandule should be extended to so
great a magnitude? Consider, I pray, how much the magnitude of one and the same
Womb differs in a Virgin, and in a Woman with Child. Peruse the Disputation,
which the most famous John Munnicks (Ultra-jectine Professor) published
November 20, in the year 1678. in which he declares, that the Womb of a certain
maid was so largely extended that it did contain 112 Pounds of Water.

Why do you yet doubt? I shall here offer yet one Experiment which comes more
near to our purpose. I myself, when I was at any time above measure hurt by
Cold, have often found the Glandules about the Neck (which in a state of health
I cannot find by the touch) to increase to so great a bulk, that they have
exceeded the largeness of a Pidgeons-Egg.

But now at last to hasten to the Cure, I say, Medicaments can neither be
commodiously applied nor retained in such a place; therefore I took away the
whole Tumor (at one time) by Section with a Knife, and healed the remaining
Wound with Honey of Roses only.

OBSERVAT. X.
Of an Affect of the Month, by us vulgarly called De Water-Kanker.

I Not long since saw a Man-child two years old (who had for three whole Months
been afflicted with a Quartane Fever) and between his Upper-lip and Gum I found
an Ulcer (which took beginning four days before) sufficiently tending upwards,
hollow, hard, painful, blackish and ill-smelling.

The Blood of this sick Child, by his acid and sowering Meat and Drink, as also
by his long continued Quartane, was become much more acid than was fit, and
(being such) did not so much settle any where, as between the Upper-Lip and the
Gum; because the Blood and Humors are there easily coagulated by the cold Air,
(admitted by Inspiration) also by the Relics of Meats sticking between the
Teeth, and by their delay there contracting sharpness.

The Blood and Humors stagnizing did in time become very corrosive, and so not
only much vellicated the Fibrils of the Lip and Gum, but also broak in sunder
many of them; and by this means a deep, hard, hollow, and painful Ulcer took
beginning.

But that we may the better find out the reason of the soon-after-induced
Blackness, I think good first to declare, that I, not long since, did (by the
help of my Microscope) look upon a small piece of white Linen, and all the
Fibrils with which the Threads were twisted, appeared transparent as Ice; but
every Thread, made of those pellucid Fibrils, were to the sight white; no
otherwise than as Water appears pellucid, but the Froath (which consists of
many Superficies of the Water, so superposited one above another, that much Air
is contained within them) presents it self white to the fight.

But when I had burned this Linen, not only all the Threads, but also all the
Fibrils of them presented to my sight (strengthened by the Microscope) a black
color, viz. because the Pores in the Linen were much distorted by the force
of Fire, and many Particles flew away from the burning Linen in the form of
Smoke, insomuch that the Solar-Rays (suffocated in those Pores) could not be
reflected to my Eye.

Now what Fire effected in the Linen, the same did the Acido-corrosive
Particles effect in the Ulcer, when they brake in sunder the Fibrils, and
otherwise figured and changed the Pores of them; yea, they compelled many
Particles to evaporate from the Ulcer in the form of Vapor, as was manifest by
the stink.

But that I may remove from many their cause of wonder, that I should write,
that Acidity concurs to the inducing of Blackness, I would have them to examine
how good Ink may be made with a Decoction of Galls in Vinegar, in which filings
of Steel have been first infused: Or (at least) let them cut a Pome-citron with
a Knife, and they will soon see the Knife to wax very black.

Now the evil Odor of the Ulcer only remains to be explained. Wherefore, that
the aforesaid Comparison may in this place also be subservient to me, let any
man smell to that ungrateful Odor which in burning of Linen is wont to
penetrate his Nostrils. For, what Fire acts in respect of Linen, the same
operates the Acido-corrosive humor in an Ulcer, whilst it corrupts many
Particles of the Volatile Salt (which in an healthful state is in great
abundance contained in the parts of the Humane Body, and in the parts of the
Bodies of other Animals, as Distillation plainly shows) changes their Figures,
and so causes them, their Bonds with which they were before tied being broken,
to fly away; at which time, by the Air, wherewith they mix themselves, forced
into the Nostrils, they affect the Fibrils of the Nerves (subservient to
Smelling) with too great trembling, and so to the Mind is exhibited a
conception of evilly-smelling odor.

The Phaenomenons of this Disease, so often occurring in the Praxis, and by no
man (that I know of) as yet sufficiently explained and discoursed of, it will
be all one to me, whether (with Hildanus) it be called a Gangreen; with Charles
Battus a Cancer; or with Cornelius vander Voorden, an Eating Ulcer; seeing I
little regard those mere Disputes about the name, being affected with nothing
so much as the matter it self.

This Evil augments very swiftly, and may (in a short time strangle the sick,
as I (two Months before) experienced in a Maiden-Child four years old; which
was brought to me (the fifth day after the invasion of the Disease) so
deformed, as she seemed not to resemble Humane kind. For half her Nose, and a
fourth part of her Tongue was already consumed, her left Cheek hard as a stone,
perforated with a great hole; by reason of which and other Symptoms, according
to my Prognostic, she died within four days.

Therefore these things being by me seriously considered, I prescribed the
following Unguent resisting corrosive Acidity.

Of Treacle, ij. ss. Of Unguent. Aegyptiac. j. ss. Of Gum Lacca, Spirit of Salt
Ammoniac, of each ij.
Mix and make an Unguent.

With this, mixed with a little Spirit of Wine, I six times a day washed the
affected part, and applied thereto scraped Lint moistened in the same Medicine;
by which only Remedy I have happily cured, not this Child only, but also many
others, in a very short time.

The end of the Second Decade.
DECADE III.
OBSERVAT. I.
Of a Coadnate Tumor of the Forehead.

A Maiden-Infant, Fourteen days old, was deformed with a very red Tumor, void
of pain, which she had contracted whilst in the Womb. For the Mother of this
Infant, when with child, was wounded in her Forehead. From that Wound, which
inferred great dolor, much Blood issued out. Wherefore the Mother, willing to
be more certain of her own misfortune, hastened to a Looking-glass, and so was
not a little terrified.

Now who knows not how strict the union is between the Mother and her Infant in
the Womb? This should not be accounted a wonder, seeing the Circulation of the
Blood is common to both.

In the Hospital in Paris, a Fool is reported to have lived till Twenty years
of age, the Bones of whose Legs, Arms, and other parts were broken from his
Nativity. The reason of this was, because his Mother (when with child of him)
had, not without terror, beheld the Bones of a certain Malefactor publicly
broken by the common Hangman.

If a pregnant Mother can impress so great evils upon her tender Young, when
she sees another afflicted with great dolor, consider what greater evil may
happen when she both sees and feels (in her proper body) a bleeding Wound.

But to write of the way how this happens (that being little conducent to the
Practick part) I shall in this place forbear. If any man be more curious in
this matter, let him peruse L. de la Forge his Annotations upon Cartesius his
Treatise of Man; also that most acute Author of a certain French Treatise
(entitled La Recherche de la Verite) who very elegantly there discourses of
this Effect, and how it is produced.

Having beheld and observed this Tumor, I applied to it a Corrosive, composed
only of Calx vive and common Soap mixed together which was extended all over
the Tumor, and by that means an Eschar was induced.

Common Soap is made of a strong Lixivium and Fatness so long boiled together,
as until the many small strings of the fat Particles are broken in sunder; as
is evident by this, viz. because fatness produces Spots (in Clothes)
pertinaciously inherent by reason of those stringy Particles, with which it
infolds it self within the Fibrils of the Cloth, and Soap (on the contrary) is
easily washed off with Water only.

Calx vive is an Alcalick fixed, and sufficiently acid Salt. Therefore it is
mixed with Water, because that (by reason of its effervescency with the Calx)
infringeth the powers of the same; not with Fatness, which too much obstructs
the Pores of the Skin; but with common Soap (by its own Lixivial Salt) not a
little helping the virtues of the Calx.

This Corrosive being applied, the Vapors (in their usual manner) passed out
from the small Arteries, through the Pores of the Cutis into the Air, by which
they again forced, into the place they left, a subtle matter, which (in its
transit) agitated both the saline Particles of the Calx, and the slippery,
rigid, and pungent Particles of the Soap, and carried them (with it self) up to
the Cutis; and indeed according to the Longitude, not according to the Latitude
of the Particles: as an Arrow shot up on high cuts the Air, not transversively,
but by its Longitude; because thus it finds less resistance and a more easy
way in the Air.

These saline Particles driven up to the Cutis, and by the subtle matter
egregiously agitated there, broke the Fibrils of the Cutis in such wise, that
the small passages of the same were in so great a measure distorted, that the
circulation of the Blood, Humors and Spirits, was there wholly impeded, and
that part died, presenting it self under the form of an Eschar; which being (in
a short time) separated, all the Tumor vanished. Seeing this, I applied my
Placentula (in a form somewhat hard) of which I have often made mention, which
compressed the Flesh (otherwise easily luxuriant) and induced a thin Cicatrice,
which was indeed at first somewhat red; but that redness was afterward wholly
taken away, when that thin skin had been several times touched gently with Oil
of Tartar per Deliquium.

The Forehead of this Child being (by these means) happily freed from all
Deformity, Chyrurgeons should hence be excited to endeavor the removal of many
like deformed Blemishes and Tumors in Infants (impressed whilst they were held
captive in the Prison of the Womb) which by many have been accounted insanable.

OBSERVAT. II.
Of an Ulcer, with Rottenness of the Jaw Bone.

A Matron, aged 28 years, was afflicted with a small, deep, and dolorous Ulcer
of her Under-Jaw, from which daily issued out a great abundance of Pus, and
spungious flesh was always luxuriant in the Ulcer, and the Tooth nigh the Ulcer
was excavated with rottenness, and besides, no small hardness presented it self
to the touch of the finger.

According to the relation of the Patient, this Ulcer derived its Original from
a great and large Tumor of the Lower-Jaw, and also of half the Face, which
(suppurated and spontaneously opened) emitted much Pus into the cavity of the
Mouth; but this Aperture was in a short time healed by the Spittle contained in
the Mouth. This External Tumor was opened by the Chyrurgeons Knife, and that
Aperture for several Weeks after yielded to no remedies.

Therefore I, being called, gave accurate heed to all Circumstances, and
exactly enough examined them, and so at length (shunning all precipitate
rashness in Judging) most assuredly persuaded my self, that the Bone of the
lower Jaw was rotten; and that was principally evident to me, by that always
luxuriant flesh, and by a greater abundance of Pus than the streightness of the
Ulcer could contain, had not the Bone been infected with rottenness.

But whence did that fungous flesh in the Ulcer, luxuriating with the
rottenness of the Bone, derive its Original? Satisfactorily to answer this
Question, those things are to be called to mind which I mentioned in the Eighth
Observation of the First Decade, of which I there at large discoursed, viz.
that rottenness of the Bone is induced by an Acido-Corrosive: which also may be
made more evident by the following Example.

Cast some Bones to be devoured by a Dog, and it will in a short time be
evident by his Excrements, that the compactness of the Bones swallowed is
thoroughly dissolved by the Ferment contained in the Dogs Stomach, the Acidity
of which, I judge there is no man will deny.

Therefore the corrosive Acidity corroded and rotted the Bone, and opened the
sanguiferous Vessels more than was fit, from which (then extended in length)
the out-flowing Humor was formed into spongious Flesh.

But whence was the so great abundance of Pus in the Ulcer, that attended the
rottenness? That Ulcer was deep, so that not only the Humors proceeding from
the Skin and Flesh, but also from the Periosteum and Bone it self, supplied
matter for generating that Pus.

This rottenness I did first discern by the Eyes of my Mind, but I desired
sensibly also to be assured of that; and because the streightness of the Ulcer
would not admit any Probe of Iron, I therefore used an Hogs Bristle, and with
that felt the Bone to be naked and rotten.

What was here to be done? the corrosive Acidity was to be temperated, and
separation of the rotted Fragments of the Bone to be promoted, and the hardness
in the parts adjacent to the Ulcer to be softened.

But first of all I commanded the rotten Tooth to be drawn out, lest it should
more infect the Jaw; but the root of the Tooth pulled out appeared uncorrupted.

Then into the Ulcer I put a Tent anointed with the following Unguent.

. Turpentine, ij. Yolk of an Egg. Aloes, Myrrh, of each j.
Mix these according to Art.

Turpentine resists Acidity, as the Oil thereof (waxing hot with the acid Oil
of Vitriol) plainly teaches; so also Myrrh and Aloes (by their Salt, with
which they abound) do temperate Acidity.

Also sometimes, for the better opening the Ulcer, I strewed upon the Tent
Crocus Metallorum pulverized, which took away the Luxuriant flesh, or I put in
a Tent made of Gentian-root; but upon the Tent I usually strewed powder of
Euphorbium, that it (by its own abounding Volatile Salt) might temperate the
corrosive Acidity, and so not only prevent the corrupting of the found part of
the Bone, but also hasten the separation of the Fragments affected with
rottenness.

Upon the Luxuriant flesh, rising up above the Ulcer, I often applied Burnt
Allom.

To remove the hardness in the parts nigh the Ulcer, I applied Paracelsus his
Stiptick Plaster; which hardness was by this means removed in a short time.

After I had for the space of three months studiously endeavored the cure of
this Ulcer, three white Fragments (one after the other) issued out of the
Ulcer, the two first of which were very small, but the third sufficiently great
and broad.

At that time, when some of the Fragments began to be separated, the Pus
appeared sanguineous, because the sanguiferous Vessels were hurt by those
Fragments. But whence the increase of Dolor then derived its Original needs
not here be explained.

Here also it may easily be understood, that the moving Fragments gave increase
to that abundance of Pus, and caused the Flesh to be more luxuriant.

But how came these Fragments to be disjoined? To explain this, it is not
behooful to call upon Nature for help, which Empedocles has long since
exploded in the following words:

What Mortals now do Nature call,
Just nothing is.
Indeed I cannot but deride those Physicians who have these words always in
their mouth, and are accounted as Oracles.

Nature is the Curatress of Diseases, the Physician Nature's Minister, etc.

Whereas they themselves know not, what they would have intended by these words
signifying nothing; which notwithstanding they boldly enough utter before their
Patients, by whom they are often accounted as Gods, by reason of their much
babbling.

Therefore let us bid adieu to this Nature, and call it what in very deed it
is, and what may clearly and distinctly be understood by every man: that is to
say, the Particles circulating through the sound Bone, approached to the rotten
and perished Fragments; but could not contine their course through them
(because tho small passages were very much distorted) therefore with united
force they daily very often struck upon them, and so (as much as they could)
tearing the Fibrils, which had as yet connexed the sound Bone with its
corrupted parts; and at length the acid Particles of the Pus (with the
acuteness of their sides) cut in sunder these interstanding Fibrils, which did
the sooner and more easily happen, because the same Fibrils were very much
distended; as we see a Thread stretched out to be most easily cut by a Knife,
but a Thread hanging loose cannot be so readily divided.

After the last of the Fragments was come out of the Ulcer, the abundance of
Pus was soon diminished, and the fungous flesh (removed by burnt Allom) no more
increased again; and so the Ulcer was wholly closed in the space of four days,
the Cicatrice notwithstanding remaining hollow and hard, which no mortal man
can prevent in rottenness of a Bone: because the nourishing Particles which
circulate through the small passages the Bone, and so come to that Superficies
of the same Bone, from which the rotten Fragment was separated, are much more
solid than fleshy Particles; therefore when there (by reason of the similitude
of Superficies) they adhere to the extremity of the Bone, very firmly compacted
and connexed each with other, and so constitute (as it were) a certain small
Callus.

OBSERVAT. III.
Of a Wound of the Leg inflicted by Gun shot.

A Young man, aged Twenty four years, complained of a Wound of his Leg,
(inflicted with a Shot) which was round, blackish, and very painful.

The Leaden bullet could not perforate this young Man's Leg, but did
egregiously contuse the same, whence arose that Dolor and blackness.

It is not my purpose in this place to describe the means by which Gunpowder
is inflamed, and excited to a motion so very vehement and swift, that it can
impress on a Leaden-bullet force sufficient to produce such a Wound; seeing
Cartesius has (exactly and elegantly enough) writ of this matter, in his
Fourth Part of the Principles of Philosophy.

Therefore after the Patient came to me, I commanded him to set his Body in the
same posture he stood in when he was wounded; and then with a leaden Probe, yea
also with a Wax-candle (which we in Dutch call even was-lichtien) I sought very
industriously for the Bullet, but in vain; because it had descended too deeply,
and absconded it self so that I could not draw it out.

If any man be desirous to see instruments fit for extracting Bullets, let him
consult Fabritius Hildanus, Scultetus and others.

What then was here to be done? The Blood and Humors (by reason of the
Contusion) stagnizing and (by reason of the Acidity) coagulated, were to be
dissolved by things temperating Acidity; that by such means the Circulation of
the Blood and Humors (in such wise impeded) might be again restored, and by
that restoration the Fibrils (inherent and plainly dead in the Wound) be
separated from the living Flesh, and the Wound again be filled up and repleat
with new Flesh, and cured; which, notwithstanding the Leaden-bullet remaining
in the Leg, was effected in a short space of time, by applying this Unguent,
and superpositing the following Plaster.

Turpentine, ij. White of Egg, No 1. Myrrh, Aloes, of each ss. Oil of Wax,
Drops 10, Make an Unguent. Emplas. Diapalma, ij. Common Chalk, Bolus, of each
ss. Diaphoretick, Antimony, j. Oil of Tartar per Deliquium ss. Of Cammomil, q.
s.
Mix according to art and make a Plaster.

But in the mean time we contributed help to the external Remedies, by internal
Medicines also given; and often gave to the sick (instead of a Vulnerary
Potion) one Scruple of Crab's-eyes, and as much of White Coral.

The Ancients, about Wounds made by Gunshot, labored with great prejudice,
thinking them to be venomous; and Johannes de Vigo had imbibed the same
opinion: for he therefore touched such Wounds with hot Oil.

No less false is the Opinion of those men, who believe a Leaden-bullet (shot
out of a Gun) does in perforating the Flesh egregiously burn the same: For a
Leaden-bullet shot against a Wall, and presently taken up, will exhibit no
sensible heat.

But whence is it, that Lead has often been known to remain in the Humane Body
without any sensible hurt for a long series of years; but Brass, Iron, and many
other things, from without forced inwards, not so? Do we not daily see in the
Macrocosm how easily Brass is infected with an Aerugo, and Iron with Rust, by
the Air, Water, Vinegar, and other things; whereas (on the contrary) Lead is
infected with no Rubigo?

Moreover, Tin is likewise said to be infected with no Rustiness; wherefore
this also, may perhaps for a very long time lie hid in our Bodies without
damage.

Helmont, Kenelm Digby, and others, much glory of the Symphatick cure of
Wounds; but they are miserably deceived. Sir Kenelm Digby set a Vessel full of
Water in a cold place, and in that Water dissolved common Vitriol, and then (in
that Solution) put a Linnen-cloath, that had before received the Blood issuing
from the Wound; and (doing this) thought that many Particles of the Vitriol
would by the Air be carried to the Patients Wound; but perhaps these Particles,
could they be conveyed so far, would do more hurt than good. This seems to be
very probable, because those Effluviums, which the Air can convey from the
Vitriol set in a cold place, must needs be very few.

Before I put an end to this Observation there remains one Problem yet to be
discussed, viz. whether it be true, as many men at this time do firmly persuade
themselves, viz. that there are such men in the world, who (by reason of a
Compact made with the Devil) have Bodies impenetrable by any Bullets, Swords,
or other things impressing Wounds.

Although I have with great scrutiny examined this matter, yet I could never
unto this day find any man, who (by proper experience in his own Body) could
ascertain me of the truth of this matter.

But it is sufficiently evident to be repugnant to reason, that the Humane Body
(which is so very soft) cannot be wounded by Leaden-bullets, Swords, and other
Weapons, agitated with very great force, whenas a Pellet of Wax, shot out of a
Gun, can sufficiently penetrate solid and hard Boards.

Whatsoever is so repugnant to Reason, cannot be consentaneous to the Will of
God; for, otherwise he must needs will somewhat that is repugnant to his own
Nature; seeing (...) The WORD (or Reason) is GOD himself.

Whatsoever GOD wills not, that the Devil cannot effect, therefore I judge this
thing to be wholly impossible, and shall never be induced to believe that such
men can be any where found.

OBSERVAT. IV.
Of a very strange Ulcer.

OUt of the City Arnhemium, beyond the Rhine, in that place which in Dutch is
called de Praest, a Woman of Seventy years of age asked Counsel of my Father
(Doctor of Physic and Chyrurgery) whilst he lived, because she was afflicted
in that part of the Thigh (which is about six fingers breadth distant from the
Groin) with an Ulcer, the Cavity of which exceeded four hands breadths.

From this Ulcer at one time proceeded thirty Eggs full of a limpid Humor;
afterward for several days many other came forth; all which numbered together,
exceeded one hundred: some of which were equal in magnitude to Hens-Eggs,
others as large as Pidgeons-Eggs, and some of them no larger than
Sparrows-Eggs; all of them, each apart from the other separated, were enclosed
with their proper Membrane, white and as thick as a Playing-card.

These Eggs appeared very like to subventaneous (or windy) Eggs, and lay all
together included in a Common, and gross Membrane.

These Eggs being by Intervals thus evacuated from the Ulcers, I used the
following (or like) Injection.

. Root of round Birthwort, ij. Herb Carduus Benedictus, Veronica, of each, M j.
ss. Crab's-eyes, j. Myrrh, Aloes, of each j. ss.
Boil these according to Art in French Wine, and use the Colature.

By this means that common and gross Membrane was gradually consumed, and the
Patient at length restored to her pristine sanity.

Many that were present thought this Woman to be bewitched, and therefore
affirmed the Devil to be the Author of this Disease, evily attributing that
honor and power to the Devil, which ought to be ascribed to the Omnipotent GOD
only. For GOD is the primary cause of Motions, that are made in this Corporeal
Universe; and according to the rules of these Motions, giving heed only to the
magnitude of Bodies, to the figure and position of them, not only the
Phaenomenons of this Disease, but also many other (far more wonderful than
these) may very accurately be explained.

If you be desirous to know how Plants proceed from a Grane (or Seed) it will
behove you attently to peruse the Anatomy of Plants (made by Mr. Grews
Microscope) published both in English and in French. There in the greater Bean,
you may behold the Rudiment both of Root and Plant already formed; there you
may perceive, how the Juice (strained through the Membranes of the Bean
committed to the earth) is fermented in the Body of the Bean; also how there
through a small hole of the Bean admittance is given to the Air, and an exit
also permitted to the superfluous Vapors; how the Juice thus fermented is
constringed into the Rudiment of a Root, and converts that Rudiment into a true
Root; which then receiving nutriment from the Earth, repels the other Juice,
coming from the other part, upwards to the Rudiment of the Plant, that so at
length it may present it self to the sight as a true Plant.

If you desire to know the causes of the stupendous powers in the Magnet, of
the Ignis Fatuus, Rainbow and other things, consult Cartesius, who will clearly
explain them to you.

The same Philosopher (in his Treatise of Meteors) will also there teach you,
that Soldiers (sometimes seen) fighting in the Air, touching which the
ignorant Vulgar tells so many tales, are no other than certain Clouds.

I know not indeed whence arose this so evily-founded Judgment of the people,
by which such cases (as this of ours is) are accounted Enchantments, and
Mawworms (so frequently ejected from the Bodies of men by Vomit and Seidg)
esteemed merely natural; whereas the generation of Mawworms is far more
wonderful, than that of these Eggs in the Humane Body.

Vigelius, professor of the Mathematics, is reported to have formed an Horse
of Metal, which in one day (for several hours) could by the help of Rotula's,
walk like a living Beast.

Rayselius is reported to have fabricated an Engine like a man, in which a
certain Liquor, poured into the mouth, was seen to circulate like our Blood;
the more thin part of which Liquor was expelled by the Yard as Urine; but the
more gross part as Dregs (or Dung) of the Belly, by the Fundament.

If Man can do such things, what cannot GOD (the supreme Architect) effect
according to the ordinary rules of Motions?

Therefore how were these Eggs produced in this Woman? I answer. In the Thigh
of this Woman, from this or that cause, many Pores of this or that Artery were
distorted and enlarged; so that many Humors flowed out, and were collected in
one place, in which (when they began to be fermented) the Particles, stringy
and less apt for motion, were thrust out to the sides, where they were not
compelled to so swift a motion; and there cohering and twisting themselves one
within the other, were formed into that sufficiently gross Membrane, which did
include all the Eggs afterward generated.

But because the Pores of the abovementioned Artery were diversely distorted,
therefore some of the Particles contained in this gross Membrane did in some
measure differ from the other in figure and magnitude; and perhaps the
Particles like each other, flowed into almost an hundred diverse places; and so
every of those Particles (besides the Congesture of their like) still
exercising a certain kind of Fermentation, did again thrust out the more
stringy Particles to the sides; and so were formed the Membranes, in which were
included all the Eggs.

Thus, I suppose, I have produced a sufficiently intelligible cause of this
Phenomenon, which I beheld with my own Eyes.

OBSERVAT. V.
Of a vast Tumor of the Neck.

A Young Maid, aged Fifteen years, being otherwise very well, had (now for six
years) sustained an hard round Tumor in her Neck, (of the same color with the
Skin, and void of pain) equalizing in magnitude a white Loaf that is wont to be
sold at the price of half a Sesterce, and miserably defacing the Patients
Countenance.

I judged the humidity of this Tumor to be very viscous, and divided almost
after the same manner as we see the Juice in a Pome-Citron or Orange, contained
in many Cells.

By reason of the viscosity of the Humor, this Tumor could not be discussed,
nor (in the common way) brought to suppuration; therefore I applied a
Corrosive, and (the Eschar being removed) put in a Tent anointed with the
Unguent Basilicon mixed with common Turpentine.

By this means some part of the viscous Pus issued out daily, and so the Bulk
of this horrid Tumor began to be diminished; the viscous Humor nearest the hole
was first evacuated, and afterward that also which lay far remote from the
Ulcer.

But when the small passages round about this hole (made by Art) were
obstructed by the viscosity of the Humor, as it often happened; then, with the
Unguent wherewith the Tent was anointed, I mixed some Crocus Metallorum, that
so an Eschar might be induced; which being separated, the small passages were
again opened; and so this young Maid in the space of three Months was wholly
freed from this Tumor, and that great deformity attending it.

I shall not in this place speak of the way or manner of the Corrosives
operating, having already discoursed of that, in the First Observation of this
Third Decade; nor will I at this time further explain by what means the Eschar
is separated; because this may sufficiently be understood by the Second
Observation of this Decade, where I teach, how the rotten Fragments of Bones
may be separated from the sound part.

Perhaps some one will wonder that I use Medicaments so few and so little
compounded; but to what purpose are so many Simples, and so many composed Forms
of Remedies, which many Physicians use at this day, for no other cause than to
boast of their vain Learning before the Ignorant?

If Gunpowder, made of Cole-dust, Nitre, and Sulphur only, produces such
stupendous effects in the Macrocosm, that (omitting all other) it can blow up
into the Air vast and heavy Ships, and also (if put under the Earth) cause the
same to tremble and cleave in sunder; why may not a few Medicines, seasonable
taken, be sufficient to heal very many Diseases in the Microcosm.

I do indeed assent to Bacon Verulam, great Chancellor of England (who is by
some called the Day Star of Cartesius) thus speaking: Variety of Medicaments is
the daughter of Ignorance.

OBSERVAT. VI.
Of a wonderful Abscess.

A Man Fifty years of age, was vexed with an Abscess arising below his Ear,
which was round, painful, waterish, and soft; with this he had been afflicted
some days before he came to me.

I, being certainly persuaded, that ripe Pus was contained in this Abscess,
made an Aperture with my Lancet; and so presently issued out no small quantity
of white shining Pus, but when I would, by pressure with my finger, in some
measure further the efflux of the Pus; behold soon after a piece of a
Tobacco-pipe (equalizing the length of the Middle-finger) presented it self to
sight; which, with an Instrument I drew out of the lately-made Orifice.

The Pus being gradually evacuated, I in a short space of time healed this
Affect after the manner of other Abscesses; so that (in this Cure) nothing
happened worthy of observation.

But the piece of Tobacco-pipe unexpectedly issuing out of this Abscess, gave
occasion to the Bystanders not only of admiring so rare a Phenomenon, but
also made them presently to fly to the Devil and his Enchantments.

The Ignorant (and therefore superstitious and miserable) vulgar men, presently
hasten to the Devil, the accustomed (but impious) Asylus of their ignorance;
when any Effect presents it self to them, the like of which they never before
saw.

If they see any thing the cause of which they know not, they do not presently
ascribe that to the Devil, having often before beheld the same; so the
stupendous actions of that Belching out of Fire (which cannot but be known by
all the Inhabitants of these Regions) are by them accounted natural, and not
taken for delusions of the Devil, viz. because these are such things as they
have often seen, though they cannot render a reason of them, being wholly
ignorant of the cause.

So, sometime since, there was an Italian (at Lugdunum in Batavia) who after
the drinking a great quantity of clear Water, vomited up the same into various
Chrystalline Vessels, not limpid as before, but it was (in every of the
Vessels) of a diverse color and taste.

This effect frequently seen, excited the people (ignorant of the cause) to so
great admiration, that they uttered not so much as one Whisper about the Devil.
But Mr. Overcamp presently found out the cause of this Phenomenon, as he
relates (In primogenito Ingenii sui Partu) viz. that in the Chrystalline
Vessels he both saw and smelt diverse subtle Oils, which in one Vessel tinged
the Water with one color, in another with another.

Not without reason did Virgil say (Felix qui potuit Rerum cognoscere Causas;)
He was happy that knew the Causes of things: For they being known, we shall not
much wonder at Phaenomenons before seen, much less (with the decieved Vulgar)
refer them to a certain imaginary power of the Devil; whereas it is well
understood, that the Common people seldom have any regard to the causes of
things.

But, omitting these, what was the reason that a piece of a Tobacco-pipe came
forth of this Affect whereof we are now writing? When I had well examined the
Patient, I by him understood, that (about six Months before) when he walked in
the streets taking Tobacco, he fell down, and internally hurt his Jaws with the
Pipe, from which hurt abundance of Blood did often flow out, viz. because a
piece of the Pipe broken off, deeply forced into his Jaw, first produced this
Haemorrhagia, and afterward the above-recited external Abscess below the Ear,
out of which when opened the piece of Pipe was taken.

OBSERVAT. VII.
Of a small Stone contained in the Vrinary Passage.

A Little Boy five years old, suddenly complained of a pain of his Yard, and
could not make water. I (as I then judged) with an Iron Probe touched a small
stone as big as a Pepper-corn (but very rugged) contained in the Urinary
passage. How this Stone should infer so vehement dolor, and stop the Urine, I
purpose not at this time here to explain.

Fit Instruments, by many Authors commended in this case, were now by me made
use of, but in vain: What then was to be done?

I presently gave to the sick Child two spoonfuls of the following Mixture.

. Antinephretick Water, Water of Stone-Parsley, Of Fennel, of each j. Fernelius
his Syrrup of Althea, ss. Crab's-eyes, j. Salt Prunella, ss. Salt of
Bean-stalks, j. Mix these.
Then I commanded the Mother to apply her mouth to her young Son's Yard, and
suck (for some time) as much as she could, and by this means the Stone was (in
a short time) drawn forward to the extremity of the Ureter, from whence then
it was easily drawn out with the Forceps; and so this little Boy was quickly,
safely, and pleasantly freed from this so very painful Affect.

We must speak with the Vulgar, but not judge with them according to the common
Proverb. I said, the Mother sucked, though in the mean while I am certainly
persuaded, that Sucking effects little, but all Motion is made by Pulsion. It
is true the Mother, applying her Mouth to the Yard, and strictly closing it
round about with her Lips, caused the Belly to swell by contraction of the
Diaphragma; and so the external Air, by its pressure, forced the small Stone to
the extremity of the Yard contained in the mouth of the Mother: which did so
much the more easily happen, because that little Air (contained in the Mothers
mouth) by the heat there existing rarefied; and so being more weak than the
external Air, forced from the swelling Abdomen, made the less resistance, as
rarefied Air (contained under a Cuppin-glass made hot) prevents not the
subjected Cutis from being lifted up into a Tumor, the pressure of the external
Air contributing thereunto. This Propulsion of the Stone was also not a little
furthered by the almost continual agitation of the Tongue commodiously applied.

But no man should here wonder, that the pressure of the Air has so great
force; for this effects many other things much more wonderful, and is the cause
that two Brass-Hemispheres, from which the Air has been (in a great measure)
removed by a Wind-Instrument, do so very firmly adhere each to other, that the
weight of a Thousand pounds would not be sufficient to separate them again;
whereas they may very easily be disjoined, when the Air is again intromitted;
as I with my eyes have beheld (at Lugdunum in Batavia) in the Laboratory of
Burcher de Volder, a most acute Professor of solid Philosophy in that place. If
any man desires to know more of these things, let him consult the Magdeburgic
Experiments, adorned with Brass Figures.

OBSERVAT. VIII.
Of a Contusion suddenly healed.

A Man about Thirty years of age, in a Tennis-Court, received a Ball, with
great force struck by a Racket, just upon his right Eye, whence exceeding great
dolor presently arose.

The Patient remembered, that he had seen others after the same manner hurt, to
be presently healed by cold Water only, applied immediately after the stroke,
therefore he presently to the contused part applied his Handkercheif moistened
with cold Water, and when that waxed warm, he again dipped it in other fresh
cold Water.

The next day after this hurt, his Friends that had heard of his misfortune,
came to visit him; but seeing both eyes very sound and well, they were amazed,
having before firmly persuaded themselves, that the eye which had received so
vehement a stroke, must needs be livid and very painful.

But what may hence be inferred? Can cold Water profit in a Contusion? It seems
more likely to do hurt; because it incrassates, coagulates and stagnizeth the
extravasate Blood. Would not Spirit of Wine, and other Medicaments (that
increase the motion of the Blood) be more convenient in this case?

That you may the more clearly conceive the solution of this difficulty, it is
behooful to know, that in the parts hurt (by the Ball so forcibly driven)
certain very small sanguiferous Vessels were opened, which had they (before the
Water was applied) poured out the Blood into the small passages of the Parts
hurt, then the cold Water would have done hurt: but this cold Water was applied
before the Blood issued out, and so not only (by its coldness) again closed
these very small Vessels, but also was the cause that no new Blood could (for a
certain space of time) enter the same Vessels. So we see our Face to be red,
for no other reason than because, through the Cutis of the same very many small
Vessels full of Blood lie dispersed; and discern the same to wax pale by the
coldness of Water, Air, and other things; because such coldness for a time
prohibits the Blood from entering these very small Vessels of the Face.

So we see the pleasant redness of the Lips in a beautiful Virgin, augmented by
the kiss of a young man, to be changed into a pallid color, by Acidity
restraining the Blood from entering the small Vessels distributed throughout the
Superficies of the Lips.

But whosoever he be, that will attempt such a way of Cure as this here
mentioned, after the small passages of the parts contused shall be replete with
extravasate Blood, seems to me to be not well in his wits: for I have not
seldom known a Gangrene to arise in a part contused, from the unseasonable
application of cold and astringent things.

OBSERVAT. IX.
Of an hard Tumor of the Abdomen.

A Girl Five years of Age, accustomed to evil Diet, was for a long time
afflicted with a very great Tumor and hardness of her Abdomen, and her face was
very pale.

The following Liniment had before been in vain used.

. Unguent. Altheae comp. Oil of white Lillies, of each ss. Of Tiles j. Mix
these.
Which notwithstanding (in a like case) is not a little commended by the famous
Sylvius, in the first Book of his Praxis, Chap. 14. under the Title 56.

Well considering the matter, I judged the Blood of this sick child to be very
viscous and acid; and (by reason of this) that many Glandules of the Omentum
were obstructed and augmented to a strange bulk. But which way Paleness of the
Face is induced by such Blood, I suppose to be known to every man, therefore
needs not be here explained.

Perhaps some one will wonder, and not believe it possible, that the Glandules
of the Omentum should increase to so great a Magnitude, as to become the cause
of so great and hard a Tumor, as was in the Abdomen of this Child perceptible
by the touch; but I would have him peruse Fabritius Hildanus, who (in the 62
Observation of his Third Century) declares, that he opened a Carcass, the
Omentum of which, by reason of the tumified Glandules, weighed Fifty six pounds.

Things being thus, I judged nothing would be more profitable than Paracelsus
his Stiptick Plaster, which I commanded to be applied to the Abdomen, after it
was spread upon a Linen Cloth, and anointed with Oil of Nutmegs.

To correct the viscous and acid Blood, I commanded certain drops of oily
Volatile Salt to be given daily twice a day; and by this means our little
Patient in the space of a few Months, was happily restored to her pristine
state of health.

OBSERVAT. X.
Of the Scurvey.

A Man, aged Thirty years, every day evily accustoming himself to viscous and
sour Aliments (according to the bad custom of the Gelders) was afflicted with
heaviness and dolor of his hands and Feet; his Gums (in a great measure
consumed) would bleed with the least touch; his Spittle was in taste salt as
Brine.

Having diligently considered these things, I judged the Blood (too acid and
viscous) to be here peccant, which (by reason of Acidity) inferred that dolor
of Hands and Feet, and corroded the Gum and its sanguiferous Vessels; and by
its too great Viscosity did so obstruct the small passages of the Hands and
Feet, that the usually-free transit of the Animal Spirits into the Muscles was
somewhat impeded, whence arose the aforesaid Heaviness.

I speak here of the Animal Spirits; for seeing the Liquor that is through the
Nerves (for exciting motion) carried into the Muscle, is subtle; I know not
why this Nervous Liquor should less deserve to be insignized with the name of
Spirit, than that Liquor which (in Chemical Distillation) is extracted from
Hartshorn. But omitting vain Disputes about the Name let us set about the
Matter it self.

This Disease is very familiar in these Regions, and is generally known by the
name of The Scurvey, and is most difficultly cured, if (in process of time) it
have taken deep root. Wherefore I presently applied my self to the Cure of this
Disease, seriously commanding the Patient for the future to eat no more acid
and viscous Aliments and prescribing the following Medicament.

. Syrup of Scurvy grass ss. Of Salt Ammoniac distilled with Salt of Tartar, ij.
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, Tincture of May-worms, of each j.
I commanded the Patient to take 16 drops of this Medicine thrice a day in a
Decoction of the Tops of Firr; and indeed to the end that the Spirits of
Scurveygrass, and Sal-Armoniac, and the Tincture of May-worms, with the
aforesaid Decoction, might attenuate the viscous Blood and infringe the Acidity
thereof. I added Oil of Tartar per deliquium, that by this means the Volatile
Salt of the Blood (subdued and bound by the Acidity) might again recover its
pristine liberty, and so render the Blood more fluid and more agile.

As we see the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or any other Volatile Salt,
coagulated and conjoined with an Acid Spirit, with the help of an Alkali-Salt
and Common Water, by distillation to be again restored to its pristine liberty,
and separated from that Acidity.

As to the Tincture of May-worms, it is to be observed that that ought not to
be extracted with the acid Spirit of Salt, (as Artists are wont to do) because
by this means the Volatile Salt of the May-worms is infringed and enervated.

By these Remedies our Scorbutic Patient was cured in a short time.

But before I put an end to this Third Decade a Difficulty (not very small)
remains yet to be removed. I here affirm the Cause of this Disease to be
Acidity, and in the mean while say the Spittle was imbibed with a Saline taste;
how do these agree? Do they not manifestly contradict each other? No. I promise
to unfold this Riddle in few words. No small quantity of Volatile Salt
contained in the Blood (with the Acidity) was coagulated; therefore the Spittle
(burdened with this Coagulate) exhibited the aforementioned Saline taste to
the Tongue. So Common Salt, which we daily use with our Meats, cease not to
taste Saline, though it has not a little Acidity permixt with it self, as
Spirit of Salt extracted by Chemical Distillation does plainly teach.

The end of the Third Decade.
DECADE IV.
OBSERVAT. I.
Concerning the Indisposition of the Gum.

A Matron Forty years of age, very much afflicted with the Scurvey, complained
of an excessive pain of her Gum, which was very much corroded, and (at the
least touch) immediately poured out Blood: and besides, her fore-Teeth were
loose. Also the Patient (according to the common custom) after Bloodletting,
had been often purged, but in vain.

How the Acidity (in some sort corrosive) should be the cause of this dolor,
corrode the Gum, and make the Teeth loose, I forbear in this place to explain;
because I judge the case to be sufficiently clear of it self.

This Evil does sometimes degenerate into that Malady, which we in Dutch call,
De Water-kanker; therefore not to be slightly regarded.

My order was, that the sick Woman should (as much as was possible) abstain
from acid things, and unto her I gave the Spirit, of which I spoke in the last
Observation of the foregoing Decade; and did also prescribe the following
Medicament to be externally used.

Tincture of Gum Lacca, j. Spirit of Scurvy Grass, iij. Oil of Tartar per
Deliquium, drops xiij. Make a Mixture.
With this Medicament the Gum was four times a day touched, and washed; and so
in a few days the diseased Woman was freed from her pain, and the out-flowing
of Blood from the Gum ceased, and the Teeth were no longer loose; but that part
of the Gum that was eaten away grew up no more: at which no man should wonder,
because it is as impossible for part of the Gum consumed to be regenerated as a
Finger once cut off to grow again.

Sometimes a certain Lapideous matter grows upon the Teeth, which by its
roughness lacerates the Gum; in which case the precedent Medicament must in no
wise be used, unless this Lapideous matter be first removed with some fit
Instrument.

If you desire to know the way of preparing Tincture of Gum Lacca, consult
Frederick Deckers (that most famous Practitioner) in his Practical Observations
about the Method of Healing, page 15.

Before I finish this Observation, I cannot forbear to tax the frequent error
of those men who use Oil of Vitriol for whitening black Teeth. For though this
immediately takes away the blackness of the Teeth, yet it afterward hurts them;
because it corrupts the Volatile Salt, which is naturally found in great
abundance in the Teeth. It would be far better for those that delight in white
Teeth, always after Meat to wash and cleanse their Mouths with pure Water, and
(once in a Week) rub their Teeth with the powder of Porcellane Earth, which is
China.

If any man, either cannot or will not give credit to my words, saying; Acidity
(as Oil of Vitriol, and other like things) hurts the Teeth, let him at least
give credit to Solomon the wisest of Kings, who speaking by the Spirit of GOD,
said; As Vinegar to the Teeth, and as Smoke to the Eyes, so is the Sluggard to
them that send him.

Now if Vinegar (according to the testimony of Solomon) be so inimical to the
Teeth, what damage will not Oil of Vitriol infer, which is much more sharp, and
far more corrosive?

OBSERVAT. II.
Of an Ambustion.

A Man Thirty years of age, setting fire to Gunpowder, burnt his whole Face
and both his Hands, whence presently arose redness and exceeding great pain; to
assuage which the Patient applied Ink, which was (as it happened) ready at hand.

Had you seen the Patient in this state, you would have affirmed you saw the
Devil, unless you could (with the Aethiopians) persuade your self the Devil is
white, which Opinion Sir Thomas Brown (in his Pseudoxia Epidemica) seems to
favor, contrary to the Testimony of the holy Scripture, which says (in the
Revelation of St. John, Chap. 19. verse. 20.) The dwelling of Satan is a lake of
Fire burning with Brimstone. But the Smoke of Brimstone burnt (as our
above-recited Author philosophizeth) is known by frequent experience to whiten
Woollen Garments, as Stockings and other things; and hence he concludes, that
whatsoever is found in Hell, must needs be white. These things only cursorily
mentioned, let us omit them and come to the matter it self.

I being called to the Patient, applied to the parts hurt Onions bruised, with
common Honey. Which Remedy is very profitable to burnt parts, if presently
applied, whilst the Skin is yet entire: for that being hurt, vehement dolor
will undoubtedly follow the use of this Medicament; which shows, that then it
is in no wise convenient.

The next day many Blisters, all over his Face and both his Hands, presented
themselves to sight, which (the third day after the accident) being opened,
poured out no small quantity of Limpid Water.

Then I prescribed the following Cerot.

Ceruss, Pulp of the Root of the greater Comphry, of each, lib. j. Lithargyry,
Lapis Calaminaris, Oyl-Olive, Wax, of each vj.
Make a Cerot.

In the preparation of which it is to be noted, that to the Oil and Wax first
melted together, the Pouders (beaten very fine and sifted) must be added, and
when these are almost cold, the aforesaid Pulp must be mixed, which Pulp is
thus extracted: The Roots are first made clean, and then cut into thin round
slices, which afterward boiled in common Water till they are soft, are then
squeezed through a fine Linnen-Cloath.

With three Ounces of this Cerot I mixed as much of Unguentum Aureum, the
description of which is found in the Amsterdam or Augustine Pharmacopoea; and
this Medicament spread upon fine and soft Linen Clothes I applied to the parts
hurt; and by this means our Patient was perfectly healed in a short time.

Whence the redness and dolor proceeded you may easily understand, if you do
but consider, that the Gunpowder fired, and so posited in a most swift and
very vehement motion, had hurt and broke many Fibrils of the Cutis. For hence
the dolor manifesting it self in that Ambustion, may easily be judged of: the
continuation of which Dolor proceeded from the Obstruction of many small
passages (by reason of the broken Fibrils) in which the Humors stagnized, and
distended the adjacent parts, and then also waxed acid, and by this means tore
and cut in sunder the aforesoid Fibrils. The Blisters were raised by the Humors
stagnizing and coacervated about the Cutis which (being constringed by the
flame) they could not penetrate.

I applied Onions with Honey, that (with their abounding Volatile Salt) they
might open the constringed and stopped Pores of the Cuticle, temperate the acid
Humors, and restore to them their usual Circulation.

The third day I opened the Blisters; for had I sooner opened them, the
subjacent Cutis would have suffered and been too much pained, not only by the
ambient Air, but also by the Medicaments; but usually on the third day is
formed a Rudiment of a new Cuticle.

Then I applied the above-prescribed Cerot with Unguentum Aureum, for
temperating the peccant Acidity.

Where the parts were only slightly burnt; that is, where the Fibrils or the
Cutis were only much agitated by force of the Fire, but none (or few of them)
broken in sunder; and where the Cuticle was only lightly shrunk, there Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium would have sufficed, viz. if the affeted part had been
lightly touched therewith; because so the Pores of the Cuticle and small
passages of the Cutis would have been opened, and the Acor of the stagnizing
Humors temperated; as I (not long since) did experience in my self, when I
burnt my Foot with boiling hot Coffee, which Burning was not without Dolor and
Redness.

OBSERVAT. III.
Of the Hernia.

A Man Seventy years of age, was vexed with a very great and painful Tumor in
his Scrotum, which Tumor was of the same color with the sound Skin. He felt
great dolor in his Abdomen, and vomited up whatsoever he assumed. Having been
in this state for 24 hours he implored my help.

Then did the sick Man, by me examined, relate, that he had for a long series
of years been afflicted with an Hernia, which (the Bowel being fallen into the
Scrotum) did often in a strange manner afflict him; but so soon as the Bowel
was again thrust into its place he felt no discommodity thereby: but the Bowel
had never before so long as now remained out of the Abdomen, and
notwithstanding all endeavors of the Patient, he could not put it up again.

To his Friends I declared his Disease to be full of danger, because the Bowel
had so long remained out of the Abdomen. So a man 40 years of age, traveling
on foot from Ultrajectum to Arenacum, was afflicted with an Hernia infesting
his Scrotum, and yet (after this) he walked on his Feet for full Four hours
(with this Hernia he had also been formerly afflicted, but that was only in
his Groin) whence the Tumor very much increased, and was very hard and painful;
the Patient in the mean while vomited continually, and was constrained to lodge
for one whole cold night in Straw at a Rufticks house; the next day he was
carried in a Coach (continually vomiting) to Arenacum.

To the Sick man was given a Mixture discussing Flatulencies, but that was soon
rejected by Vomiting; also three Clysters were injected, but to no purpose. The
Patient was laid in a good posture, moist and dry Fomentations were applied to
the affected part; but these proving ineffectual, the Patients Pulse gradually
diminishing, he died the fourth day after this last invasion of his Distemper.

His Carcass being opened, the great Gut Ileon was found to be infected with a
Gangrene the length of a Span, and sited in the Scrotum, with flatulent and
hard Excrements. Besides, a great part of the Omentum was contained in the
Scrotum, wrapped up like a Ball, with the sanguiferous Vessels very much
distended.

In the mean while I admonished the Friends of my Patient not too much to
despond, and to that end related to them the Eighth Observation communicated to
Riverius, by Mr. Ozia Aimar a most famous Chyrurgeon of Gratianopolis, in which
after many Remedies for nine days used in vain, the Bowel (for as many days)
remaining in the Scrotum, was happily reposited by Incision made, as far as to
the production of the Peritoneum, which stranguled the Bowel. The method by
which this Operation was instituted, you will find in the above cited
Observation.

But whence is it that in an Hernia the Bowel slips down into the Scrotum and
other Parts? This is occasioned by relaxation of the Peritoneum, which proceeds
from Obstruction of the many small passages of the same, and because in them
the Humors stagnize and are coacervated, and in process of time insinuate
themselves between the Fibrils of the Peritoneum, and so relax the same.

Now why did not the Bowel, fallen into the Scrotum of our Patient, with as
much ease return into the Abdomen as it came out, seeing the way is the same?
This principally happened because the Bowel had remained so long out of the
Abdomen in the Scrotum, where was less heat: For the Pores of the Bowel, by
that means somewhat constringed, prevented the free egress of the Vapors
(partly also condensed by the Bowels long lying in the Scrotum) wherefore they
were coacervated in the Bowel, and distended it with Flatuses as they are
commonly called.

Therefore it is hence sufficiently manifest, that the principal Cure of this
Evil consisted in opening the Pores of the Bowel (fallen out of the Belly) and
rendering the Vapors (in some measure condensed) again fit for greater motion
and agitation, that so they might circulate (as formerly) round their proper
Centers.

I effected this with Thread newly twisted (and not purged by boiling) which I
first boiled in sweet Milk, and then applied it hot to the affected part; by
which means, after it had been applied one quarter of an hour, the Bowel (with
gentle force of the Hand) returned into the Abdomen of the Patient, laid in a
fit posture.

The Sick man, thus (as it were) snatched out of the Jaws of Death, with the
Fisher learned to be wiser, and afterward always wore an Iron Truss (all over
covered with Cotton) for retaining the Bowel in its place: For, to attempt to
heal men perfectly that are so far in years, and afflicted with this Evil, is
to labor in vain. What Fabritius Hildanus relates (in his Book of
Observations) very rarely happens, viz. That a man Sixty years of age, had for
Twenty years been afflicted with a great Hernia, which could not be healed by
any Physician or Chyrurgeon, and that the same old man afterward was entirely
restored to his pristine health, without Medicaments, after he, afflicted with
some perilous Disease, had lain upon his Back 14 days; therefore the same
Author affirms Rest and lying on the Back to be the best Remedy against the
Hernia.

But we see the Hernia's of young Children very often cured (and indeed
especially about the Eighth year of their Age) with a good Truss made of
Linen, and Sylvius his Carminative Plaster spread upon Leather (the
Description of which is found in the first Book of his Praxis, Chap. 14. under
the Title 58.) in which notwithstanding there is one Error which I hope no man
will follow, worthy to be noted, viz. that Gum Galbanum and other things are
dissolved in Vinegar, which not a little infringeth the Volatile Salt of them.

The Oath of Physicians in the Ultrajectine Academy commands, that things heard
or seen in a Cure should not be mentioned but involved in silence. And this
Oath (I judge) should be strictly observed in the Hernia's of Young men;
because this Evil attending them is wont to be more offensive to Maidens than
is fit; which (before I finish this Observation) I purpose to declare by an
Example.

A new-married Virgin, when she and her Bridegroom were the first time in Bed
together, boldly handled those parts of her Husband which Adam (as the
Scripture witnesses) presently after his Fall, covered with Fig Leaves; and so
by the Truss he wore, perceived he was afflicted with an Hernia; whence she,
driven almost to madness, passionately uttered these words: You may be ashamed
so impiously to deceive your Lover; O miserable wretch that I am, what Counsel
shall I take? I am certainly undone. Can such a distempered Body satisfy a
Maid in the flower of her Age, having not as yet accomplished her eighteenth
year? No, I am totally lost, and had rather die than live longer with you. The
Husband in the mean while seriously pondering the matter, at length with kind
and good words returned her this Answer: My Love, my Sweetheart, be of good
cheer, and drive from thee this vain and superfluous care; for I promise you by
the effect to prove my self a Man sufficient, so that you shall never afterward
have cause any more to complain of this matter. Nine Months were scarcely
elapsed, before Experience confirmed the Husbands words, by Twins which his
Wife was delivered of; who never after durst so much as whisper any thing of
her Husbands imaginary impotency.

OBSERVAT. IV.
Of a Suppurated Tumor of the Breast.

A Woman giving Suck, had for several days labored with an hard, red, and
painful Tumor, sited in the superior part of her Breast.

Paracelsus his Stiptick Plaster being applied, the Tumor was quickly
suppurated, and spontaneously opened, and much laudable Pus did for some time
issue out thence; in the mean while to the Aperture I applied Arctaeus his
Balsam, of which this is the Description.

. Sheeps-Grease, Gum Elemi, Venice Turpentine, of each ij. Oil of St.
John's Wort, j. ss. Wax, ij. Red Sanders, j.
Mix and liquifie all, strain the Mixture, and make a Balsam. I did also apply
Paracelsus his Stiptick Plaster, and upon that laid a small Bag made hot,
which was first filled with Rye-flower, for softening the remaining hardness;
and so this Tumor was healed in the space of a few days.

I shall not at this time explain how the Imposthume was produced, Pus
generated, the Ulcer cleansed, and many other things of which I treated above;
but only signify that I here (contrary to the vulgar custom) used no Tents,
and for good reason, viz. because they, in many cases like this of ours, do
commonly infer more detriment than ease or benefit; for they are wont by their
pungent property to hurt the Bottom of the Ulcer, and render the Lips of the
same callous; and in the mean while can do no good, because the Pus is very
often found happily enough to issue out without their help.

Not only in this Imposthume; but also in many others, I have observed, in the
first days after the apertion of the Tumor, a white shining Pus to flow out;
but afterward a certain pellucid, yellowish, oily and somewhat viscous Juice,
at the sight of which (being taught by frequent experience) I have been
accustomed to judge the Evil would in a short time be healed; and that they do
egregiously err (whosoever they be) that seeing this above-described Juice,
would keep open Imposthumes by thrusting in Tents.

Now that you may more easily give credit to what is here mentioned, I shall
endeavor by solid Reason to confirm this Experience. The issuing out of a
white shining Pus, for several days, from an open Imposthume, is caused by an
acid Ferment (with which the Interior Superficies of the Imposthume is
imbibed) mixed with the nutritive Juice, by reason of the interrupted passages,
falling into the Cavity of the Tumor: but when this acid Ferment is removed,
then the nutritive Humor presents it self sincere to the sight, viz. pellucid,
yellowish, oily, and somewhat viscous.

That this oily Liquor, at first pellucid, acquires a white color (by its
admixion with Acidity) will undoubtedly seem strange to no man that has even
but once in his life seen how soon Oyl-Olive, after it has been mixed with
Vinegar, presents it self white to the sight.

OBSERVAT. V.
Of an hard Tumor of the Breast dissolved.

A Matron giving suck one very cold Night, exposing her left Breast (as she lay
in Bed) to the then freezing Air, the next day complained of a great Tumor (of
the same Breast) hard and very painful, which continually increased: Some days
were elapsed before my Advice was asked.

This Tumor was twice a day anointed with unsalted Butter mixed with common
Chalk, and over all was applied hot a small Bag filled with Rye-flover; and in
the mean while for several days the Patient suckled her Infant. By the help of
these few, and not much compounded Medicaments, this Tumor was happily removed.

By reason of Cold admitted, the Milk stagnized in certain Glandules, was
coacervated and waxed acid; whence, as may be easily judged, that hardness and
dolor derived their Original.

Chalk mixed with unsalted Butter, temperated the Acor of the stagnizing Milk,
and so dissolved whatsoever was coagulated in the Glandules, the small Bag
filled with Rye-flower, applied hot to the part, in the mean while contributing
help.

How far Chalk is available for correcting acid Humors, you may easily discern,
when you mix the same in a Glass with Vinegar, because immediately after the
commixion of both, you shall see and hear an egregious and very manifest
(although as to our touch cold) Effervescency, and afterward you will find the
sharpness of the Vinegar not a little diminished.

OBSERVAT. VI.
Of very great Torment of the Abdomen.

A Maid, aged Forty years, had now for six Weeks passed, complained of a most
vehement dolor, yet not far extended, but exercising its Tyranny in a very
small part of the Belly, and day and night most cruelly tormenting the Patient,
who had used very many Remedies, both Internal and External: She was purged,
and had a Vein opened, but in vain; so that (after the use of these) she almost
despared of recovering her pristine Sanity; in the mean while the External
Cutis in the pained part, could not be distinguished from the sound parts of
her Belly.

I, being called, with my Knife cut a small Wound, which is vulgarly called an
Issue, and kept that open by a Pea put in and daily renewed.

The next day after the cutting that Issue, the Patient had ease of her pain,
which from day to day did more and more lessen, so that it was wholly removed
quickly after.

One Month after the Issue made I permitted it again to close up, and so this
sick Maid was in a short space of time freed from this exceeding Torment and
remained well.

Some Acido-corrosive Particles in the affected part, were perhaps separated
from the other Particles of the sanguiferous Mass, with which so long as they
lay involved they could not exercise their sharpness.

So Nitre put upon the Tongue infers little or no trouble; whereas the Spirit
of Nitre does not a little corrode the Tongue, because it is now at liberty,
and separated from the other Particles of the Nitre with which it was before
mixed.

After the same manner Vitriolate Tartar bites the Tongue little; whereas
Spirit of Vitriol by distillation thence again separated, recovers its pristine
corrosive force which it had before.

These Acido-corrosive Particles, freed from their Cells, in which they before
lay included, and collected in a very small part of the Abdomen, did with their
sharpness in a wonderful manner continually agitate the Fibrils, and so
inferred that almost intolerable torment, which must necessarily cease when
these corrosive Particles were driven out with the Pus through the Issue.

OBSERVAT. VII.
Of a Bleeding Teat.

AN honest man's Wife giving suck, whilst she was cleansing her Infant from his
Excrements, was not a little offended with their blackness, the Infant in the
mean while was somewhat ill.

I being consulted about this case, first asked of the Infants Mother, whether
she felt any pain in her Nipple? She answered she did. I therefore bid her in
my presence somewhat to compress her Nipple; and then I saw Blood issuing out
thence, (because one or other of the small Vessels was hurt) which assumed by
the Infant, and carried through the Belly, waxed black, by reason of the acid
Ferment in the Infants Stomach mixed therewith.

The Mother, by my order, sprinkled Gum Arabic (cut into thin slices, dried and
pulverized) upon her finger, first moistened with her proper Spittle, and with
that Finger touched her Nipple; by this means she was the next day wholly freed
from this Evil, and remained well.

The most famous Sylvius, in the third Book of his Medicinal Praxis (Chap. 10.
under the Title 28, and following) instanceth this Blood, sometimes issuing
from the Nipples of Women giving suck, as an uncontrollable Argument, to
demonstrate, that Milk is not generated of the Chyle, but of the Blood; yet in
this he is deceived, because that Blood issues out from the sanguiferous
Vessels hurt, or otherwise opened by the Child's sucking.

Chaps are often seen in the Nipples of Suckling Women, which affect them with
very great torment, and are difficultly healed, because they can have little or
no rest, by reason of the Infants continual sucking. But I have frequently
healed these Chaps in a short time, by every day often gently touching the
Nipples with a Feather moistened with Oil of Myrrh; the description of which
may be seen in the Amsterdam Pharmacopoea.

Prudent Old Women are wont to advise Young Men affecting Matrimony, first with
their hands gently to touch the Breasts of the Maids they love, that so they
may be assured that they either have or have not Nipples. But though Virgins
may often seem to be without Nipples, yet Experience teaches, that the Nipples
before hid (when they become Mothers) may easily by the help of a fit
Instrument be drawn forth, and commodiously enough perform their office;
therefore there is no need of Nurses, to which many Mothers are much averse,
because they firmly persuade themselves, that the Infants by the Milk they
assume must needs imbibe the evil and bad qualities of their Nurses. In this
case I can determine nothing certain^; yet this I know, viz. that Infants daily
nourished with Cows-milk do not thence acquire to themselves brutish and
Cow-like manners.

OBSERVAT. VIII.
Of an exceeding great Dolor of the Ear.

A Virgin aged Twenty four years had now for 15 Weeks very much complained of
an almost intolerable pain of her Ear, which sometimes would, whole nights,
hinder her sleep; the Ear in the mean while daily poured out abundance of well
digested Pus, many Medicaments being adhibited in vain.

I being called, gave heed to all (and indeed the least) Circumstances as
circumspectly as I could, and at length with my Fingers felt a certain
Undulation of Pus, deeply sited behind the affected Ear. This Abscess was not
observed by others, though it was the cause of the whole Evil.

Well weighing and considering the matter, I soon understood, that this Abscess
behind the Ear would never spontaneously, viz. without external Artifice, be
opened; not only by reason of its depth, but also because the Pus there
contained had already sought an Exit for it self by the Ear, although that
passage was full of crooked turnings, and not sufficient. Wherefore I quickly
applied a sufficiently sharp Corrosive, by which the Eschar being separated, an
abundance of well-digested Pus issued out by the hole made by Art; and after
that time the dolor of the Ear and the out-flowing of Pus from the Cavity of
the same wholly ceased. The hole made by the Corrosive (all the Pus being by it
evacuated) in the space of two Weeks wholly closed up, and the Sick Maid was
perfectly restored to her pristine state of health.

I judged this Aperture behind the Ear was to be made without delay, lest
otherwise the Pus should have touched the subjected Bone, and in time have
infected the same with rottenness, although good Pus, abiding for some time
upon a Bone does not always necessarily infect the same with rottenness, as I
shall easily demonstrate by the following Example.

A Man about the Thirty sixth year of his age, traveling in very stormy
Weather in the Wintertime, soon after felt a great pain in his right Ear, out
of which every day after some Pus issued out, and then followed no small
abatement of that dolor. Afterward the Pus flowing out no more, the Sick man
again complained of very great torture, which (in the night often producing a
Dilirium) had continued now for several Months, and yielded to no external or
internal Remedies.

Being called, I found a Tumor behind the Ear extended far and wide, in which
(I firmly persuaded my self) Pus was contained, although (by reason of the
deepness of the place in which the Pus lay hid) no Undulation could be
perceived by the touch; therefore I applied a Corrosive, by which a very gross
Eschar being separated, an incredible quantity of Pus issued out. This Pus lay
upon the Petrose Bone, which was wholly bare, as I could easily observe by my
Probe: Yet in the mean while, without any separation of Fragments of the Bone,
the Patient (in the space of six Weeks) was perfectly healed, and remained well
afterward; no other Medicaments being used, than a fit Injection, a good
Digestive, and at length (the Bone being again covered) my Tincture of
Antimony, which I daily find wonderfully profitable in many cases externally
used.

The Drum of the Ear being eroded by an Ulcer, the Hearing is recorded to have
remained, by Vopiscus Fortunatus Plempius, in his Fundamentals of Medicine,
page 148.

Moreover I remember I have at Rotterdam (with Jacob Lodensteyn, chief
Chyrurgeon of the Navy, a most dexterous man) seen all the small Bones,
pertinent to Hearing, which after an Ulcer, came out of the Ear of a certain
Boy; but that Boy never heard of the same Ear afterward.

I knew a Surgeon, who to remove the pain of the Teeth, was wont with a
red-hot-Iron to burn the Ear; but this seems to be a ridiculous and vain
operation.

OBSERVAT. IX.
Of the Cubit displaced by reason of Relaxation of the Ligaments.

A Youth about 15 years of age, one evening putting off his Clothes, suddenly
and unexpectedly felt Immobility of his arm, with a certain sound arising
therefrom, because the Cubit was dislocated, which was easily again reposited;
but very often afterward, upon the least motion it would slip out of its
place. This Evil had continued for full three years, notwithstanding all the
deceits of Aposems, made of Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, China, and other things
which the Patient (animated by the hopes of health) had during this time
greedily swallowed; in the mean while Plasters, Liniments, and other External
Remedies, were not omitted: but the Youths Arm became much more slender than
was fit.

The Patient at length committed himself to a certain Surgeon to be cured,
who certainly promised him the restoration of his Arm, which he set about after
the following manner.

To the Arm ill-affected, he (every week often) applied certain
Cupping-glasses, but without Scarification; and then the same days after
Cupping, under the Arm (the upper part of which was covered) he burned Spirit
of Wine impregnated with the Volatile Salt of many Herbs, the Vapor of which
surrounded the whole Arm. These were the principal things, which (in the space
of half a year) restored to our Young man his pristine state of health; so that
the Patient at this time, without fear of a relapse, pleases himself with the
Art of Fencing, and other like Exercise.

The Ligaments connexing the Gubit with the Shoulder, were relaxed; how that
happened you may see, in the last Observation of the First Decade.

Besides, there were many Obstructions in the Nerves, Arteries, and small
passages of the Muscles, whence proceeded the Atrophia and extenuation of the
Arm.

The Cupping-glasses, often applied with Flame, removed the Obstructions of the
Ligaments, Muscles, and other parts; by their heat opening the Pores and small
passages, and giving more free passage to the Circulation of the Blood and
Humors through the Arm: For the pressure of the Air under Cupping-glasses is
much less and weaker than elsewhere; as you may more clearly understand by the
7th Observation of the Third Decade.

The Vapors of the Spirit of Wine kindled into a Flame, did (without any
impediment) enter into the Pores and small passages, sufficiently opened by the
Cuppingglasses, and there atenuated and dissolved the viscous and coagulated
Humors.

And so those Particles (that had insinuated themselves between the Fibrils of
the Ligaments, and by that means relaxed them) being removed, the Ligaments
acquired their pristine state which they before enjoyed, whilst the Arm
remained unhurt, and by that means they again retained the Cubit conjoined with
the Shoulder, as was fit.

The remaining Obstructions being also removed, the Atrophia of the Arm did
likewise begin to vanish.

OBSERVAT. X.
Of a Gonorrhaea contracted from impure Contact.

A Young man aged Twenty four years, a great admirer of Beauties, and a true
Son of Venus, after Coition with an impure Harlot, suffered an almost continual
Issue of white and viscous matter from his Yard; which was not only without
pleasure, but also attended with a cutting dolor, which was likewise felt when
the Patient voided his Urine.

An Acido-corrosive Ferment lying hid in the Genital-parts of this Whore, being
more than usually agitated in Coition, passed through the Yard of this Young
man, into the Pores of the Prostates and seminal Vessels (by Coition more than
usually opened) and so by its sharpness infected both the Seed and nutritious
Humors, and excited small Ulcers in those parts: Hence arose that Vellication
and almost continual contraction of the Prostates and small Seminal Vessels in
the aforesaid manner, with dolor frequently pouring out the Seed and
nutritious Humors corrupted.

This Evil is generally called a Gonorrhaea, and is sufficiently perilous,
because it often degenerated into the Venereal Lues if the Cure of the same be
deferred: For then the Acido-corrosive Ferment is forcibly removed and mixed
with the Sanguineous Mass.

Therefore without delay I set about the Cure, and (for temperating and
evacuating the corrosive Acidity, as well as for sanation of the small Ulcers)
I prescribed the following Pills.

. Extractum Catholicum, granes 24. Mercurius Dulcis, granes 6. Salt-prunella
Antimoniate, gr. 5.
Make Pills, No vii. These Pills the Patient took early in a Morning, and for
five days following (every day once) he took this Bolus.

. Venice Turpentine, iij. Rubarb, j. Mix these S. A.
He again afterward used the above-prescribed Purgation and Bolus as before;
and by this means recovered this pristine state of health.

Turpentine is, by some, so long boiled, as until Pills may thereof be made,
but this is an evil practice; for the boiling forces the Spirituous Oil into
the Air, whereas in that Oil the principal virtues of the Turpentine is known
to consist.

I do again condemn Acid things in this Affect; but perhaps my Opinion will
seem strange to some, viz. that Acidity should be so noxious and inimical to
Sanity in a living Animal, whereas Vinegar preserves the flesh of a Beast
killed, for a long space of time without corrupting; but, to remove this
Scruple, I Answer: The matter is far otherwise in a living Animal than it is in
the same when dead.

In a living Animal, for conservation of Life and Health, the free Circulation
of Blood and Humors (through the Vessels and passages sufficiently opened) is
absolutely necessary; yet this Circulation is not a little impeded by Vinegar
and other acid things coagulating the Blood and Humors. But in a dead Animal,
to preserve the Flesh thereof, the aforesaid Circulation is not requisite; but
there is only need to take care that the very small Particles of the Flesh
killed be not too much agitated, fermented, and forced from their station by
the ambient Air: to effect this, Vinegar is very fit by reason of its gross and
heave Particles.

That the flesh of a Beast killed will remain uncorrupted, if the motion of the
very small Particles (otherwise like to be) be by this or that cause stopped,
is very manifest by this, viz. that Flesh killed in Winter is kept sound for
many days; whereas the Flesh of a Beast (of the same kind) killed in the heat
of Summer, is most speedily corrupted by the Air, at that time constituted in
very swift motion.

That Vinegar consists of gross and heavy Particles, is manifest by
Distillation, which teaches, that Spirit of Wine is sooner elevated into the
alembeck than Water, and Water also sooner than Vinegar.

Moreover it may be said, that the Volatile Salt of Flesh killed is coagulated
with Vinegar, and so is kept unmoved, and impeded from being fermented with the
Air, losing its Figure, and flying away; as we see the Volatile Salt of
Hartshorn, or any other Volatile Salt, coagulated with an acid Spirit, not to
fly away, as it is otherwise wont to do.

The end of the Fourth Decade.
DECADE V.
OBSERVAT. I.
Of a Wound of the Head.

A Youth aged Sixteen years, fallen from an Horse to the ground, received a
sufficiently large Wound in the forepart of his Head; which was indeed so
great, that the Bone presented it self bare to the sight; in the mean while the
Patient did often vomit and was very ill. Two hours, after this mishap, were
scarcely elapsed, before I was called to this Youth, in whose Head I could
perceive neither Fissure, nor Fracture, nor imbowing of the Cranium; and at
that time the Vomiting ceased, and the sick Youth was pretty sedate, and
complained not much of pain or of any other discommodity.

It would in this place be superfluous to explain whence this Vomiting
proceeded; the matter being (as I judge) sufficiently clear of it self.

The Hair being shaved off, I filled the Wound with dry Lint; and indeed did
this for two reasons: First, that the Flux of Blood might by this means be
stopped. And Secondly, that the Lips of the Wound might be in some measure
separated each from other, to the end that the Cranium might (the next day) be
the better discovered.

Then I superposited a Plaster made of the following Mass.

. Emplast. Diapalma, ij. Bolus, and common Chalk, of each ij. Diaphoretic
Antimony, j. Oil of Bays, ij. Of Tartar, p. d. ss.
Mix and make a Plaster.

The next day nothing of evil appeared in the Cranium discovered, and the
Patient was scarcely vexed with an evil Symptom; whence I conceived hope, that
the Interior part of the Cranium had also received no hurt, and that the Brain
likewise lay unprejudiced within both its Infoldings.

Therefore, the Bone being first covered with dry scraped Lint, I applied to
the Lips of the Wound this following Medicament.

. Common Turpentine, Honey of Roses, of each ss. Myrrh, Aloes, of each ss.
Mix these, make an Unguent.

By this means the Patient was in a short time restored to his pristine state
of health.

The Plaster was applied for temperating the Acidity, and that it might
speedily dissolve whatsoever was coagulated by the Contusion: The Unguent was
also added for restoring the Circulation of the Blood and Humors, somewhat
impeded by reason of the small passages (in the Wound) interrupted and
distorted.

The bared Cranium was covered with dry scraped Lint, partly that the Pus
(issuing from the Lips of the Wound) might infer no damage to the Bone, and
partly that the ambient Air might (by this means) be kept from the Cranium, to
which, by reason of its Acidity (with which it abounds) it is very inimical, as
the daily coagulation of Blood let out from a Vein cut (caused by the external
Air) does plainly teach.

But that kind of Lint which is in Dutch called Catoen, is not convenient in
Wounds, because it is often wont, by its acute Angles (with which it abounds,
as by the help of a Microscope may easily be seen) to excite Inflammation.

All fat things I here studiously avoided, because they, with their stringy
Particles, too pertinaciously obstruct the very small passages of the Cranium,
and so cause the Humors to stagnize and wax acid, corrupt the Volatile Salt of
the Cranium, and induce rottenness; and then the Cure must needs be not a
little procrastinated, by reason of the perished part of the Bone, which must
first be separated.

Scultetus, in his Chyrurgick Armoury, anoints the part adjoining to a Wound
with astringent Oils (for some time) to prevent Inflammation (as he judges)
but improperly: For in an Inflammation the Circulation of the Blood should not
be stopped, but promoted; because the Blood and Humors, by reason of their
coagulation, in an Inflammation stagnize more than is fit; therefore it would
in this case be an Argument of much greater prudence, to dissolve the
coagulated Humors by Plasters temperating Acidity.

The cutting of a Vein, which many egregiously extol in Wounds of the Head, I
wholly omit, because I see not any Utility thence to arise.

To distinguish Medicaments, into Mundificatives and Narcoticks, and to take
sometimes These, and afterward Those into use, is a matter of no Utility; for
our Unguent only is sufficient, and performs whatsoever is necessary; whilst
it temperates Acidity, and restores the Circulation of the Humors. But in the
mean while it is to be observed, that when the Wound was almost filled up with
flesh, omitting the aforesaid Unguent, we at length applied dry scraped Lint;
for otherwise the Flesh would have been too luxuriant and risen higher than was
fit.

The Ancients in Wounds of the Head used a Swathe which is called Cancer, the
delineation of which may be seen in Scultetus; but in these our days a common
Napkin fitly applied is generally used.

Vomiting, in a Wound of the Head, for the most part portends much evil; but
that it is not always an infallible sign of a Fracture of the Cranium of a
Fissure, or any other very great discommodity, is clearly evident by our
proposed case.

Full of peril is a Wound of the Head, which beguiles us most when it seems
most pleasing. Therefore no Wound of the Head (though very small) should be
lightly esteemed, or negligently handled; but here we should rather suspect all
things, because where Chyrurgeons are most secure, there commonly lies a Snake
in the Grass.

Having for some time pondered these things in my mind, I judge it worth while
before I put an end to this Observation, to enlarge my Discourse more than I am
wont to do, that if (in this case) I cannot satisfy others, I may at least
give satisfaction to my self, for whose Instruction I write these.

It is out of all doubt, that a very small Wound of the Head, long after it
has been inflicted, may infer Death; yet this hinders not, but that it may
sometimes happen, that a Patient having a Wound of his Head (accounted almost
by all men most dangerous and mortal) may recover, contrary to the expectation
of Physicians and Chyrurgeons. So, I remember, some years since, to my Fathers
care was committed a certain wounded man, who had with a Spade received so
horrid a Wound in the forepart of his Head, that (by the stroke inflicted) not
only a very great part of the Cranium, but also no small portion of the Brain
it self was shattered, and notwithstanding this, the same man is at this time
(at Arenacum) living and well, yet his Hemiplegia still remains.

By this History I shall (perhaps) prove the opinion of the most famous Willis
to be false, who endeavors to persuade his Reader, that the seat of the Memory
is found to be in the Cortex of the Brain; for if this were true, then our
above-recited Patient must needs have had his Memory much impaired, whereas it
is at this time no less vigorous than it was before the Wound received.

But what do I speak of those who have recovered of an horrid Wound of the
Head? Is it not much more wonderful, that to some persons very great benefit
redounds from a Wound of the Head so very perilous, that it is by most men
accounted mortal? especially seeing there want not Examples testifying the
same? So you may read (in Schenkius) how a certain man, receiving a dangerous
Wound in his Head, was freed from an inveterate and very pertinacious
Epilepsie. Also if it be not too much trouble to you, I would have you peruse
the most famous Hildanus (in his Second Century, Observation VIII.) who
exposes to sight a case sufficiently rare; where he says, A certain man
received a Fracture of the Cranium, upon the conjunction of the Sagital, with
the Coronal Suture; and the same man afterward (the Ulcer notwithstanding
remaining) was by this means freed from a great and troublesome Cephalalgy,
with which he had been for a long time before) very much molested.

Such Histories as we have now related, very rarely happen, therefore in a
Wound of the Head (whatsoever it be) it is best to be always too careful,
rather than at any time too secure.

But a Wound of the Head, where the Patient is infected with the Veneral Lues,
is much more difficultly healed; as also if the same part has been often
wounded before. For usually in the Lues an Acido-corrosive Humor is peccant,
which contributes no small Impediment to the cure of Wounds. But when it
happens that the same part has been often wounded, it is well known, that not
a few of the small passages there remain distorted in a wonderful manner; so
that the Blood and Humors are thereby not a little impeded in their Circular
Motion, by the benefit of which (notwithstanding) almost the whole cure of
Wounds is effected.

That the Circulation of the Blood and Humors is impeded in a part once or
oftener wounded, though the Wound be long before healed, is manifest by this,
viz. that the parts formerly wounded are frequently sensible of the approach of
Cold or Storms more than usual.

Moreover, a Wound of the Head is more or less dangerous according to this or
that part of the Head on which it is inflicted: So a Wound of the hinder-part
of the Head is judged less perilous, because the Bone of that part (by reason
of its grossness and solidity) seldom suffers a Fracture or Fissure, although
it receive a stroke very vehement; and when it does happen to be broken or
crack, then the Filth notwithstanding (in this Fracture or Fissure collected)
does not so easily distill down upon the subjected hard Meninges.

But a Wound inflicted on that small Bone of the Brain, with which maturity of
Age afterward fills up the open place in Infants, is accounted, and undoubtedly
is, very perilous, because that Bone is tender and nigh the Suturos.

So a wound of the Temples is very formidable for many Causes; and indeed
first, because the Temporal Muscle is covered with the Pericranium.

Secondly, because there lies an Artery (sufficiently great) which being
wounded induces a very dangerous Hoemorrhagia, which must needs be very
difficultly stopped; because while we speak or eat the Temporal Muscles are
moved, and so the flux of Blood (before cohibited) is often wont to return and
be renewed.

Thirdly, because the Nerve (in the Temporal Muscle) hurt is wont to excite a
Spasmus, and indeed such as in Dutch is called de klem, and hinders the
Patients eating. So when a Muscle of the Temples is very much hurt, its
opposite Muscle is contracted, and that Affect excited, which is called Torture
(or Wryness) of the Mouth.

Fourthly, because Artificial Section (sometimes necessary in Wounds of the
Head) cannot be safely made in a Temporal Muscle.

Fifthly, because the cure of Wounds requires rest of the wounded part, which
notwithstanding is often disturbed in a Wound of a Temporal Muscle, viz. as often
as we eat or speak.

A Fissure in Sutures is also worse than elsewhere, and most difficultly found.
So Hippocrates (Epid. 5.) freely. confesses himself to have been deceived, and
indeed to the ruin of the wounded man.

A Wound inflicted on the Eye-brow, so as the Cavity be opened, which is found
in the Bone of the Forehead, emits wind, because that Cavity of the Bone is
previous into the Noethrils; that Wound can scarcely (by any means) be
consolidated, according to the testimony of Celsus and others that have seen
such cases.

Chyrurgeons, when they doubt of a Fracture or Fissure of the Cranium, give to
the wounded man a Nut to crack with his Teeth; or they make a Thread (one end of
which the Patient holds in his mouth) observing whether he can bear that
trembling motion without trouble.

When the Cranium is bared, we generally with a Probe search whether there be a
Fissure or no. But that this Examen may be rightly instituted, it is behooful
before all things exactly to know the accustomed site of Sutures; least a
Fissure be taken for the Suture, or the Suture it self for a Fissure. Also,
that this Error may be wholly shunned, it is expedient for the Artist always
to bear in mind, that the Sagittal Suture does sometimes (contrary to the usual
custom) slip down as far as the Nose, and so deforms the Forehead; yea, also
that it sometimes extends it self to the hinder-part of the Head and divides
that. Here likewise the Observation of a certain Anatomist is worthy of
remarque, who affirms he saw that little Bone of the Bregma, with which (in
riper age) the place lying open in young Children, is filled up to be
circumscribed with a small Suture.

In the Writings of Parey, Fallopius, and others, we may read of wounded men,
in who (being dead and opened) the external Table of the Cranium, which
received the Wound, was discerned to be entirely whole, the Internal (in the
mean while) not only cleft, but also exhibiting certain Fragments, which (by
their punction) molested the Meninges. How could this happen? I answer: The
vehement stroke had very much agitated the Subtle matter nearest, and so this
Subtle Matter most swiftly moved (without delay) freely passed through the
first Table of the Cranium, inferring no damage; but when it came to the second
Table of the Cranium, much more solid than the first (as Anatomists testify)
it there met with Pores so very small and crooked, that it could not pass
unless by a new way, which it in a moments time violently prepared for it self;
and so (many Pores being broken through) egregiously cleft the Internal Table
of the Cranium: As Lightning is reported to have melted a Sword leaving the
Scabbard unhurt; so Aqua Fortis dissolves Silver, not hurting Wax.

Many declare that it sometimes happens, that the right-side of the forepart of
the head being struck, the left-side is cracked, the right-side remaining whole;
and such a Case is usually called a Contrafissure, though this word
Contrafissure is often extended to other cases also.

I willingly confess I never saw such a Contrafissure; but Celsus affirms such
a case has happened, Aegineta denies it, therefore I suspend my judgment about
this matter.

It so happens sometimes, that the Marrow which is found between both Tables of
the Cranium, is (by a forcible stroke) crushed and squeezed out which the Blood
(also by the same force) extravasate: and so this Marrow with the Blood
conceives an Acido-corrosive Acor, by which it induces rottenness on the
Internal Table of the Cranium; and so (sometimes) the acrid and aqueous Humor,
proceeding from the perished Bone, infects the Meninges and Brain it self, and
infers sudden and unexpected Death, some Weeks, yea some Months after the hurt
received; the Cranium in the mean while on the outside appearing whole, not
showing either Fracture or Fissuren Such Examples are here and there described
by Author that have written of Chirurgy.

The Cranium, with the Dura-mater, being hurt, sometimes (in the space of 24
hours) arises a Fungus, in magnitude almost as large as an Hens-Egg, which the
most famous Malpighius judges to derive its Original from those Glandules
hurt, of which the Cortex of the Cerebrum is compounded, and which (according
to his Opinion) end in the Roots of the Nerves, into which they transmit their
nervous Juice received from and purified by the Arteries.

It is by almost all Authors seriously advised, that no Wounds of the Head be
sewed up, and indeed very well.

When Wounds of the Head were bound up, Vesalius always used a Wax-candle
lighted (not a Suet-candle, because fatness hurts the Bones) to the end it
might in some measure temperate the cold of the ambient Air; but at this time
some Chyrurgeons use a certain Brass Vessel filled with live Coals, which
Vessel is in Dutch called even bedpan.

The middle space, that is between both Tables of the Cranium, is found to be
much thinner in Children, than in Men full grown; which is (as I judge) very
fit to be well observed by Chyrurgeons when they either use a Trepan or
Lancets; for otherwise it may happen that they may persuade themselves they are
not yet come to the middle space, when in the mean time they hurt the Meninges
it self.

Some, before they use the Trepan, choose to make a cross-like Incision of the
Flesh; others a Triangular; but my Father always esteemed the Circular Incision
best, and so he separated and took away all that portion of flesh from the
Cranium.

In Operating some dip their Trepan in Oil for temperating the heat, (as they
say) but evily, because Oil, as we have often said, is inimical to the Bones;
wherefore common Water may in this case better serve.

The Ancients opinionated, that the Marrow and Brain in Animals increased in
the first Quarters of the Moon; therefore at the Full Moon they forbid the use
of a Trepan. But at this time Experience has taught, that the Brain in the
Cranium, and the Marrow in the Bones of Animals, do no more abound in the
Increase of the Moon than at any other time; thus this Opinion, superstructed
on so sandy a Foundation, falls to ruin.

The Ancients would not permit the Trepan to be put in Sutures; but we have
Surgeons at this time who do this without fear.

It sometimes happens, that the Duramater very firmly adheres to the Cranium;
yet this is but seldom, and is beside the usual custom.

To the Meninges lying bare, Scultetus applies Oil of Roses, Celsus Vinegar;
both err, the one more, the other less. What can Oil effect, unless it be the
obstruction of the Pores and Passages of that membrane, and so impede the
Circulation of the Blood and Humors? But Vinegar will coagulate the Blood and
Humors, circulating through the Meninges, and so not a little hinder the
circular motion of them.

What shall then be here applied? Honey or Syrup of Roses; but best is the
Syrup, (being less sharp) which may be put in hot with a round Lint, having a
Thread tied thereunto.

The Trepan being used* it sometimes happens, that no Evil is found upon the
Meninx, but the Pus lies hid under the same: When this is seen, the Meninx must
be cut, that passage may be made for the Pus to flow out. Here is no cause of
fear, that the Pia-mater will be hurt, because the interjacent Pus prevents
that. I remember that this Apertion of the Meninx was happily instituted at
Arenacum.

A Patient wounded in the Head, should rather assume Meats liquid than solid.
For otherwise the motion of chewing may somewhat molest the wounded part; and
indeed more especially if the Wound be inflicted in the Temples.

If Sneezing sieze any one wounded in the Head, it will undoubtedly too much
shake his Brain and hurt the Wound. Therefore it would be prudence so soon as
Sternutation is perceived to approach to prevent the same; which may easily be
effected, if at that time we often rub the greater Angle of either Eye with our
Fingers.

In a Wound of the Head, Anger and Venery must (above all things) be shunned,
because they very much disturb the Brain, and so infer no small damage to the
miserable Patients; as frequent Experience daily proves.

Thus I shall now at length put an end to this Observation, after I have said,
that here I have offered none but thing rare and worthy of note. For all other
things pertinent to Wounds of the Head, are largely enough treated of by Parey,
Hildanus, Scultetus, and other writers of Chirurgy, which to repeat here (I
judge) would be wholly needless.

OBSERVAT. II.
Of a Wound penetrating the Thorax.

A Young man Thirty years of age, received a Wound between the sixth and
seventh Rib (if you reekon from the inferior) with a Sword, which penetrated
into the Cavity of the Breast, as was experienced by a Probe gently thrust in;
as also by the Air, impetuously enough issuing out from the Wound. The Patient
in the mean while eat well and complained little.

Because this Wound was not sufficiently opened to give Exit to the Pus, we put
in a Tent (made of Sponge) with a Thread tied to it, and by this means the Wound
was the next day very well opened. Therefore we then applied a Tent made of a
scraped Lint, and anointed with a good Digestive, with a Plaster temperating
Acidity, and a good Ligature.

In the mean while the Patient drank twice a day three Ounces of the following
Apozem.

Of the Herbs Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, Scabious, of each Mij. Leaves of the
Fir Tree, Mj. Raisins stoned, iij. Fennel-seed, ss. Barley, Mij.
Boil all in equal parts of Common Water and French Wine, and use the Colature;
which also, when necessity requires, may be injected by a Syringe into the
Cavity of the Breast, being (at that time) mixed with an Ounce or two of Honey
of Roses.

The Wound, thus handled for several days, emitted a little Pus, and the
Patient was otherwise very well; therefore we daily formed the Tents shorter,
and so the Patient was (in six Weeks time) wholly recovered of this Wound.

The Probe, with which the deepness of the Wound was searched, was not Iron;
because this Metal (by reason of its rigidness) does not sufficiently give way
to the Muscles, which are wont sometimes to enter and fill up the place of the
Wound, when the Patient changes the posture of his Body; but a Wax-candle (in
Dutch called even wassichie) was used, which in this case, by reason of its
flexibility, would better serve. But before we set about this work, we
commanded the Patient to stand with his Body in the same posture in which he
stood when wounded.

The Air brake forth impetuously enough from this Wound, and sometimes so
forcibly as it would blow out a Candle held near. But whence did this happen? I
Answer, When the Thorax is straightened in Expiration by the Muscles of the
Abdomen, as also by its proper Muscles, the Air (commixt with not a few
Vapors) is compressed, and compelled to seek for it self an Exit; and so, by
reason of the streightness of the place, it is with great force driven out from
the Wound, no otherwise than as we see Air with great impetuousness to issue
out of the Nose of Bellows, when the sides of the Bellows are only gently
compressed. For so a great part of the motion; which before did diversely
agitate the several Particles of the Air, is now employed to move the Air to
one part only.

But why was the Tent tied with a Thread? I answer; That it might not be forced
into the Cavity of the Breast. For that such a thing has sometimes happened,
very many Histories testify; yea, we have read, that Tents have not only been
forced into the Cavity of the Thorax, but also that the same afterward has
been by the Mouth of the Patient expelled with coughing.

Therefore, whence is it that the Tent sometimes penetrates into the Cavity of
the Breast? Shall we with the Ancients answer, that is done by Suction or
indrawing of the Thorax? No: For we can clearly and evidently enough
demonstrate that every motion conspicuous in this Corporeal Universe is made by
Pulsion.

It would be no less absurd and disconsant to Reason, if I, with many others,
should in this place have recourse to the Asylus of a Vacuum which is not, as
is clearer than the Sun at Noon, to all those that are not wholly blinded with
their own Prejudices; and is distinctly enough explained by the famous
Cartesius, in his Second Part of the Principles of Philosophy.

But that we may call this what it is, and what may most easily be understood,
we reply in this manner: When the time of Inspiration is present, the Thorax is
rendered more capacious, because the Diaphragma is contracted downward. Now
because the Diaphragma is thus contracted, the Belly egregiously swells, and so
forcibly enough drives out the Air, which (there being no where any Vacuum) at
the same moment of time must needs enter the Thorax enlarged as aforesaid; and
so the Air enters partly through the Cleft of the Larynx, partly also through
the Orifice of the Wound, (as being a passage more commodious, more short, and
more free) and when the Air so rusheth inward through the open wound of the
Thorax, in its passing through it forces the Tent in with it self, it be not
tied with a Thread strong enough.

Some Authors, when they suspect that some part of the Blood or Pus does lie
upon the Diaphragma, they endeavor to heal up penetrating wounds of the
Breast, without the help of any Tents, and commend the same to others; but in
the first days they cannot be sufficiently assured of this matter: therefore
they seem to act more prudently, who (with me) for some days use Tents, and in
the mean while as much as they can keep the ambient Air from the Wound. But in
the interim we must be very careful in due time to abstain from Tents: For if
their use be protracted longer than is fit, an uncurable Fistula may happen,
continuing to the last moment of life; because the continual agitation of the
Breast in Respiration (which is no small hindrance to the Consolidation of
Wounds) is not a little conducent to the production of such an Evil.

Penetrating wounds of the Thorax are very dangerous, and compel many to bid
adieu to the Society of the Living, and in others excite a Ptisick worse than
death it self. But in the mean while, I remember I have read of one, who was
happily freed from an Asthma (with which he was long before cruelly afflicted)
by a wound penetrating into the Cavity of the Thorax. Yea, I at this time know
an honest Citizen of Arnhemium, to whom a penetrating wound of the Breast
proved very salutery. For he for a long time before had been afflicted with an
Empyema, and daily expected death: but when by another (I know not from what
cause provoked) he was wounded with a Sword, so as the Wound penetrated into
the Cavity of the Breast; and by this means, the Pus flowing freely out through
the Orifice of the Wound, he was in a short time after freed from his Empyema,
my Father (while he lived) being his Physician.

When, in a very small Wound of the Breast, Chyrurgeons doubt whether the Wound
has penetrated into the Cavity of the Thorax or not, they are wont to hold
near to the Wound either burning Tow, or the flame of a lighted Candle, and
thence they judge of the penetration of the wound; if there be a Trembling
motion in the flame of the Tow or Candle, excited by the Air proceeding from
the Breast, then the Wound is deep, otherwise not.

When it happens that any part (contained in the Cavity of the Breast) is also
hurt, then the Wound must be kept open the longer, and into it twice a day some
Injection be emitted hot, without the addition of Carduus Benedictus, Aloes,
Wormwood, and other bitter things, as some are wont to add. For the bitter
Particles carried upwards with the Air, through the Branches of the Pipe of the
Lungs hurt, affect the Tongue with bitter and troublesome taste, as frequent
Experience witnesses.

If any great sanguiferous Vessel (sited in the Cavity of the Thorax) be
wounded, then much Blood is wont to be collected together above the Diaphragma,
and (by this means) to excite heaviness about the Diaphragma, Fevers,
Watchings, bloody Excretion, prostrated Appetite, and difficult Respiration.

This Blood must be several times every day evacuated through the Orifice of
the Wound; yea the Pus also, which some days after the Wound received usually
follows.

If the Blood that flows out from a sign the Lungs are wounded; and such a
Wound often infers on the sick a Tabes, but more often death. This will not
seem strange to any man, who (with Malpighius and other curious searchers of
the Humane Body) will not disdain somewhat more piercingly (than the Ancients
have done) to inspect the substance of the Lungs. So doing, he will discern the
Lungs to be no other than a certain conjested heap of membranous small
Bladders, clothed with a wonderful Net (composed of the minute very small
Branches of the small Veins and Arteries) into which small Bladders passage is
given to the Air through the rough Artery.

Hence therefore it is sufficiently manifest, that a Wound of the Lungs cannot
be so very small, but that some small sanguiferous Vessels of these small
Bladders must also be hurt; whence the Cure is rendered yet more difficult
(which was before of it self difficult enough) because these small Bladders are
membranous, and posited in continual motion, into which every hour new Air is
introduced. For membranous parts are more slowly healed than the fleshy; and no
man can doubt, that rest of the part hurt hastens the consolidation of a Wound,
if he has (but once in his life) observed how easily wounds of the Tibia are
healed, the sick keeping himself in a Lying-posture; and on the contrary, how
difficulty the same wounds are consolidated when the Patient daily walks about
the Streets. And lastly, who knows not that the ambient Air ought diligently to
be kept from Wounds?

Therefore wounds of the Lungs (as we said) are by Experience found to be
almost all mortal. Yet in the mean while we read, that a Patient may supervive
the taking away a piece of his Lungs by a Wound.

As Soon as men are born and respire the Lungs are filled with Air; but it is
not so in the Young whilst in the Womb. To this Physicians give heed, when they
are compelled by the Magistrate to give their Opinion whether an Infant died in
the Womb, or lost its Life out of the Womb. For then they take the Lungs out of
the Breast of the Carcass and put them into water; if they swim above the
water, they conclude the Infant died out of the Womb; but the contrary when
they sink and are submerged.

A Wound in the fleshy part of the Diaphragma, brings the sick into no small
peril, yet that is sometimes healed. But when a membranous part of the
Diaphragma is wounded, the Patient (a Fever and Delirium arising) expires not
long after. Nor indeed is this to be wondered at, seeing (by reason of the
continual and very sensible motion of the Diaphragma) the small passages about
the Wound are very much distorted; whence the Humors there stagnizing wax acid
and produce Inflammation. And when these acid Humors are (from the Inflamed
part) absorbed into the sanguineous mass, a Fever is induced, which a Delirium
follows. So I remember a Carter of Arnhemium, who was wounded with a Knife in
the membranous part of the Diaphragma. Presently after the wound inflicted he
came to our house on foot; but soon after became so very weak, that he was
carried home by two men, where (siezed with a Fever and Delirium) he died three
days after.

But wonderful is that which I not long since read, viz. that in one man the
Stomach, in another the Gut Colon (by a wound of the Diaphragma) ascended from
the Abdomen into the Thorax, and that both Patients lived for some small time
after.

A wound of the Pericardium is judged mortal; and where the substance of the
Heart is also wounded, the Patient (for the most part) suddenly dies. Yet I am
able truly to witness, that a Jew of Arnhemium, wounded in the very substance
of his Heart, did notwithstanding (every day twice) for six days together
(before he died) come to our house on foot to have his Wound dressed.

Galen in one place relates (as an Eyewitness) that the Pericardium being
corrupted, the Heart lay sufficiently bared in the Breast of a certain sick
Man, who notwithstanding recovered. But men at this day are found to be so very
incredulous, that with them such Histories find, or seem to deserve, little
credit.

Whilst I make mention of the Heart, two Prejudices seem to me fit to be
removed. The first is, that with which the generality of the Common sort are
frequently affected; that is, they pertinaciously believe, that the Heart has
its seat in the Left-side of the Breast, whereas it is placed in the midst of
the Breast. But occasion of this Error was first given to the people from
this, viz. because there is a more vehement Pulse felt in the Left-side of the
Thorax than in the Right. But this happens because the great Artery has its
situation in the Left-side.

The other prejudice, which I was willing to reprehend, is this, viz. that some
of the Ancients did persuade themselves that the Heart was afflicted with no
Diseases; the falsity of which Opinion is notwithstanding daily proved by
Experience. So in the French Ephimerides we read, that (in the right Ventricle
of a Dogs-Heart) thirty and one living Worms were found, being of the length of
one Finger, and as thick as a common small Needle. Moreover the Heart is
sometimes affected with a certain Disease, called the Polypus of the Heart;
touching which, peruse Malpighius in his Anatomick Treatise of the Structure of
the Bowels.

In penetrating wounds of the Bowels, some Chyrurgeons instead of Tents use
small Cannels of Silver, Lead, or of Linen well waxed; but because Silver is
often infected by the Pus, and Lead too soon covers the Lips of the wound with
a Cicatrice, here in this place the Cannais made of Linen well waxed ought to
be preferred before the other.

Acid things are inimical to all Wounds, but especially to wounds penetrating
the Thorax: For besides their coagulating the Blood and Humors, and rendering
them unapt for Circulation, they do also hurt in this case, viz. because with
their Acid-Particles cutting on either side, they are wont to excite a cough.

But although I reject acid things, I do not therefore here commend sweet
Syrups, seeing they profit the Lungs little, but (in the mean white) hurt the
Stomach and other parts; as many others with my self do daily find by
Experience. It is better from Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, and other fit Herbs, to
extract their Tincture with boiling hot Water in such a small Vessel as the now
commonly known Drink is wont to be prepared of the Herb Tee.

If a Patient be afflicted with a penetrating wound of the Thorax, and the
Blood, latent in the Cavity of the Breast, issue not out by the wound, let him
hold one Grain of Musk under his Tongue, and the Blood will presently flow
out, as Sennertus says; but of the success I very much doubt.

Sometimes the place of the Breast wounded is higher than that the Blood or
Pus, congested upon the Diaphragma, can flow out; then is the Blood or Pus not
seldom seen to be expelled by the Mouth with coughing; yea, not a few Authors
testify, that at such a time the Pus is sometimes driven into the Bladder, and
expelled with the Urine; which Pus (they think) may by two ways be brought to
the Bladder: First, if through the small Veins or Lymphatick Vessels, it be
forced into the sanguineous Mass, and with the same carried to the Reins; and
at length (when it shall there be transcolated) descends by the Ureters into
the Bladder, and so is expelled with the Urine. But the other way seems to be
far more difficult: For they judge that the Pus can, in the form of Dew,
transpire through the Pores of the Diaphragma (from within looking outward) and
so passing through the whole Abdomen, at length enter the Cavity of the Bladder
through the Pores of the same (from without looking inward.) That such Pores,
from without looking inward, may be found, is evident by the following
Experiment: In an hot Room invert a Bladder, and fill it with hot Water, and
then you will see the Water transpire like Dew.

When it happens that the Pus (copiously contained upon the Diaphragma) cannot
be expelled by the wounds being too highly sited, nor by the Mouth with
coughing, nor be evacuated by the Bladder with the Urine, then is commended a
Paracenthesis; that is, an Artificial Incision in a lower place of the Thorax.
This Incision is usually made between the fifth and sixth Rib (if you number
from the Inferior) not in the midst of the Breast, but in the Side; and this
rather in the Anterior than in the Posterior part thereof; and rather about the
Superior than the Inferior part of the Rib; and indeed with a Knife, having
(for a good part of it) a Cloth wrapped round about, just at that moment of
time in which the Patient breaths.

But in this Age wherein we now live, and in these Regions, this operation is
very rarely exercised.

The Paracenthesis being made, the Pus must not be let out all together and at
once, but at several times. This all Chyrurgeons concede to, but few of them
know why they do so. Some say the Spirits would be dissipated if the Pus should
be let all out at one time; others feign, that provident Nature is then
sensible of that Vacuum, therefore presently sends much, yea too much Blood and
Humors into that place. But both these Reasons are so very frivolous, that they
deserve no refutation. Therefore I shall briefly declare what I judge to be the
reason of this: It is certain that into that place, from which the hot Pus has
receded, the cold Air has immediate access; which does not only molest the
Fibrils (before somewhat injured by the Pus) but also produces many
Obstructions in the small passages; so that in them the Humors stagnize, are
coacervated, wax acid, and by that means an Inflammation is excited, much after
the same manner as when we have been exposed to the cold Air, and presently
after are well warmed, we are not seldom afflicted with Catarrhs (as they are
vulgarly called) and when we are above measure hot, and at that time drink cold
Beer, we are sometimes punished with a Pleurisy.

OBSERVAT. III.
Of a penetrating Wound of the Abdomen.

A Young man, aged Twenty years, was wounded by an Adversary of his, so that
the Sword passed through the anterior part of the Abdomen and pierced through
his Back.

The Patient soon after he was wounded took his Bed, and the first days did
somewhat complain of this or that Discommodity; but afterward from day to day
he waxed better and better; and both his Wounds (in three weeks space) were
perfectly consolidated with the use of Tents put in, which were first anointed
with a good Digestive, and a fit Plaster superposited.

It was not necessary in this case to search into the profoundity of the Wound,
it being sufficiently manifest, that this Wound had penetrated into the Cavity
of the Abdomen, because the Swords point had passed through the Belly and came
forth at the Back.

Otherwise the profundity of a Wound is wont to be searched out by an Iron or
Leaden Probe; but better is a Wax-candle (which is in Dutch called even
Waslichie) because it can much more commodiously be bowed, and accommodated to
all occurrent Meanders. Here in the mean while it is to be studiously observed,
that sometimes the Probe enters very deep, passing through the Interstitiums of
the Muscles, and the Wound (notwithstanding) penetrates not so far as into the
Cavity of the Belly. And on the contrary the Wound sometimes penetrates into
the Cavity of the Abdomen, though the Probe (when thrust in) presently finds
resistance, viz. because the parts in the Body hurt were otherwise figured when
the sick was wounded, than afterward when the state of the Wound was searched
into.

A Wound of the Abdomen, though it penetrate not into the Cavity of the Belly,
yet is difficultly healed, by reason of the motion of Respiration: For Wounds
to be consolidated require Rest.

But if a Wound of the Abdomen, not penetrating, be in the White-Line (so
called) then it is much more difficultly healed, and very painful.

In the Second Observation of this Decade, I willed the enlargement of very
small wounds of the Breast; but this Operation deserves not place in wounds of
the Abdomen: For in such it is to be feared that the Omentum of Bowel, through
too large an hole of the Belly, should slip out of the Cavity of the Abdomen.

Some dream, that the Resurrection of the Dead shall take beginning from the
small Bone contained in the 18th Vertebra; but they dream indeed without any
similitude of Truth. Truly I know not what answer men of such an Opinion would
give me, if I should ask them, whether that man should not rise in whom that
small Bone had (while he lived) been broken to pieces by a Wound.

The Testicles hang without the Cavity of the Abdomen, and therefore may be
easily wounded; yet their being wounded hazards not the life of the Patient.
For we by experience find, that a man can supervive the cutting out of both his
Testicles. I my self familiarly knew a man (studious of Medicine) who had both
his Stones by reason of a carnous Hernia happily cut off.

What then are the Testicles? They are no other than a certain Congesture of
very many most small Threads or Vessels confecting the Seed; which Threads, if
separated each from other without breaking, would (in a man) easily exceed the
length of twenty Else. For the Testicle of a Dormouse is extended to fifteen
Else.

Many Chyrurgeons, to Wounds do first of all apply repelling things, that is
things cold and astringent; but in wounds of the Groin omit them. If you ask
their reason, they will answer you, Because the Emunctory of the Liver is in
the Groin. This Answer is both frivolous and rediculous, and we have already
(in the Eighth Observation of the First Decade) exploded and and sufficiently
refuted the same.

What then is the reason that Chyrurgeons do any where else but in the Groins
use cold and astringent things? Attend a little and I will tell you. Cold and
astringent things hurt almost every where, but more in the Groins than
elsewhere; which Experience (the Mistress of Fools) has taught them. The fact
they know and confess, but are wholly ignorant of the cause of such an Effect.
Therefore they seign to themselves such a Chymaera; whereas (in the mean while)
the true cause is, that certain Glandules have their seat in the Groins, which
Glandules are no other than a Congesture of very small Vessels much inflexied,
in the Meanders of which the Humors more easily subsist than elsewhere, if
Chyrurgeons (by cold and astringent things unseasonably applied) retard their
Circulation.

All penetrating Wounds of the Abdomen are dangerous, but far more perilous
when they are large; because the Omentum (or Bowel) at that time easily slips
out; and if it be not, presently after its Egress, forced into its proper
place, it dies and changes its color by reason of the ambient Air. But whence
is it that the Omentum for some time remaining out of the Belly so suddenly
dies? The Omentum consists of very many small Bags, into which the Grease is
conveyed through several fatty Vessels, as the most accurate Anatomists of this
Age plainly witness. Hence it is now easily manifest how readily the Grease (in
its small Bags) and the Matter (contained in the very small fatty Vessels) may
be coagulated by the cold Air.

Now when the Omentum, issuing out of the Cavity of the Abdomen, by reason of
some delay, is in the aforesaid manner corrupted; then must a Thread be tied
between the sound and the corrupted part, and least the sound part also be
infected what is corrupted must be cut off; and if the Wound be found too
large, that must be sewed up: but the aforesaid Thread hanging out of the
Abdomen must be a left so, until it falls off of it self in process of time.
Thus I knew one, part of whose Omentum (by its too long stay out of the
Abdomen) was corrupted, recovered happily of his Wound, who was after the same
manner handled by my Father.

In a large wound of the Abdomen, the Bowel sometimes issues, which must be
presently thrust in; for otherwise it is so distended with Flatus's, as it
cannot be thrust into its pristine place. But whence is it that the Bowel is so
distended with Flatus's, remaining out of the Belly for some short time? I
answer; A certain Fermentation is excited, not only in the Chyle, Pancreatick
Juice, and Choler; but also in the Feces left of the Chyle, and in the Ferment
adhering to the sides of the Bowels. Hence arise many Vapors (not to mention
those Vapors which from the Pores of the small Arteries, continually enter
into the Cavity of the Bowels) which must needs be accumulated in the Cavity of
that Bowel, and distend it; if in the Bowel abiding out of the Abdomen the
Pores (from within looking outward) be closed up by the ambient Air.

Now what remains to be done, when the Bowel out of the Abdomen is seen
distended with Flatus's? The closed Pores are to be opened, and greater
agitation contributed to the Vapors contained within; which may well be
effected, if a Thread newly twisted, but not purged by boiling, having been
first boiled in sweet Milk, be applied hot.

Then the Bowel, the Flatus's being absumed, must be reposited, and (if need
be) the Wound, in some part sewed up.

If the Bowels be also wounded, the life of the Patient is in very great
danger; and indeed the more, if the Wound be inflicted in a thin Bowel, but not
so if in a more gross Bowel; because in this the Wound, after it is sewed up,
is more easily conglutinated; the Bowel being such as consists of a greater
number of small passages, through which the nourishing Humors are conveyed.
So the gross Bowels generally contain only Feces, but Bowels more slender the
Chyle.

Whilst I here treat of the Bowels, a certain Dispute, which has been for a
long time contraverted among Physicians, comes into my mind, viz. whether
nourishing Clysters injected do obtain the wished Effect; or whether (as some
say) they be wholly unprofitable for Nutrition; because, according to their
opinion, they come not so far as to the sanguineous Mass? But they err who
embrace the last opinion, if credit may be given to credible men, who (taught
by Experience) witness, that the same quantity of Spirit of Wine, if injected
into the Fundament by a Clyster, will sooner inebriate than if taken in by the
Mouth.

The Liver consists of certain glandulous Kernels, into which the small
sanguiferous Vessels conveying their own Humor, are terminated, and of the
Branches of the Bilary-Pores, which receive the Choler separated in those
glandulous Kernels.

Moreover great sanguiferous Vessels are seen in the Liver, whence it is easily
understood how dangerous are those Wounds that are inflicted on the Liver. For
if the great Vessels be opened, an Haemorrhagia yielding to no Remedies
follows. And though those great Vessels be not hurt, yet a wound of the Liver
(though but small) does in the mean while disturb the separation of Choler,
which notwithstanding we know to be exceeding necessary in the Economy of an
Animal.

But notwithstanding these, Paulus Aegineta speaks of a man that recovered of a
Wound that had taken away a piece of his Liver.

It is wonderful indeed, that one man should supervive the loss of a piece of
his Liver, and another die by the too-great increase of his Liver. So some
years ago, to my Fathers care was committed a Sick-man, afflicted with a vastly
tumified Belly, continuing so unto Death. His Carcass being opened, clearly
presented the cause of this Evil to the sight, for his Liver was incredibly
augmented. I remember the same happened in an Hen, which never laid Egg, the
Liver of which weighed an entire pound.

The Spleen is a congesture of small Membranes, formed into small Cells and
Concamerations, in which Cells innumerable oval and white Glandules (into which
the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves are opened) do in a wonderful manner adhere.

Here it is to be understood (as an industrious Anatomist of this Age judges)
that the Humor is carried, through the Arteries, into the Glandules of the
Spleen, and by the Glandules (being there separated and somewhat acid) into the
abovenamed small Cells; and from those Cells, imbibed with an acid Ferment,
into the Splenetic-Branch, and so to the Liver; where, in the Blood, it in some
sort precipitates the Choler, to the end that may so much the more easily be
separated in the glandulous Kernels of the Liver.

Hence it is now manifest, what great misery a Wound of the Spleen infers on
the sick.

The Reins consists of Glandules, into which the small Arteries, Veins, and
Branches of the Ureters, are terminated. Through the small Arteries the Humor
is deferred into the Glandules of the Reins, in which the Urine is separated,
and taken from the Branches of the Ureters is forced into the Bladder.

That the matter is thus, you will more easily believe, when you shall know the
following Experiment, which a certain Professor communicated to me, and is
this: If you, by a Syringe, inject warm Milk into an emulgent Artery, the more
gross part will return by the emulgent Vein, and the wheyish Portion be
sequestered in the Reins, and thence conveyed into the Ureter.

Hence it is apparent how perilous Wounds of the Reins are, and how difficultly
they can be consolidated; also hence, whence proceeds Blood excreted with the
Urine, when the Reins are wounded, is easily understood.

Whilst I am speaking of the Reins, I call to mind a certain Question often
bandied about among Physicians, viz. which way the Drink, a little after it is
assumed, cast out by the Urinary passage, can come so soon into the Bladder? or
whether it first comes to the sanguineous Mass, or not touching the Blood,
presently and immediately hastens to the Reins or Bladder?

The latter seems more probable, and is confirmed by the following Experiment:
If a Vein be cut in any one a little after he has eaten Garlic or Asparagus,
neither the Blood extracted, nor the whey-like Humor floating above it, shall
have either the odor or taste of the Garlic or Asparagus eaten, when (in the
mean while) the Urine shall manifestly exhibit the odor of Garlic or of
Asparagus.

Now, whether this Urine pass out through the Pores (of the Stomach and Bowels)
from within looking outward, and through the Pores of the Bladder (from without
looking inward) under the form of Vapors, having surrounded the Cavity of the
Belly, and so at length is conveyed to the Bladder, or rather has its tendency
thither by a peculiar passage, I shall not at this time dispute, though the
latter Opinion seems to me most probable.

Wounds inflicted in the bottom of the Bladder are very full of danger; but
those that wound the fleshy neck of the Bladder, are oftentimes consolidated,
by reason of the abundance of sanguiferous Vessels, and multitude of small
passages conveying the nutritious Humors. This is what we daily experience,
after the exection of Stones, viz. that though those wounds be healed, yet
sometimes the Urine flows from the sick involuntarily by the Yard; the reason
of this is, because in Section and Extraction of Stones, not a few Fibers of
the Spincter Muscle of the Bladder are cut in sunder and broken.

But if in the Cavity of the Belly, some of the small Lymphatick Vessels be
wounded, may not an Ascites be by this means produced? What shall I say? such a
case seems not to be impossible, though I cannot remember that I have in my
practice seen any such thing, or elsewhere read of it.

Dolor of the Testicles in perilous wounds of the Abdomen, is a sign of
approaching death, as the most experienced Parey testifies.

I have here hitherto spoken of wounds of the Abdomen inflicted from without,
there is yet a Wound (remaining to be spoken of) which is inflicted from
within, viz. as when in an Ascites the Navel bursteth, partly from the great
distention of Water, and partly from the acuteness of the cutting Particles
floating upon that Water. So I remember an Hydropick Maiden-Child, aged five
years, which (her Navel being after the aforesaid manner burst) dyed in a few
days after.

In such a disruption of the Navel, diligent heed is to be taken, that the
Water flow not out too fast; therefore here must be prescribed an Apozem,
prepared of Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, and other things.

Some affirm, that if the Moon shine upon a wound (whatsoever it be) that wound
cannot be healed without difficulty; but whether this be true or no, I know
not. It is certain, that the cold Air hurts wounds; but whether that be more
injurious when the Moon shines than at any other time, is indeed what I have
not as yet experienced.

Mr. Blankard, in his Medico-Physical Collections, says, that Spirit of Wine
mixed with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, does very much profit in Wounds; and so
saying does not a little confirm my Opinion, whereby I judge Acidity hurtful in
every wound, and that our principal care ought to be employed in correcting
that.

OBSERVAT. IV.
Of an Artery of the Arm wounded.

A Soldier Forty years of age, was wounded with the point of a Sword, in his
Arm below the Cubit; from which wound the Blood issued with great force, and
indeed with intermediate stops, as if forced out of a Syringe by intervals.

That Artery was wounded which is touched when we feel the Pulse of the sick.

We have known Bleeding at the Nose to kill some; and have read, that the hasty
flowing out of Blood, after Extraction of a Tooth, has killed others. If the
opening of such very small Arteries can infer Death, into how great danger of
life shall the Aperture of so great an Artery, precipite the miserably-wounded
party?

Therefore, because so great danger is sited in delay, I judged the Cure was to
be presently set about, and accordingly (so soon as I came) I applied two Lints
pleated together cross-wise a little above the wound, over them putting a
sufficiently strict Ligature.

Then, to the wound, with Lint I applied the following Medicament mixed with the
White of an Egg.

, Root of Tormentil, ij. Acorn Cups, Galls, of each j. ss. Mastich, ss. Bole
armenac, Terra sigil, of each 14.
Mix and make a Powder.

In the mean while the Patient often took two Spoonfuls of the following
Mixture.

. Water of Plantane, ij. Of Roses, j. Sugar perlate, iij. Sanguis, or Sanguinis
Draconis, ss. Terra Sigillata, ij. Salt prunell. Gr. 25. Laudanum Opiat. Gr. 3.
Make a Mixture.

The Blood thus stopping we did not unbind the Wound before the third day; and
then, from the Wound issued out a little Pus, but no Blood. Thus was this wound
(so very full of danger) with the help of a good Digestive, very well
consolidated, after the manner of other wounds, in two Months space.

This Wound was very dangerous, but would have been much more perilous, if it
had been inflicted above the Cubit; because there is found one only great
Artery, which (below the Cubit) is divided into two sufficiently large
Branches; so that one of them being closed by Art, the Blood may freely pass
through the other.

It sometimes happens, that the Blood from an Artery wounded below the Cubit,
running out with great force, cannot be stopped in the above-prescribed manner;
therefore at such a time certain Iron-Instruments must be used, which I have
always by me, though I cannot in words well give a plain Description of them. I
remember two that were by this means cured by my Father.

So also, I have by me an Iron-Instrument; by the help of which my Patron
(Consul and Ordinary Physician of Stenovicum) as he told me, had happily
stopped the Blood flowing out from the Artery Carotides, in the Neck of a Fox
wounded.

Therefore, forasmuch as wounds of the Arteries are so very dangerous (as we
see) I thought good in this place to subjoyn a double caution. The first is,
that we do not, after the manner of the Ancients, in dolor of the Head and
other affects, attempt to use Arteriotomy about the Temples, Forehead, or
elsewhere. For greater benefit from the opening of an Artery, than from the
simple cutting of a Vein, is not to be expected. Secondly, Least judging an
Aneurisma to be a vulgar Abscess, we unawares cut the dilated Artery. For by
this means I have certainly known some to have augmented the number of the Dead.

Moreover Ligatures must not be tied too close; for by this means I remember a
mortal Sphacelus has unexpectedly been introduced.

But if the Patient from the wound of an Artery, lose so much Blood, as he
suffers great Swoonings, and Death seems to stand at the door, what is then to
be done? Cannot the Transfusion of Blood (so much praised) in this case profit,
especially seeing it is declared by credible men, that a Dog, from whom in one
day so much Blood was taken, that he could scarcely move, by Calves-Bloud
received the next day, in a moment of time showed recovery of strength, and
incredible vigor? I answer, I cannot remember this Operation to have been at
any time instituted by our Countrymen; therefore warily suspended my,
judgment about this matter.

OBSERVAT. V.
Of a Fracture of the Tibia with a Wound.

A Virgin Twenty years of age, by the sudden and unexpected discharge of a Gun
(I know not by what misfortune happening) charged with Small-shot, received a
wound on the inside of her Leg a little below the Knee. Which wound presented
it self (in length and breadth) very large; yea so large, that it exceeded an
hands breadth. There was also present a very great Contrition and Commination
of the Bone of the Tibia broken into very small pieces, which extended it self
the whole length of the Wound, and thickness of the Bone of the Tibia. Whence
the sick Maid was afflicted with most cruel dolor, which caused her to pass
many Nights without sleep; or if she at any time slept for a very little while,
she would suddenly awake, not without very great terror, attended with a
Convulsion (as it were) of her wounded Leg; by which means the broken Bones
were often distorted.

The broken Bones were reposited without great Extension, and the Fragments
which were wholly separated loose and at liberty, were presently taken out
without much trouble; the remaining Fragments, yet somewhat adhering, were
left, till (in process of time) they should be separated.

Then was applied a digestive prepared of Turpentine, the Yolk of an Egg,
Powder of the Roots of Flower de Luce, and Birthwort, with Myrrh and other
things, together with a Plaster and Lavament temperating Acidity. After these
was used a common Ligature, and at length the affected Leg, included in a case
of Wood, was aptly placed in the Bed; over which hung a Rope, by which the
Patient might raise her body when necessity was; and at her Feet was erected a
Semicircle of Wood, lest the weight of the Bed-clothes should create any
trouble to the wounded Leg.

The cutting of a Vein, which very many are wont to commend in such a case, was
wholly omitted; because no benefit can thence arise; nor were Purgers here
(according to the vulgar method) revoked into use, because in this Evil nothing
is more desirable than Rest, and nothing more pernitions than Motion. Therefore
whenever the Patient was necessitated to discharge her Belly, a four-doubled
Cloth was laid under her to receive the Excrements.

In the mean while the Patient eat Foods easy of digestion, drank new Beer,
and the first Evenings after she was wounded, assumed a certain gentle Anodine,
for mitigating the dolor and removing that terror of which I spoke.

The Bones were reposited as often as they were found distorted by that
Nocturnal terror.

The Wound by reason of great abundance of Pus, was dressed twice a day; and so
in process of time very many Fragments were separated. And then we could daily
see the Generation and Accretion of a Callus, arising not from the Marrow, but
from the very small Pores (or passages) of the Bone, through which are conveyed
the nourishing Humors, coming from the small Arteries.

This Wound, so very perilous, was closed up in a Months space, and the Patient
could again as well stand and walk as she had done before this wound was
inflicted.

I remember another Woman, afflicted with the same Evil, to have been cured by
my Father. But these two Examples should not render any Artist so secure, as
slightly to regard a Fracture with a Wound: For I have known that to have
caused death in many. So, when in the Hospital as Rotterdam, I was present with
others, daily for almost whole days, dressing very many wounded Men, which came
from the Siege of the City of Graaf, I remember all they that labored with a
Fracture and Wound of the Tibia died; and among others, one was afflicted with
a Fracture and wound of the Tibia, in whose wound I beheld (not without
Admiration) very many broad, thick, and white shining Worms. But whence had
these Worms their Original? I answer, From Eggs fallen from the Air into the
wound, out of which the Worms were excluded, when a certain Fermentation was
excited in the stagnizing Humors. So not a few Eggs fall from the Air into
Milk, of which Cheese is afterward made. As long as that Cheese is new, these
Eggs are not excluded; but when the Cheese putrifies; that is, when (in process
of time) a certain Fermentation is produced in the Cheese, then do the Worms
crawl out of the Eggs.

So in a very great contrition of a Bone, the Fracture with the wound
attending, I remember to have been cured no otherwise than by cutting off the
Leg a little below the Knee.

In a Fracture of the Tibia with a wound, some are wont to use the Ligature of
eighteen Heads, which is in Dutch called even boexwiise Ligatuur; but we have
happily used the common, which we changed twice a day by reason of the great
quantity of out flowing Pus.

I knew a Chyrurgeon, who instead of the wooden Case of which I spoke, used a
certain Iron-Instrument, into which the Leg affected was put, and so kept
extended and unmovable but I cannot here in words give a description of that
Instrument.

In a simple Fracture of the Tibia, Ferula's made of Pastboard are generally
applied; but in our Patient these were wholly omitted, because in a wound so
vast they seemed not convenient.

With our Digestive, which was put upon the Wound, by reason of the bared Bone
no Fatness was admixed. For that Fatness hurts the Bones, Experience does
abundantly testify; the reason of which we have before given.

Parey in the Chyrurgick Practice was very deserving, and had much Experience;
yet in a Fracture with a Wound, he improperly commends Astringents, which, why,
and how much they hurt, we have often showed. I suppose no man will take it in
evil part that I should dare to reprehend so great a Man; seeing the more
famous any man is, the more dangerous are his Errors; because very many, moved
by the only Authority of so great a Man, with a certain blind force follow
him, treading a Path that has been trod, but not that which should be trod.

It is to be observed, that a Callus is most difficultly produced in Fractures
of women with Child, or giving Suck; because the matter fit is withdrawn by the
young in the Womb, or by the Infant sucking. So Fabritius Hildanus relates (in
the 87th Observation of his Fifth Century) that for this cause, in a Fracture
of the Tibia with a wound, the Bones were yet loose the 23d week after the hurt
received.

In a Fracture, as well Simple as Compound, when a Callus has again conjoined
the broken Bone, the Patients are commonly sensible of some trouble in motion;
which happens because the newly-generated Callus occupies the place of some
Muscles moving this or that part.

Before I put an end to this Observation, two very intricate Problems seem very
fit to be here unfolded by me. The one is, why Bones in clear Frosty-weather
are more easily and sooner broken than at any other time? The other, whence
proceeds the Terror that generally invades the Sick (afflicted with a Simple
or Compounded Fracture) presently after a short sleep.

To the First, Some perhaps will answer, the slipperiness of the Ice is the
cause that men often fall to the Earth, and so the Bones may happen to be
easily broken. But this does not untye the Knot; this removes not the
Difficulty: For not only Bones, but also Iron, Wood, and other hard Bodies,
are more easily broken in the Winter-season than at any other time. Whence then
does this happen? Attend a while and I will tell you. The more pertinaciously
and firmly the parts of hard Bodies are conjoined each with other, the more
difficultly they are broken. This is certain: But what is that which effects
coherency in the parts of hard Bodies? Not Rest, as some think, because that is
not any thing positive in the Body, but only a privation of motion. Therefore
Rest proproduceth not this Effect; but the Air compressing the parts of hard
Bodies, conjoyns and causes them to cohere, as is evident by the Experiment
cited in the Seventh Observation of the Third Decade. The Air whilst Summer's
Heat is most vehement, presses more than in Mid-winter; partly because at that
time it is more forcibly agitated by the heat of the Sun; partly because then
it is more heavy, by reason it is mixed with very many gross Vapors, forced
upwards by the Solar heat. Hence it is now manifest, why Bones, and other hard
Bodies, are more easily broken in Winter than in Summer. Hence also it may
readily be understood, why Wood is much sooner consumed by burning in the
extreme cold Winter-season, than whilst we enjoy the pleasant Summer. The
Winter-Air, by its more weak pressure, cannot very pertinaciously conjoyn the
Particles of the Wood; whence these Particles are easily separated from the
Wood, when they suffer violence by certain terrestrial Particles; floating upon
the only most subtle matter of the World, therefore most swiftly agitated.
Hence it is, that the Winter-Air, as being less pressing and containing fewer
Vapors, permits the Flame freely to enlarge it self.

We now come to the other Problem, by which it is asked. Whence arises
Terror, invading the sick, suffering a Fracture of the Bone (in sleep and not
while waking) and often again distorting the broken Bones?

Parey, a man endowed with great Experience in the Chyrurgic Art, who himself
once suffered a Fracture of the Tibia and Fibula with a Wound, and in his own
Body plainly enough experienced this Terror, as he says; a reason of which he
endeavors to render (in the 26th Chapter of his Book of Fractures) but he
there miserably philosophizeth, producing nothing but Impertinencies and
Chimoera's.

Therefore, let us see whether we can give a more probable Reason that may come
nearer to the truth: We will at least attempt it. When the Sick are not
sleeping, they see, they hear, they eat, they drink, and stir their Arms, and
(by this means) consume much of the Nervous Juice; so that that cannot flow in
so great abundance into the parts irritated, etc. but when the Sick indulge
their Members with sleep, the matter is far otherwise. The Ears at that time
hear not, the Eyes are closed, the Nosethrils perform not their wonted Office,
the Tongue is silent, and the Arms rest. Therefore, when (at such a time) the
Humors stagnizing and waxing acid about the Fracture, with their distention
molest the Fibrils, and by their cutting property irritate them; then, I say,
the Nervous Juice (which, in the time of the Patients waking, is not employed)
in great abundance falls down upon the irritated Muscles, which (by this means
swollen) vehemently move the Leg, and miserably distort the Extremities of the
broken Bone, one to this part, the other to another; whence arises pain cruel
enough, by which the Patient after a short sleep is awakened with terror.

But that you may more readily give credit to the reason of this Phoenomenon, I
judge it fit to advise you to attend to these few Words following.

When you are awake, and not sleepy, and when your Semenary Vessels contain
much fruitful Seed, imagine to your self (as strongly as you can) some
beautiful Maid, yet (as I judge) you shall not by this means eject your Seed,
unless you use some other excitation: But if whilst in a sound and pleasant
sleep, a very beautiful young Woman be (by imagination) presented to your
Fantasy, and if (in the mean while) your Semenary Vessels be sufficiently
distended with the Seed, the Seed not seldom (by such means) flows out with
very great pleasure, viz. because the Seminary Vessels are very much contracted
by the Nervous Juice, which in great abundance (whilst you sleep) is carried
from the Brain into the Seminary Vessels distended and very much irritated by
the Seed; because it is not now employed about other works to be done whilst
waking.

So I knew two Epileptick Persons, who never had Fit whilst awake, but always
when they soundly slept: which does not a little confirm my Opinion.

OBSERVAT. VI.
Of Dislocation of the Talus, or Ankle-bone, with a Wound.

A Man aged Forty years, fell from on high to the Ground, and suffered a
Dislocation (in the interior Ankle-bone of his Left-leg) conjoined with a vast
Wound, out of which the Bone was prominent the breadth of three fingers, and
the dolor was almost intolerable.

This case is very perilous: For, not without great danger of life, a Gangrene
sometimes invades the great Toe, infected by the Dislocation and Wound
concomitant, as I remember not long since to have happened. But such horrid
Symptoms are not to be feared, if in the great Article of the Talus a
Dislocation also be with a very large Wound.

This Affect is not only perilous, but also rare; so that Parey, Pigreus,
Aquapendens, Barbette, and other scarcely so much as mention the same in their
Books, although Scultetus (in his Chyrurgic Armory) speaks of it: but whether
credit is to be given to his Words, or his Counsel followed, we shall see,
after we have pondered the following Words written by himself.

If an Article be luxuriant, so as it is either uncovered, or be a little
thrust out through the Skin; the Affect is mortal, of greater danger if
restored, than if not restored. For if it be not restored, an Inflammation,
Convulsion, or sometimes Death follows. Secondly, Foulness of that Member will
be present. And Thirdly, an uncurable Ulcer, which if it happen to be covered
with a Cicatrice, that (by reason of softness) is easily broken. If it be
restored, it infers very great danger of a Convulsion, Gangrene, and Death. But
some fear dangers of this kind only in the great Articles, viz. in the Wrist,
Shoulder, Talus and Thigh, which (by reason of the strength of the Tendons, and
magnitude of the Ligaments and Vessels) prohibit Restitution. Then he adds: If
a Convulsion follows, the Joint must be presently again Dislocated.

My purpose is no otherwise to answer these words of Scultetus, than by an
exact and faithful Declaration of the Medicines we applied to this our Patient;
seeing thereby it will be sufficiently manifest, how well or how ill the
abovenamed Author has written.

First, We washed the Bone of the Tibia (forced out of its seat) with Spirit of
Wine warm, for removing the coagulated Blood and Filths adhering; then
sufficient Extension being made, we set the dislocated Bone in its place,
applying to the Wound a good Digestive, with a fit Plaster superposited; not
omitting a Lavament temperating Acidity, and a Common Ligature. The Leg thus
bound up, was laid upon a soft Cushion, and so the Patient was carried to his
Bed, over which hung a Rope, by the help of which he could raise his Body, as I
said in the precendent Operation; and at the Feet of this Sick-man we set up a
Board, that the Clothes (with their Weight) might infer no detriment to the
wounded Leg.

The Leg affected, by reason of the abundance of Pus (flowing out of the Wound)
was dressed twice a day. But in the mean while most vehement dolor exercised
its Tyranny on our sick Patient; who was both feverish, and had a Delirium,
passing whole night (almost) without sleep; or if he was between whiles,
somewhat refreshed with sleep, a little after that was excited the aforesaid
Terror (of which we spoke in the precedent Observation) whence the Talus was
often of some measure distorted again.

To remove the Dolor, Fever, Watchings and Delirium, the Patient at time
assumed some of the following Mixture.

. Water of Betony, iv. Of Bawm, j. Syrup of Card. Bened. iij. Antimony
Diaphoretic, j. Salt prunella antimoniate, ss. White Corals, Crab's-eyes, of
each j. Laudanum Opiat. Gr. 4.
Make a Mixture.

But the Talus, as often as it was found distorted after sleep, was reposited.

By this means, the space of three Weeks being scarcely elapsed, the Fever and
Delirium ceased; then also, but more slowly, the aforesaid Terror vanished,
and at length the Dolor and Watchings likewise.

But here I call to mind one thing, which I had almost forgot, viz. that two
Abscesses arose in the affected Leg, one nigh the Wound, the other in the
External part of the Leg; but both these Abscesses after Apertion were healed.

In process of time very many Fragments were separated from the Bone of the
Tibia, which we then gently and easily took out of the Wound; and upon the
fungous flesh, which was seen in the Wound, we strewed (almost every day once)
the Powder of Burnt Alum; and so at length a Cicatrice came in sight, which
from day to day increased more and more; so that (about the sixth Month) the
whole Wound was almost covered. Wherefore the Patient began to walk with
Crutches; but by this motion the Wound was again enlarged, so that it closed
not in every part, which should seem strange to no man. For I at this day know
two, who after Dislocation of the Talus with a Wound, had an Ulcer several
years.

But what if (after setting the Dislocated Talus) the Patient had been
afflicted with a Convulsion, must we needs have followed the counsel of
Scultetus, and again have dislocated the Article so lately set in its place? I
think not, seeing I see no cause that should incite us to such an Action.

In this place I render not a Reason of many Phaenomenons, and indeed
considerately, least I should set before the Readers a Dish of Crambe twice
cookt. For I think I have here omitted no reason of any Phenomenon, which may
not be found in one or other of the foregoing Observations.

OBSERVAT. VII.
Of a Nose hurt by Winters-Cold.

A Young Maiden, Sixteen years of age, in Mid-Winter, in extreme cold Weather,
complained of a Tumor, Redness and Dolor in the Tip of her Nose; and she had
been often before afflicted with this Evil in the Winter-Seasons.

The coldness of the Air, both within and without affecting the Nose, the Blood
(in its very small Vessels) and the Humors (in their small passages) were in
some measure stagnized; and in process of time contracted a certain Acor,
whence the Tumor, Redness and Dolor, were easily excited.

But whence was it that this Evil had now several times returned in the Winter?
This Return proceeded from no other cause, than because the small Vessels and
Passages were, the first time, so distorted, by the Blood and Humors stagnizing
and waxing acid, that afterward they could never so well return to their
pristine state, but they would (in Wintertime) much impede the Circulation of
the Blood and Humors.

This Affect (in Dutch called de Roud) is without danger, as to life; yet in
the mean while it is not a little displeasant to young Maids, accounting their
own Form (whatsoever it is) as their chiefest good, and therefore are often
willing rather to lose their Life than their Beauty.

This Evil I wholly removed (in a few days) with a Linnen-Cloath only,
anointed with Sperma Ceti.

I shall not now dispute what that is which is known by the Name of Sperma
Ceti; whether it be the Seed of that great Fish, or a certain Substance which
is found (in the form of thick Oil) in certain small Cells in the Head of the
Whale (about the largeness of Goose-Eggs;) or lastly, whether it be a certain
artificial Composition of the Brain of some Fish dried, made up with a Lixivium
of Lime. In this place I say, I will not dispute of this matter; it suffices
me, that much Oily Volatile Salt is contained in the aforesaid Medicament,
which corrects the Acidity in the blood and stagnizing Humors.

This Evil is wont to invade not only the Tip of the Nose, but also the
Fingers, Toes, and Soles of the Feet. To attempt to render a Reason of this
would be superfluous, seeing it is manifest, that the cold Air does more affect
the Extreamities of the Body, than other parts; and small Vessels are sooner
obstructed, than others more capacious.

To prevent this Evil Cupping-glasses (with Scarification) are wont to be
applied, but improperly; because the Obstructions are not by this means
removed, but multiplied; and the distorted Vessels are not reverted to their
pristine state, but more distorted. Much better would be the Vapor ascending
from Spirit of Wine set on fire; or a Fermentation made of Wine and Herbs
abounding with Volatile Salt.

To prevent this Evil, when it is wont to infest the Tip of the Nose, some
apply Leeches, but evily; for I have known this Affect to be by them not a
little exasperated; the reason of which Exasperation I should here add, were it
not sufficiently manifest by the foregoing Paragraph.

This Affect is wont leisurely to increase, but sometimes it meets with another
Evil, suddenly proceeding from intense Cold; and is called a Gangrene of Cold,
which (beginning) is wont to be cured by Immersion into cold Water. But is this
a rational way of Cure? Yes, and consentaneous both to Reason and Experience.
Cast a frozen Apple into cold Water, and you shall see that (in a short space
of time) to be thawed within, all the Ice adhering to the external Skin of the
Apple, without loss of its pristine taste, or former consistency; but set the
same frozen Apple near a Fire, and it will presently wither and lose the
sweetness of its taste.

Very many Particles, contained in the Pores and small Passages of the
congealed Apple, which before were fluid, have now (by reason of the Frost) put
on the form of Ice; that is, many Particles, which before, by the subtle
matter sufficiently strong, were in their motions (each from other diverse)
continually agitated, do now rest each with other, because they are surrounded
with a subtle matter, which is too weak to conserve them in their usual
motion. When such a congealed Apple is cast into cold Water, the more strong
part of the subtle matter, from the Water, flies into the Apple, and so thaws
the same. But the more weak part of the subtle matter rusheth out of the Apple
into the Water, most nearly touching the External Rind (or Skin) which is
therefore covered over with Ice.

But when such a frozen Apple is set to the Fire, the most subtle matter of
the World, very strong, and attended with many gross particles of the burning
Wood or Turf, endeavors (with great violence) to enter the Pores of the
congealed Apple, but cannot, because the Pores are very much constringed with
Cold; therefore it breaks them by force, and so the consistency and good taste
of the Apple is changed and wholly spoiled.

Hence it is now sufficiently manifest, that this Cure of a Gangrene from Cold
is rational; though in the mean while it may perhaps seem fit to some to vary
one Circumstance, and that is as here following expressed. A congealed or
frozen Apple is cast into cold Water, and indeed well; because the Liquor in a
well-constituted Apple is found cold as to the touch; but our Blood and Humors
well constituted, are not cold to the touch, but warm; therefore a Member
lightly affected with a Gangrene from cold, should rather be put into
luke-warm-Water (by the Dutch called bloet-laeuw) than into cold.

OBSERVAT. VIII.
Of an Atrophia, Imbecility of Motion, and an Algor of the Arm.

A Young man 24 years of age (as to all other things very well) had now for six
Months labored with an Atrophia of his Left-arm, from the Shoulder to the
Cubit, and he could not lift up or otherwise move his Arm, but continually
complained of an Algor (or extreme coldness) thereof. Some Chyrurgeons had long
attempted to cure this Affect., according to their vulgar method; and applied
their Plasters, Unguents; Linements, and other such Medicaments, but in vain.

The very viscous Humor in the Arm of this Sick man, had produced not a few
very pertinaceous Obstructions, whence the Astrophia of the Arm, its Impotency
to motion, and Algor of the same readily took beginning.

But this gross Humor lay so very deep, that it could indeed be in no wise
dissolved by Unguents or other suchlike Remedies.

Had the cure of this Evil been longer procrastinated, there would have been
great cause of fear, that the Ligaments, connecting the Shoulder Bone with the
Scapula, would in a short space of time have been so much extended in length,
that thence would have followed such a Dislocation of the Shoulder (most
difficult to heal) as we described in the Last Observation of the First Decade.

Therefore without any delay I set about the Work, and ordered seven or eight
Cupping-glasses with Flame (but without any Scarification) to be applied twice
or thrice every Week, and left on till the Skin waxed red; at which time the
affected part was washed (before a Fire) with the following Liquor first made
hot; and every other day when the Cupping-glasses were not applied the same was
also twice used.

. Root of Sarsaparilla, j. Bark of Lign. Guaicum, ss. Herb Rosemary Sage, of
each M.j. ss. Flowers of Lavender, M. ss. Bay Berries, j. Salt of Tartar, j.
ss. Of Ammoniac, ij.
Boil these in a double Vessel, with two pounds and an half of Spirit of Wine;
and strain the Liquor from the Simples.

We also took care sometimes to burn Common Spirit of Wine, so that the Vapor
thereof ascending might surround the affected part (covered above) and by this
means the Algor vanished in 14 days, and the Patient (in six Months time) could
as well move and use his Left-arm, as his Right, and in the mean while the
affected Arm became daily more and more fleshy.

Which way the Cupping-glasses and aforesaid Medicaments effected the cure of
this our Patient, I here pass over in silence, and that indeed considerately;
because the same is sufficiently manifest in the Ninth Observation of the
Fourth Decade.

OBSERVAT. IX.
Of the Uvula and Tonsils evily disposed.

A Young man, aged 30 years, walking in a very cold season, was afflicted with
dolor, redness, and tumor of the Tonsils and Uvula; whence he perceived
difficulty in Swallowing, though he was (in the mean while) almost continually
forced to swallow.

The Blood in its small Vessels, and the Humors in the minute passages of the
Tonsils and Uvula, stagnized (by reason of the cold Air admitted by
Inspiration) were coacervated and waxed acid; whence arose the aforesaid tumor,
dolor, redness, and difficulty of swallowing.

But whence did that so great Impulse to swallowing derive its Original? I
answer. The Membrane, subject to the Uvula, has Nerves, which touched by the
relaxed and incumbent Uvula, are the cause that the Nervous Juice is (in
greater abundance) carried into the Muscles adapted for swallowing.

Being called to the sick, I prescribed the following Gargarism.

. Spirit of Wine, iij. Water of Elder-flowers, ij. Spirit of Sal. Ammoniac,
drops 20.
Mix these according to Art.

By this means our Patient was cured in a very short time.

The prescribed Gargarism proved very profitable, because it temperated the
Acidity, dissolved the coagulated Humors, and removed the Obstructions.

I have in my self often restored the Uvula relaxed, by reason of viscous and
coagulated Humors there stagnizing, when I gently touched the same with the tip
of my Finger moistened only with Spirit of Sal Ammoniac: the reason of which
Cure being more clear than the Sun at Noon, I shall not here add.

I remember most desperate Quinseys to have been often cured with a Decoction
made with a fit Liquor, and Herbs containing much Volatile Salt; when the
Vapor of the same, (boiling hot) the upper part of the Head being well
covered, ascended into the Cavity of the Mouth, and outwardly surrounded the
whole Face and Neck.

In a Quinsey very desparate, what shall we judge of Laryngotomy? Antonius de
Heyde says, the same may be exercised without peril, and that he himself
happily instituted it in a Dog, which (without any troublesome Symptoms) was
in a few days restored to his pristine sanity. And besides this, Mr. Blankard
(in his Medico-physical Collections) relates, that Mr. Smalsius (a famous
Chyrurgeon at Lugdunum) did, in a Patient, exercise this Laryngotomy with good
success.

OBSERVAT. X.
Of an Hair Lip.

A Female-Infant 14 days old, had from her Nativity labored with an Hair-Lip
(that is, with an open cleft of the Upper-Lip) miserably disfiguring the Face
of the Child, otherwise comely enough.

My Father being called, freed the Lip from the adjacent parts, that the
Extreamities might the better and more easily approach each to other. Then he
sufficiently excoriated both the Extreamities of the Cloven-Lip, united them,
and kept them united with three silver Needles, about which Threads were
wreathed, to keep them steady in their places. In the mean while the ends of
the Needles were cut off with a fit Instrument, lest they should be infixed in
the Bed-clothes, or other things, and so (taring in sunder both Flesh and Skin)
fall or be forced out; as I remember to have happened more than once.

On the eighth day the Needles were drawn out, and both Extremities of the
Hair-Lip grew together and were united; the Blood and Humors performing their
Circular Motion from one Extremity to the other. But the Holes made by the
Needles did as yet pour forth a little Pus; undoubtedly for no other reason,
than because the Needles had remained too long infixed in the Lips. Wherefore
my Father, when he afterward cured the like Affect in others, sooner took out
the Needles; and because Silver Needles are no less liable to rust, than those
made of Steel, I therefore instead of Silver Needles used Steel Needles,
because they more easily perforate the Skin and Flesh.

The most famous Sylvius would have an Hair-Lip cured without Needles, by the
help of Plasters only; and I remember that a certain Chyrurgeon cured some
young Patients by these means.

This Operation is usually exercised in Infants 14 days old: for if they be
younger, they have flesh so very soft, that it will (by the least irritation)
be torn in sunder by the Needles inherent; and in more maturity of age the
Extreamities of the Hair-Lip will not so easily conglutinate.

But whence is it that Infants are sometimes born deformed with an Hair-Lip?
Some ascribe this wonderful Effect to the Imagination of the Mother; but others
again stiffly deny this to be able to effect any thing.

In an Hens-Egg, before Incubation, some affirm that the Chick may (by a
Microscope) be seen completely formed: After the same manner in an Humane Egg
(of which they say we are generated) the little Body of the Infant completely
formed is contained; whether the same be entire, or affected with an Hair-Lip.
But the matter is not thus sufficiently elucidated, there must some reason be
added, why in one humane Egg, rather than in an other; is generated a small
Body affected with an Hair-Lip. Yet thoroughly to search out these things, is
little or nothing conducent to the practice of Chyrurgy; therefore here we
forbear to speak further thereabout.

FINIS.

