MUS RUSTICUS.
THE Exportation of One Hundred and Thirty Thousand Pounds in Gold, into the
Gulf of Holland, in One Month and Eight Days last past, as appears by our Bills
of Entry; with a fair Surmise, that a greater quantity has been Claudestinely
Shipped off, as likewise a large quantity of Silver, being joined to the
difficulty, that the Woollen-Manufacturers of this Kingdom, for a considerable
time, last past, has been under, in getting Silver for Gold, and that without
some speedy supply of Silver Coin in Shillings and Six-pences, this noble
Commerce which Providence has happily blessed us with, must inevitably sink;
will be a fair Justification of this Rural Address. When so violent a Draught
is upon us in Silver and Gold, we can expect no supply from Foreign
Importation, nor will a total stop to the Exportation relief, when Silver and
Gold is as well taken in at Cadiz as here, to supply the Occasions of those
Trades which drain our Treasure. When St. Paul preached down the Temple of
Diana, the Silver-Smiths exerted their whole Strength to support their Profit,
and as now left no Stone unturned to Maintain their Ground. Even reprinted Dr.
Lock's Republican Position, that Authority had no power in altering the value
of our Silver. What (in great Submission) I offer at, is an immediate Advance
of our Silver Coin, and a Security to it when Coined. The Ounce of Silver which
from Ozlwright the Saxon King continued for many Hundred Years at Twenty-Pence;
was advanced to Thirty-Pence in the Second Year of King Henry the 6th; it was
advanced to Forty-Pence by King Edward the 4th; to Forty Five-Pence and Forty
Eight-Pence in the Reign of King Henry the 8th; and to Sixty-Pence by King
Edward the 6th. The Ground upon which these Advances were made, could be no
other, then the keeping an Equality with Foreign Standards with whom we Traded.
And by this Rule (which was strenuously urged) at the last new Coinage of our
Silver, our Standard ought to be advanced to Sixty Five-Pence, to equal the
Rix-Dollars of Germany and Holland, and the Crown piece of France. This being
undeniable matter of Fact, his Majesty's Proclamation in adjusting this
important Affair, in an Equality with Foreign Standards, and giving that
Advantage to those of his own Subjects, that brought Plate to be Coined into
Shillings and Sixpences, it would immediately advance a Stock of Silver Coin,
and be a relief to Trade, allowing the advance to our Silver Coin now standing,
(which I take to be much less then reported by some) unto a limited time, that
it might be new Stamped; which advantage being strictly limited to his
Majesty's Natural Born Subjects it could not be looked upon with an ill Eye,
although an easy Profit; by this expedient, according to our nice Politicians, we
shall have as much for our Crown as it Weighs, and it will be some small
security against its being melted down. And as I have been here Laboring for
this convenience to Negotiate this noble Fabric of ours. I am now to fix this
Treasure of our Silver Coin by an expedient which is much more Advantageous to
our Woollen-Manufactury. And in order to this, I must beg leave to recite the
Restrictions under which the Flourishing Trade of Queen Elizabeth was carried
on. All Interest of Money was stopped by her Brother King Edward the 6th, which
turned Drones into Bees. The Wear of Silks was stopped by her Sister Qneen Mary,
by all Persons under the degree of Quality, and if any Servant wore any Silk,
if the Master did not put her forth of her Service in Fourteen Days, or did
retain her again, he forfeited One Hundred Pounds. By a Law made in the Fifth
Year of Queen Elizabeth, no Foreign Fabric could be sold otherwise than for
ready Money. And in the Thirteen Year of Queen Elizabeth, it was Enacted, that
every Person above the Age of Seven Years, shall wear upon the Sabbath and
Holy Day, a Knit Cap made of the Wool of this Kingdom, under the Penalty of Ten
Groats for every Day not wearing it, except Maids, Ladies, etc. What I now, in
great Submission, propose, is the Revival of this last Act, in changing the
Name of Cap to Hat; in the making of which, we are now come to great
Perfection, and there can be no more decent Distinction or becoming Dress to
our Women. This Hat will be like the Stern of a Ship, guide all other Habits of
the Body, and introduce the wear of the Fine-Flaxen-Linnens of Germany,
Flanders and Holland Lace, etc. which are the Natural Effects of our
Woollen-Manufacture, and stop the wear of Muslings; to purchase which, our
Silver is now issued out, and what I farther propose, is, a strict Injunction
of the wear of the Woollen-Manufacture of this Kingdom by all Servants for
their upper Garments, with a Penalty upon the Master if the said Act was not
complied with; as was the Case of Silk in the Reign of Queen Mary. In the most
Flourishing Reigns of this Kingdom, as Edward the 3d, Edward the 4th, Henry the
7th, Edward the 6th, and Queen Elizabeth; we were under Sumptuary Laws and a
total stop put to the Cotton Commodities of India; and Presidents are safe
rules to waik by. And as this Distinction will tend to the Encouragement of our
own Products, and be a means to keep the Balance of Trade upon our side, and
secure our Silver Coin, it will likewise be an inducement to Virtue and Good
Manners, and Servants will not think themselves above their proper Employments.

In Kersey Joan her Pot did Scower,
Dressed in Callico, she looked demure;
Despised that Work, she got it done,
By Wife well stuffed of Thrasher John.
Sic cesinit mus Rusticus and redit in rurem.

