Murder will Out: Being a Relation of the Late Earl of Essex Ghost Appearing to
my Lord Chancellor in the TOWER.
Chanc. WHat means this thick ill-scented Mist? What Noise is that? Who Is
there? Ah! Lightning, and at this Cold Season! Confusion! What Is that I see?
Bless me! I shall learn to Pray if this continues: Heavens! A Man in my Chamber
at this time of Night! I am lost! undone! it is my Executioner! Speak what! what
want thou? Stay, sure I should know that Face, pale as it is! See! he
approaches! he beckons! assist me this time, Hell and Impudence! I Will stand,
since I am prepared for the worst that Fare can offer! Ha! by that Razor it
must be he, it is Essex! See! he knows his Name! he comes up! Speak! speak!
What will thou?


Ghost. Yes, it is I, the most Unfortunate Essex! Well, restless Sysiphus, will
thy unbounded Malice never have an end? Thou have bin the common troubler of
Mankind all thy Life; and now thou art contriving a Legacy; which, like
Pandora's Box, will leave them all in a fresh confusion at thy Death,


Chapter Your Ghostship takes a Liberty which your Lordship would have forbore: But
why Sysiphus, pray Sir? have I, like him, roul'd my Stone in vain? Shall one
little misfortune blast the Glory of all my former Triumphs? Have my Projects
been useless, or my Malice ineffectual? Why, this very Minute am I upon a
design shall not only re-purchase my lost Liberty and Honors, but, like the
Gordian Knot, shall puzzle the wisest of their Heads to unfold it.


Gh. Horror and Confusion! Thou make me, though a Ghost, tremble at thy
Prodigious Impudence. Are not thy Eyes then, Cursed wretch, already satisfied
with thy yet reaking Western Cruelties, nor thy Ears tired with the hollow
Groans of the Fatherless and VViddows? Could not thy boundless swelling
Thoughts of false vain Glory, fix in the Enjoyment of Riches and Honors,
without thy Prodigious Contrivances to disturb the Peace of all the Christian
World? What would thou have, or whether would thou tend? have thou no
remorse for thy poor Oppressed Country, nor care for thy own future welfare?
Will neither past Examples, nor present Dangers warn thee of the miserable
Estate of those who serve the ends of wicked Men? Look here wretch, ( showing
him his Throat) and tremble at the Fate of those, who have forsaken God,
Conscience, and Reason to lay the bloody Foundation of an unstable Glory:
Remember Essex, wretch, remember Essex.


Cha. This Advice, my Lord, runs very contrary at least to all the latter
Transactions of your Life. Is it possible then that the Grave can have such a
strong Operation upon a Man's Fancy, and in so little a time alter his Opinion?
You Died, with Submission to your Lordship, in the general Opinion, more
apprehensive of a shameful Punishment, than penitent for your objected Crimes.


Gh. What! dare thou then mock my Misery? Art thou alone of all the Kingdom
Ignorant of the bloody Circumstances of my Death? Tremble, and think what Thou
may yet endure. Beware those means thou usest for thy Safety, prove not thy
utmost Danger. I fondly Dreamt, Confession and Discovery would melt the Sword
of Justice into Mercy: But ah! that Charm that lulled the wrath of my Offended
Master, wakened the Fears and Malice of my more powerful Foes: An Irish
Russian, and a dread Command, soon let me know my Error Fear and Repentance are
not safe to be trusted with a Prince's Secrets: Nor had Coleman bin ventured to
the place of Execution, but that they found a way to send him off between Jest
and Earnest.


Cha. I must confess, under the Rose, my Lord, 'twas generally whispered, more
Hands than your own were employed to sign your Pass; but as the Circumstances
of Time and Persons are altered, I have reason to hope for better success. My
Crimes are indeed every way Superior, and my designs more Barbarous; I have
had Murders, Fellons, and Treasons as my Bosom Friends: I have Laughed and
Ridiculed all fear of God; and to my Ambition and Covetousness; have, without
the least remorse, Sacrificed the Laws and Liberties of my Native Country; nay,
being not content with the present fraud and oppression I encouraged, I have,
(oh Prodigy!) endeavored to entail Slavery and Popery on the Kingdom for
ever. 'Twas I alone could swear the reaking Circumstances of our Young Perkin;
'twas I alone promoted and set up that Antichristian Court of Ecclesiastical
Commission, to Scourge the Clergy and Harass the People; 'twas I alone could
resolve all the known Ancient, fixed and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom into
the Arbitrary will of the King: You may talk of Irish Russians, and French
Dragoons, Popish Conspiracies, and Private Assassins, I think I have bid as
fair for my Honor and Cause as any of them; If that Puny Rascal that burnt a
Heathenish Temple at Ephesus, could hope to be famed to Posterity, What may not
I expect, that have already sorely shaken and endeavored the final destruction
of the Church of God! I have outdone Nero or Ravilliac, Jacques Clement, or
Massianello.

He was running on in an extravagant Description of his Cruelties and
Wickedness, had not the Ghost, with a frown full of Horror, (being as it
seemed displeased with his proceedings) put a stop to his discourse, and being
about to make answer, the Cock Crew, at which the Ghost seemed affrighted, and
without saying more, than Remember Essex, it vanished.



