A malicious Rich Man makes acceptable pleasant Reasons, and most People for
Money take the rich Villain by the hand. Pray, Money or no Money, right or
wrong yea, like the green and withering Leaves, ill persuaded, ill designing,
shie, otherwise busy or not; read from the first to the last word in this
present Case nicely, and attentively, before giving your judgment in it. And
order the Speaker or Chairman in a Committee of a full or not full House, to
give the Petitioner, at your Bar, your Answer to it before your Honors,
between the Hours of two and three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled,

The humble Petition of Prince Butler, a woeful, persecuted, beaten, pushed,
thumped, bruised, and sickly, 26 Years Vagabond, lying in Garrets, more for
cheapness then for ease. 14 Years a fluxing more in cold than hot weather, a
groaning, grunting, and frightfully sighing to the hearers near him above three
years, and doubts will last during life, day and night in his Bed, in the
Streets, in the Fields, and to his great Sorrow, and more trouble, very often
in strange Company, like a stabbed, ready, presently dying Man, and in cold
windy weather, like to be choked with Smoke.

If he is a Fool, the Pope and all the Kings and Councils in their
Council-Chambers and people in Europe are Fools, except King William, and ill
persuaded, ill designing, ignorant, or not People. The Case and matter of fact
of Prince Butler, an Account of what Blood he lost in 4 Years time, by reason
of unexpected beatings, kicks in the legs, pushes and thumps in the breast as
he can remember, besides long physicking, dieting, exercising, purging,
vomiting and fasting, and not yet well cured, in all 497 Ounces and a half of
Butchers weight, besides what he must lose in cold weather, and for what may
happen; it is better to lose offensive Blood than life, all the said blood,
besides offensive pinches, showers of greasy Bones and other nastinesses
thrown at him; hard Bulls out of a trunk Cane blown at his Head, many slaps,
reflections, vexatious, scandalous reports, affronts, and aspersions, he lost,
and endured very often unexpectedly in London, to the great pleasure and
content of him and them, ill persuaded, ill designing, bribed or not, as may by
a word hinder as order and encourage it, without regarding the Petitioner's,
God help him, serious, sober, and earnest Prayers to shoot him with a Gun or
Pistol through the Head, which ye may judge is enough to weaken a Sampson, a
Stone-Horse, or a Town-Bull, and much more your tame and innocent weak
Petitioner, not yet out of pain and danger, daily a trembling from the bottom
of the Sky to the top of the Ground, for fear any part or all the said
Misfortunes may happen to him again, besides many troubles he endured out of
England, in 26 years Persecution, not yet, nor like ever to be ended, if not
assisted by your Honors and the King.

Wherefore he humbly prays your Honors to desire his Majesty, by an Address,
by his Secretary, or Members of his Privy Council in your House, to give him a
general open Letter to his Ambassadors abroad, that the Ambassador where he
arrives, may; Money or no Money, right or wrong, desire the King or Prince,
with his Secretary, to hear the Petitioner ^ead his grievances publicly or
privately before them, and after a clear Hearing, to answer him as they please.
And the said Ambassador may give him Bed and Bread, Money or no Money, right or
wrong, without Aspersions, Backbitings, Affroats, Blows and Reflections from
his Servants, young and old Men and Women upon Oath, until he gets his Answer,
in or not in writing from Court. And he prays your Honors to desire his
Majesty to give him ^ravelling Money to Vienna, the Emperor's Court, And he
will pray.


