THE Spiritual Worship EXALTED.

OR A Treatise concerning the Worship and Service of God; Showing how incapable
men are in their natural and unconverted State of Worshipping and Serving God
acceptably in this Gospel day.

And that it is the Light, Grace and Spirit of Christ reveaved in men, which
does Renew, Fit, Prepare and ^ualifie them for performing that Pure Spiritual
and Acceptable Worship which was instituted by our Lord, and practiced by his
Disciples and Followers. As also several other things here inserted, worthy of
observation.

By a Lover of Truth, and Wel-wisher of the Souls of all men, George Myers.

But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritualy
discerned

1 Cor. 2.14. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him,

John 4.23. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth,

John 4.24. Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name. Worship the Lord in
the Beauty of Holiness,

Psalm. 29.2. THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
FOrasmuch as Divine Worship is the supreme act of man's Life, and a duty
incumbent upon all; for that thereby we answer the end of our Creation, and pay
those Respects and Acknowledgments which we owe to the Divine Majesty, for all
his Bounties and Favors toward us: It greatly behooves all People to be very
serious and weighty in that respect, and truly to inform themselves what that
Worship is which is acceptable unto God, and how People ought to be qualified
for performing the same; the want of a right understanding upon these accounts
has occasioned great Miscarriages and Defects among People in Religions matters
and is one great reason why there are so many Jars and Divisions about the
several Forms and Ways of Worship now extant in the World.

The consideration of these things, together with the drawings of Divine Love,
have induced me to the publication of this following Treatise, wherein diverse
things relating to the Worship and Service of God are declared and held forth,
and whereby it is manifest that it is the Light, Grace and Spirit of Christ,
revealed in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, that rightly Renews,
Fits, Prepares and Qualifies them for Worshipping and Serving God acceptably,
and opens their Understandings in Divine and Spiritual matters, insomuch that
in all acts of Worship and Service unto God, the Holy Ghost is to have the
Precedence, so as to move, act, influence and assist the Persons exercised
therein, whether it be in public Preaching, Testimonies and Declarations for
God and his Truth, or in Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings unto him.

And also that those who in their own Will and Time do go about to perform acts
of Worship and Service unto God, in their Natural and Unconverted State, whilst
they are despising and dis-regarding the Counsel, Drawings and Directions of
the Light and Spirit of Christ in themselves; such Worshippers, in that State,
and under those Circumstances, may please themselves with such pretenses; but
can no way perform that Divine and Spiritual Worship which is acceptable unto
God in this Gospel day.

Although, I might have produced diverse Testimonies, both of Ancient and Modern
Authors, in favor of this Discourse; yet for several Reasons, I rather choose
to keep close to the Holy Scriptures; inasmuch as I conceive those who are
inclined to be Religious will not dare to make exceptions against that which is
concluded to proceed from the Divine Spirit.

Let none be Offended that I do not admit of human Learning, and natural Arts
and Sciences to be of such absolute necessity for the Qualification of a Gospel
Minister, as some would have them: For by what is here Written, I do no way
intend to undervalue human Learning, or lessen its esteem in the minds of such
as are inclined to make a right use thereof; for I do grant, that it is good
and serviceable in its place, yea, it is, and may be serviceable upon many
accounts to a Gospel Minister, where it is reduced to a blessed Subordination
and Conformity to the Spirit of Truth; but then if People will attempt to exalt
it above the teachings of the Divine Spirit, and lay that stress upon it for
opening the Mysteries of Truth which the Holy Ghost will not admit of, in that
case I found my self concerned to bear a Testimony for the Truth, and against
the Vanity of such as would extol human Learning and natural Arts and Sciences
above their proper use and service.

Albeit, the consideration of those many Treatises which have been writ, by
other Hands, upon these accounts, did at first seem to divert me from this
undertaking; yet for clearing of my Conscience in the sight of God, and in
performance of that Duty and Service which I owe to him, I thought fit to cast
my Mite into the Treasury, desiring that what I have here Written in Humility,
may be Read and Expounded in Charity; and that God Almighty, who is the Author
of all our Blessings, may by his Grace and Goodness make this small Treatise
effectual for informing the minds of People upon these accounts, and for
reducing them into that pure and spiritual Worship which is acceptable unto him
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

So desires, and so prays thy Christian Friend, George Myers.

THE CONTENTS.
. 1. COncerning the Worship that was Instituted by Jesus Christ, and Practiced
by his People. page 1.. 2. Concerning Man's incapacity of Worshipping and Serving
God acceptably in his natural and unconverted State. page 4.. 3. Concerning the
necessity of receiving the Light, Grace and Spirit of Christ in order to
quicken and renew to God, and so to prepare and qualify People for his Worship
and Service. page 10.. 4. Concerning the Gospel Church and Evangelical Temple.
page 15.. 5. Concerning silent waiting upon God, for the help and concurrence
of his holy Spirit, in the performance of Divine Worship. page 20.. 6.
Concerning the Preparation, Call, and Ordination of Gospel Ministers. page 25..
7. Concerning Women Preaching. page 34.. 8. Concerning the Rise of Gospel
Performances, and the Qualifications of Gospel Ministers, showing that they are
not from Human Learning, Worldly Wisdom and Natural Arts and Sciences, but from
the Divine Spirit. page 43.. 9. Concerning outward Force and Violence in
Religious matters, and the unlawfulness of forceable resisting the temporal
Magistracy p. 55.. 10. Concerning the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers. page
63.. 11. Concerning Prayer. page 75.. 12. Concerning Singing of Psalms, and
Artifical Music. page 88. The Conclusion. page 98.
THE Spiritual Worship EXALTED.
Section I. Concerning the Worship that was Instituted by Jesus Christ, and
Practiced by his People.
AFter the Lord God, in his own appointed time, saw meet to put an end to the
Dispensation of the Law, which was delivered unto the Children of Israel by the
Ministry of Moses; it pleased him, according to his determinate Will and
everlasting Counsel, to send his own Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, who was born
of the Virgin Mary in Bethlehem of Judea, of whom Moses and the Prophets did
write, and whom John testified of to be the Lamb of God who takes away the
Sins of the World, John 1.29. He perfectly fulfilled the Law, and the
Righteousness thereof, and gave witness unto the Dispensation of the Gospel,
drawing Religion into the secret of the Heart, he made it to consist in a
higher state of Righteousness, then that of the Law, called Evangelical; he
also approved himself, and the excellency of his Doctrine, by many great and
wonderful Signs and Miracles, and sealed it with his Blood; for that after he
had preached that heavenly Doctrine, and wrought many Miracles among the Jews,
he was apprehended, and by wicked hands was Crucified and Slain, yet God raised
him up again; so that he triumphed over Death, of which it was impossible for
him to be held; and after he was so raised up from the Dead, he appeared to his
Disciples and Followers, who had believed in him, comforting them with the hope
and assurance of the pouring forth and attendance of his Spirit, by which he
was to be with them unto the end of the World; and by which they, and all such
as afterward should come to believe in his holy Name might be rendered capable
of bearing and holding forth a true, certain and faithful Testimony for him
whom God has appointed for Salvation unto the ends of the Earth, and also of
performing that Worship and Service which was instituted by him, which Worship
is Spiritual, and cannot be truly performed by the Art, Strength, Wisdom and
Policy of men in their natural and unconverted state, but only by those who are
spiritually quickened and renewed unto God (in some measure) and whose Hearts
and Souls are fitted and prepared by the Light, Grace, Spirit and Power of our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

That the Worship instituted by Christ is Spiritual is very plain, from his own
Words unto the Woman of Samaria, John 4.21, 22, 23, 24. Jesus said unto her,
Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; ye worship ye know not what, we know what
we worship, for Salvation is of the Jews; but the hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the
Father seeks such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. This is the chiefest and most ample
Testimony that Christ gives of the Christian worship, as different and
contradistinguished from that under the Law; he tyeth not his People to the
Temple at Jerusalem, nor unto any other place, but plainly holds out, that the
season is now come, wherein the worship must be in Spirit and in Truth; he also
gives the reason for it, and excellently argues from the anology that ought to
be betwixt the Object and the Worship directed thereunto, viz. God is a Spirit,
therefore he must be worshipped in Spirit -- This Testimony of our Lord is so
clear in the case, that I need not enlarge much further upon it, but only add
the saying of the Apostle Paul to the Church at Philippi, We are the
Circumcision that worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
having no confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3.3 By which it appears, that the
Saints and People of God, in those days, were in the practice of that worship
which was instituted by our Lord, as aforesaid.

Section II. Concerning Man's incapacity of Worshipping and Serving God
acceptably in his natural and unconverted State.
THat Men in their natural and unconverted state are incapable of performing
this spiritual Worship, is certainly true, for that, whilst they remain in that
state, they cannot do any thing that is really good and acceptable unto God,
being subject unto that depraved and ungodly Spirit which leads People into
Iniquity, and rules in all the Children of Disobedience, it comes to pass, that
not only their Words and Deeds, but also the Imaginations of their Hearts are
evil continually, their Thoughts, Notions and Conceptions concerning Divine and
Spiritual matters are unprofitable both to themselves and others, which thing
does yet further appear from diverse Testimonies in the Scriptures of Truth.
Moses said, That God saw the Wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and that
every Imagination of the thoughts of his Heart was only evil continually, and
that it repented the Lord that he had made man on the Earth, and it grieved him
at his Heart, Genesis 6.5, 6. David says, The Lord looked down from Heaven upon
the Children of men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God,
and says, They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is
none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14.2, 3. And again, But unto the Wicked
God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant into thy Mouth? Psalm. 50.16. Jeremiah says, The Heart is
deceitful and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Our Lord says,
An evil man out of the evil treasure brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12.35.
Also the Apostle Paul, alluding to the saying of David, says, Thero is none
Righteous, no not one; there is none that understands; there is none that
seeks after God; they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one, Romans 3.10, 11, 12. Thus
it is to be observed, that what is thus spoken relates to men in their natural
and unconverted State, wherein their Souls are dead unto God, and the things of
his Kingdom, and cannot live unto him, nor do any such lively act, as to serve
him, until they receive the Lord Jesus Christ, and know the virtue and power of
his Grace and Spirit, inwardly to quicken them unto God, That so they may serve
him in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, Romans
7.6.

For, alas, it is not the bare performance of such things, as are supposed to
be religious duties, that brings into acceptance with God, unless the Heart,
Soul and Spirit of man be renewed, fitted, prepared and qualified by that which
is holy and pure; its the rise of the performance that God looks at, more then
the outward act, he that searches, the Heart and tryes the Reins of men, before
whom all things are naked and bare, looks not so much upon the external
Fabric, as the internal frame of the Soul, Unto this man will I look, says
the Lord, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at
my Word, Isa. 66.2.

We read, that although the Jews were in the practice of the legal forms of
Worship, Sacrifice and Oblations, which were by Gods appointment, yet, because
their Hearts were defiled, and polluted with Sin and Iniquity, and that they
presented not their Offerings and Sacrifices in a right frame of Spirit, nor
under that disposition of Soul that was required; therefore they incurred the
wrath and displeasure of God against themselves, and with great aggravation he
declared against them, and terribly renounced their Worship, as appears in Isa.
1. and 66.3. Amos 5.21, 22, 23. If it was so then, that the Jews under that
Dispensation displeased the Lord in appearing before him, with Offerings and
Sacrifices, whilst their Hearts were polluted and unprepared, as aforesaid; it
may be a caution unto all those that make profession of the pure and undefiled
Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of that Worship which was instituted by
him, that they be not found attempting the performance thereof in a spiriritual
unpreparedness, and whilst their Hearts and Souls are polluted with Sin and
Iniquity, lest it be said unto them, as it was unto the Jews, Who has required
this at your Hands to tread my Courts? Isa. 1.12.

Again if the Jewish Sacrifices, in the time of the Law, were Sprinkled before
they were offered, and the People were Consecrated that offered them, before
they presented themselves before the Lord, and that the touching of a dead or
nuclear Beas then, made People unfit for the Temple or Sacrifice, yea, society
with the Clean, until they were first Sprinkled and Sanctified, as the
Scriptures hold out, Numb. 8. and chap. 19 2 Chronicles. 29.36. and 30. 16, 17. How
car any think so meanly of the worship, instituted by Christ, in Gospel times,
as that it should admit of unprepared and unsanctified Offerings, or allow,
that those who are spiritually defiled with Sin and Iniquity, and in Words or
Deeds do daily touch that which is unclean, can in that state well and
acceptably worship the pure God, until their Consciences be sprinkled from dead
works by the blood of Jesus, and that they be inwardly prepared and
consecrated, by his divine Spirit and Power, in order to serve him.

It is also observable, that when the Temple at Jerusalem was built, before the
glory of the Lord descended to fill the same, it was purified and cleansed and
all polluted stuff removed out of it, yea, and the place for the Tabernacle was
overlaid with Gold, the most precious clean and purest of Metals, 1 Kings 6,
7, 8, chapters. So also, before God be truly worshipped in the inward Temple of
the Heart, it must also be purged of the filth and pollutions that are therein,
that so it may be fit to receive the Spirit of God, so as to be acted by it.

And yet further, let it be considered, how it can be available to the High and
Lofty in Mind and Spirit, the Rich and Full in the Pomp and Grandeur of the
World, the Proud, Covetous and Self-conceited, and such as go on in a road of
Unrighteousness, Ungodliness and Vanity to utter a multitude of unseasoned
Words before the Almighty God, or to cry Lord, Lord, whilst they have neither
received, nor are subject unto that Blessed Spirit which has right to call him
so, 1 Cor. 12.3. Or how any can rationally suppose, that he who is clothed with
divine Honor and Majesty, who covers himself with Light as with a Garment; who
stretches forth the Heavens like a Curtain, and walks upon the Wings of the
Wind; who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of Fire, and is
of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, can be truly and acceptably Served and
Worshipped by such as do not only resist and rebel against that which brings
into acceptance with God, but also remain and delight in that which is an
abomination unto him.

Section III. Concerning the necessity of receiving the Light, Grace and Spirit
of Christ in order to quicken and renew to God, and so to prepare and qualify
People for his Worship and Service.
SInce then it appears that the Worship instituted by Christ is spiritual, and
that no man in his natural and unconverted state is capable of performing the
same acceptably, we may conclude, and that upon sure grounds, that the
preparation of the holy Spirit is that which is absolutely necessary for men to
know in the first place, before they go about to perform their Devotions before
the Lord: Such as desire to worship God acceptably must believe in him whom God
has sent to redeem lost man unto him self, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, who by
his Light, Grace and Spirit does manifest Sir and Evil in the Hearts and Souls
of People and reproves for the same, and also lead them that truly own and
receive him unto Repentance, and converteth them unto God; he, by his Power
revealed in man, does Crucify the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; he
cleanses from Sin and Iniquity and quickens the Soul unto God, raising up the
same unto newness of Life; so that those who in their natural and unconverted
state have been Aliens unto God, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise,
through Faith in Christ, and the work of his Grace and Spirit in their Hearts;
such come to be delivered from the Power of Darkness, and translated into the
Kingdom of Gods dear and wel-beloved Son, to be made Heirs of Glory,
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, of the Household of God, Col. 1.13. Ephesians.
2.19. and so are rendered capable of Worshipping and Serving God acceptably,
according to divine institution, Being born again (as the Apostle said) not of
corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and
abides forever, 1 Pet. 1.23.

As to the quickening and renewing Virtue of this divine Spirit and Light of
Christ, the Saints and Children of God have not only a living and blessed
Experience thereof in this our day, but also the Scriptures do afford us diverse
Testimonies concerning the same; Jesus says, As the Father raises up the
Dead, and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom he will, John 5.21.
Again, It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing, John
6.63. And also the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans says, If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; and if Christ he in you, the
Body is Dead because of Sin, but the Spirit is Life because of Righteousness;
but if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by
his Spirit that dwells in you; therefore Brethren we are Debtors not to the
Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh ye shall Dye,
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall Live;
for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans
8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And again the same Apostle in his Epistle to the
Ephesians says, And you has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins;
yea, God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, (by Grace are
ye saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5, 6. From whence it is very clear and
plain, that it is the Spirit of Christ that quickens the Souls of those who
have been dead in Trespasses and Sins, and that if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ he is none of his, and if he be none of Christ's, he is none of the
true Church, and consequently no true Worshipper; Again he says, That as many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; and if Sons then
Heirs and Members of the true Church, who worship God in the Spirit.

Moreover, as the Lord Jesus Christ by his divine Spirit and Power does thus
work upon the Hearts and Souls of those that receive him, in order to cleanse
from Sin and Iniquity, and to raise up into newness of Life; so also it is he
only, by his holy Light and Spirit, that truly prepared and disposes the Hearts
of People for the service of God, and opens the Mysteries of Truth unto the
Sons and Daughters of Men: He it is that has the Key of David, that opens, and
no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens, Rev. 3.9. And without him
the vision of divine things are as a Book that is Sealed, and hid from the
wisdom of man in the Fall, and no man is worthy to open the Seals thereof; for
which cause, it seems, John Wept, as we read in the Revelation, And I saw, in
the right hand of him that sat on the Throne, a Book written within, and on the
backside sealed with seven Seals; and I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a
loud voice, Who is worthy to open the Book and to loose the Seals thereof? and
no man in Heaven, nor in Earth, neither under the Earth was able to open the
Book, neither to look thereon; and I wept much, because none was found worthy
to open the Book, neither to look thereon; and one of the Elders said unto me,
Weep not; behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has
prevailed to open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof, Rev. 5.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. By the Lion of the tribe of Juda, is to be understood the Lord Jesus
Christ, who prevailed with the Father to open the Book of Truth, and to loose
the Seals thereof; without whom no man is able to open the same, be he never so
Wise in worldly Wisdom, and never so Learned in natural Arts and Sciences, as
may hereafter, in its due and proper place, more fully and at large appear.

Section IV. Concerning the Gospel Church and Evangelical Temple.
AS it is the Light, Spirit and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ that truly
quickens, and renews People unto God, and renders them capable of performing
that Spiritual Worship, which is acceptable unto him; so also it is by the
virtue and influence of the same Spirit and Power that the Lords People have
been, and are stated in a joint Fellowship and Communion, and are drawn into an
outward and visible Society, and so come under the name of a Church; yet for a
better understanding of the word Church, or what is meant thereby, it may be
considered in a two fold respect, First, As it comprehends all whatsoever, of
every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People, whom the Lord God by his universal
Spirit and Power (revealed and made manifest in and through our Lord Jesus
Christ) does truly call and gather out of the Life and Spirit of the World, and
the Pollutions and Defilements thereof, into that Pure, Holy and Righteous
State of Faith and Life, wherein they are cccepted of God, and owned by him as
his Children and People, which make up that one, true, Universal, or Catholic
Church, out of which (indeed) there is no Salvation. Secondly, The word Chuch
may be taken for a certain number of Persons who (being Members of this
Universal Church) are gathered into an outward and visible Society, and do Meet
and Assemble themselves together, really to wait upon, and Worship the Living
God, and to bear a Testimony for the Truth against Error. The Church, in the
first sense, in Scripture terms, is called, The New, Holy and Heavenly
Jerusalem, the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, the Lambs Bride,
and the City of the Living God, Heb. 12.22, 23. Rev. 19.7. and 21.2, 9, 10. The
Church in the latter sense we have it often mentioned in the Scriptures, as
appears Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. also Rev. 1.4. John
writteth to the seven Churches in Asia. Thus it is not the outward House,
Frabrick or Building of Wood or Stone, that is or can be truly termed the
Church, or House of God, in this Gospel day, as some vainly do conceive, (and
therefore do ascribe some imaginary Sanctity or Holiness thereunto) but it is
the Assembly of Believers, in this sense gathered together as aforesaid, who
are the Evangelical Temple, Gospel Church, and House of God, the Ornaments
whereof are not the Embroideries and Furnitures of wordly Art and Wealth, but
the Gifts and Graces of the holy Spirit, Love, Meekness, Faith, Patience,
Long-suffering, Humility, Self-denial and Charity, with other Christian Virtues.

It Is true the Jews under the old Covenant and Dispensation of the Law had an
outward Temple, where they were to Worship, as in 1 Kings 9. and 2 Chronicles. 7.
and because the Lord was pleased to Hollow it for his Name, and honor it with
his Presence; as also to cause an outward Glory and Majesty to appear there, by
causing Fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices, etc. therefore it was
called the House of God, as is manifest in the writings of the old Testament.
And also the Lord Jesus, before he was offered up, gives it that Name, Mat.
21.13. Joh. 2.16. But then, after Christ was offered up, and the pure spiritual
Worship and Service came to be Exalted, and born Testimony unto, by the
Apostles and Servants of Christ, that outward Temple being left desolate of the
Glory and Presence of God, it came to Ruin, according to the saying of the Lord
Jesus, and the true Ministers of the Gospel plainly testified, That the most
high dwelt not in Teinples made with Hands, Acts 7.48. and 17.24, 25. Neither
was he Worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he
gives to all Life and Breath, and all things; but he is Worshipped in Spirit,
John 4.24. His Tabernacle is with men, he will dwell with them, and they shall
be his People, Rev. 21.3. Therefore the Apostle thus writes to the Church at
Corinth, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you; if any man desile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy;
for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Again, Ye
are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor 6.16.
And also the Apostle Peter says, Ye also as lively Stones are built up a
spiritual House, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Again the Author to the Hebrews expresses
himself thus, Moses verily was faithful in all his House, as a Servant, for a
Testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but Christ as a Son,
ever his own House, whose House we are, if we hold fast the Confidence, and the
rejoicing of the Hope from unto the end, Heb. 3.5, 6. By all which Testimonies
its plainly manifest, that the Saints and Children of God are that Spiritual
House, and Evangelical Temple, wherein the Glory and presence of God is
spiritually known and witnessed in this Gospel day, which is yet further
confirmed, and held forth in that remarkable passage of the Apostle Paul to the
Church at Ephesus, Now therefore ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
fellow Citizens with the Saints; and of the household of God, and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Corner Stone, in whom all the Building fitly framed together grows unto
an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom you also are builded together for an
Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.

Howbeit Christians have Meeting-Places, tho not in Jewish or Heathen Pomp and
State, but plain and suitable for that purpose, answerable to the simplicity of
the Life and Doctrine of their blessed Lord, who teaches Humility, Plainness
and Moderation upon all accounts; it is not simply the Place, but the Persons
there assembled that he has a regard unto, who meet in his Name and Fear, such
does he honor with his blessed Presence wheresoever they are met together to
wait upon him, and by the virtue of his Grace and Spirit he does strengthen and
confirm his Children and People, enabling them to perform that Worship and
Service which is acceptable unto God in this Gospel day.

Section V. Concerning silent waiting upon God, for the help and concurrence of
his holy Spirit, in the performance of Divine Worship.
INasmuch as those who have received the Lord Jesus Christ, and make profession
of his blessed Name and Truth, are so drawn into an outward and visible
Society, as that they do Meet and Assemble themselves together at seasonable
and convenient times and places, according to the practice of the true
Believers in the primitive times; so when they are assembled, it ought to be
the care of all to abstain from their own Actings, Thoughts and Imaginations,
and to be inwardly retired in their Minds in a holy watchfulness and dependency
upon the Lord, that so being gathered together in his Name, they may be
sensible of his blessed Presence amongst them, according to his promise, Where
two or three (says he) are gathered together in my Name, there will I be in the
midst of them. This Name is not only an outward and literal Name, but a
precious, living and powerful Name, wherein true Comfort, Strength and Safety
is nor is it an outward gathering only, but an inward gathering in Heart, Mind
and Spirit unto that which is pure and holy; therefore says the Apostle, I
beseech you Brithren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto him, 2 These. 2.1. By which it appears that the Saints
gathering was unto Christ, his Spirit and Power, and as every one are thus
gathered in Spirit, as well as outwardly in Person, the secret Power and Virtue
of the divine Spirit is frequently known to Revive and Refresh their Souls, and
the pure Motions and Breathings thereof are witnessed; from which as Words of
Declaration, Prayers or Praises to God do arise, the pure, spiritual and
acceptable Worship and Service of God is known, yea tho there be not a word
spoken, yet in possible that the true Spiritual Worship may be performed and
the Church of Christ Edified.

Howbeit, although this inward Silence, and spiritual waiting upon God be a
very great and necessary Duty, and in order preceeds all real acts of Divine
Worship; forasmuch as it is an inward retirement of the Mind from all its own
Motions, Workings, Imaginations and vain Speculations, and a mere dependence
upon God for the help and influence of his Grace and Spirit, yet it is very
strange and opposite to the natural Will and Wisdom of Man, whose roving
Imaginations and running worldly Desires, Vauities and Delights are not easily
subjected and brought to silence, and such are ready to think all time lost
wherein there is not something spoken that is obvious to the outward Senses, not
considering that so long as the natural Spirit of man is the first and chief
Author and Actor of him in his Devotions toward God, so as that he does not
first wait for a Divine Guide to direct him he cannot worship acceptably, nor
bring forth any thing of himself but the Fruit of the fallen, natural and corrupt
Root; and indeed this is one great reason why many sober and discreet Persons,
in this our Age, cannot join with the several forms of Worship now extant in
the World, but under a conscientious Exercise and Concern do dissent from them,
not in any stubbornness (as some would charge them) but really for Conscience
sake, lest they should offend God in joining with that which he by his Spirit
has made them sensible of that he takes no delight in; for what is a heap of
the most Pathetical Words that can be uttered unto God Almighty, when they are
both begun, carried on and concluded in man's own natural Will and Strengh,
without the motion or influence of the Spirit of God, which is and must needs
be of absolute necessity for enabling People to perform that Spiritual Worship
which was instituted by our Lord, and is now practiced by his People.

Yet nevertheless, although this inward retiredness and spiritual waiting upon
God be almost a mystery to the World, and very hard and difficult unto men in
their natural and unregenerate Sat, yet it is that whereby the spiritual man
renews his strength in the Lord, and it is frequently commanded and born
testimonyunto in the holy Scriptures, as appears by the following Texts, which
the Reader may peruse at his Leisure, Job 14.14. Psalm. 40.1 and 62 5. and 69.3.
Prove. 20.22. Isa. 40.31. Lam. 3.25, 26. Hos. 12.6. Hab. 2.1. Mat. 24.42. and
25.13. and 26.41. Mar. 13.37. 2 Timothy 4.5. See also, Ezra 9.4. Ezekiel. 3.15, 16.
Zech. 2.13. Job. 2.13.

Moreover this silence or silent waiting for a season, before Words be spoken
relating to the Worship and Service of God, does not thus only appear to be
agreeable to Scripture Testimony, but also is answerable even to Reason and
natural Experience in other things, for he that would learn of a Master any Art
or Science, ought not to fall on speaking or acting immediately of his own Mind
and Will, and so continue unquiet, but rather should be silent, for a season,
to hear his Master instruct him what and how he shall door say, and then
proceed. So also he that undertakes to serve a Master should not run hastily on
to do things in his own Time and Will, nor yet to deaffen his Master with
Discourse, though it were in Praises of him; but he ought rather to wait to
hear his Master speak, and inform him what and how to do, and then proceed to
act according to his Directions. Even so those that desire to be taught of God
and instructed by him in Righteousness, ought not to keep themselves
continually busied with their own Imaginations and Inventions, but patiently to
wait upon God, that so he by his Grace and Spirit may Teach and Instruct them;
and also those that desire to serve God (in this Gospel day) ought not to run
hastily about the same, in their own corrupt, forward and unrenewed. Wills and
Minds, but diligently to attend upon God to feel the Strength and Counsel of
his Spirit in such undertakings.

Section VI. Concerning the Preparation, Call and Ordination of Gospel
Ministers.
AS it is the duty of every Christian to wait upon God for the help and
strength of his holy Spirit, in order to sit, prepare and qualify them for the
Worship and Service of God; so it is by the Power and Virtue of the Divine
Spirit that every true Evangelist and Gospel Minister is ordained, prepared and
supplied in the work of the Ministry, otherwise he cannot be truly said to be a
Minster of the Spirit; for as none could be Ministers of the Letter who had
thence no ground of their Call, nor directions therefrom, how, when, nor after
what manner they should Minister; neither can any be real Ministers of the
Spirit, who are not called, ordained, fitted and prepared by it, nor are
acquainted with the motions and directions thereof, in order to draw, move,
act, influence, assist and go before them in the Work and Service of the Gospel.

As for the Service of the Jews, under the Dispensation of the Law, there was a
certain Tribe allotted for the Ministry, which was the Tribe of Levi, so that
then People needed not to question who should be Priests and Ministers of holy
things, for that the Lord God by his Servant Moses did set apart diverse of the
aforesaid Tribe for the Priestood, and other Offices; as also he did direct
how, and after what manner their Worship and Service was to be performed, as
may be seen at large in the writings of Moses -- And besides that it pleased
God at diverse times under that Dispensation, by the immediate Testimony of his
holy Spirit, to raise up several Persons to Teach, Instruct and Reprove the
People, as Samuel, Nathan, Elias, Elisha, Jeremiah, Amos, and others of the
Prophets; but now under the new Covenant, and Dispensation of the Gospel, there
is no such Tribe of People allotted, and set a part particularly for the
Ministry, as was under the Law, neither is the Worship and Service of
Christians Celebrated after the manner of the Jews in diverse respects, nor is
it attended with those outward Ceremonies, and shadowing Performances, as was
that of the Jews; for the Christian Worship and Service is performed in Spirit
and in Truth, (as has been before and still yet may be further observed) and
therein it greatly Excels, and far Transcended that under the Law, being
under the administration of Life and Glory, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is
alone exalted as high Priest and Prophet of his People, who being the Lord of
true Divinity, does spiritually Call, Ordain, Constitute and Qualify the
Ministers of the new Testament, and Instruct them in the Spiritual Law, which
is the delight of Gods People.

That the Apostles and Servants of Christ, in the Primitive times, were called
and qualified by the Divine Spirit to, and for, the Work of the Ministry, is so
plain and clear that none need question it, unless it be such who at this day
would assume and arrogate unto themselves the name and title of Gospel
Ministers, by Virtue of some outward Ordination, without the call, help and
influence of the holy Spirit; unto such I say it greatly behooves them to
consider how, and when, the Lord Jesus Christ did transfer that power unto man
which is only peculiar unto himself; I know that those who despise the motion
and diclares of the Grace of God in themselves, and yet would be esteemed
Ministers, are apt to deny, that the Power and Influence of the holy Spirit is
of absolute necessity for the Call and Qualification of a Gospel Minister, and
therefore do wholly betake themselves to an outward Ordination for a refuge,
otherwise such would have nothing to stand upon, in that respect, for what they
pretend to. It Is certain, and always granted, that those whom God is pleased to
Call and Qualify by his Grace and Spirit to and for the Work and Service of
the Gospel, are to be owned and approved of by his Church and People; but then
it does not therefore follow that any who have only attained unto some degree
of humane Learning and Knowledge in Arts and Sciences, can be thereby fitted for
the Gospel Ministry, or that such Person, under those Circumstances, can be
rightly qualified for that Work and Service by the Power of man, without the
call, help, influence and assistance of the blessed and holy Spirit and Power
of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein the true power of Ordination stands, and not
in men, as men, but in the Spirit of Christ, which ought to have the supreme
Government in the hearts of men, and those who are truly called, ordained and
qualified by the divine Spirit for the Work and Service of the Gospel, are
accepted of God and approved of by his Church and People, as the Apostle said,
He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
Men, Romans 14.18. Also we read that the Apostle Paul, when he took his leave of
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, he thus expressed himself, Take heed
therefore unto your selves and to all the Flock, over which the holy Ghost has
made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own Blood, Acts 20.28. And again the holy Ghost said unto the Prophets and
Teachers which were in the Church at Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Saul,
for the Work whereunto I have called them; and when they had Fasted and Prayed,
and laid their hands on them, they sent them away; so (its said) they being
sent forth by the holy Ghost departed unto Soleucia, and from thence they
sailed to Cyprus, and when they were at Salamis they Preached the Word of God
in the Synagogues of the Jews, Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. From whence its
observable.

First, That the Elders of the Church at Ephesus were made Overseers there, by
the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, That it was the Holy Ghost that called Barnabas and Saul unto the
Work and Service of the Gospel, and that it was the Holy Ghost that sent them.

By which it appears, that the power of Calling, and Ordaining Gospel
Ministers, resides in the Holy Spirit, and that those who are Called and
Ordained thereby, are approved by the Church, being set apart by God for the
Service they are called unto, which thing does very well agree with the saying
of the Apostle Paul to the Church at Corinth, God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12.28. And likewise
to the Ephesians, he faith, When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
Captive, and gave gifts unto Men; and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12. By which it also appears that it was not Man but God that
set Apostles, Prophets and Teachers in the Church, and that it was through the
gift of God that they were made Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, and thereby were they rendered capable of perfecting the Saints, of
the work of the Ministry, and of edifying the Body of Christ.

Furthermore it is observable that when the Apostle Paul was giving an account
before King Agrippa, how the Lord met with him in his way to Damascus, he says,
that Jesus told him, For that purpose he appeared unto him, to make him a
Minister and a Witness both of those things which he had seen, and of those
things he would appear unto him in, Acts 26.16. And also the same Apostle in
his Epistle to the Galatians says, When it pleased God (who seper^^^d me from
my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace) to reveal his Son in me, that I
might preach him among the Heathen, immediately I conferred not with Flesh and
Blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before me,
but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus, Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.
And again, in his Epistle to Timothy, he says, I thank Jesus Christ our Lord,
who has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful putting me into the
Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. All which does yet further set forth, that it was the
Lord Jesus Christ that made Paul a Minister, and that it was by his Grace,
Spirit and Power that he was enabled and put into the Ministry; neither does it
appear that he went up to Jerusalem at that time to be ordained by them who
were Apostles before him, but he went into Arabia and returned again unto
Damascus, as is before set forth.

Objection, Its probable some may object and say, That though the Apostles, and
Ministers of Christ, in the primitive times were immediately called to that
Work and Service by the Spirit of God, yet it was for an extraordinary Work,
and if any now do pretend to an immediate call, they ought to confirm it by
Miracles.

Answ. Unto which I Answer, That although it was an extraordinary Work which
they were sent to do, yet the degree does not change the kind; They were to
preach Christ Crucified and risen again, and were to preach Repentance and
remission of Sins through his Name: They were to turn People from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that so they might receive
forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them which were Sanctified by
Faith in Christ, Acts 26.18. Even so are the Ministers of Christ in this our
day to hold out the same Doctrine, according to the Dispensation of the Gospel
committed unto them; nor is there any necessity for Miracles to be wrought by
those who are called of God, in this our day, to the Work of the Ministry for
the confirmation of their Testimony, when as they preach no new Gospel, but
what was preached by the Servants of Christ in the primitive times, and is
already confirmed by the Miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles; and when
nothing is offered but what is answerable to Truth, and agreeable to the
Testimony of the Scriptures; and besides that, we do not find that either John
the Baptist, or several others of the Prophets did any Miracles, and yet they
were both Immediately and Extraordinarily sent.

Section VII. Concerning Women Preaching.
AS this Divine Spirit has been, and is extended universally unto all People,
at certain times and seasons, during the day of their Visitation, according to
the Good Will and Pleasure of our God, and that in order to call, gather and
renew them unto himself; so it has been the good Pleasure of our God to call
and qualify whom he thinks convenient for the Work and Service of the Gospel;
and upon this account it may please him sometimes to make use of Women as well
as Men, according to his Promise by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass
afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and
your Daughters shall Prophecy, your old Men shall dream Dreams, your young Men
shall see Visions; and also upon the Servants, and upon the Hand Maids in those
days will I pour out my Spirit. This Prophecy had a respect to the Gospel
Day, and related to the more plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit under that
Dispensation, both upon Male and Female, as was witnessed at the day of
Penticost; When the Apostles with the Women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, with
his Brethren, were gathered together, its said, They were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, Acts 1.13, 14. and 2.4. And if All were filled with the Holy Ghost,
and Spoke, then Women as well as Men, forasmuch as Women were there present
with the Men, as the Text holds out.

Object. Now so it is that many are inclined to object against Women Speaking
or Preaching, and upon that account do allege the words of the Apostle Paul, 1
Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.

Answ. In answer whereunto I say, that although these Texts may be mystically
understood, as some have observed, yet if we take them literally, and withal
consider the scope and tendency of the Apostles Words, both before and after,
and compare other Expressions of his with those, (which will be one way to give
satisfaction concerning his meaning) and also observe the Practice of the
Church upon those accounts, it will appear that Women, as Women, or of that
Sex, and for no other reason, are not prohibited to Preach.

Its observable, that the Apostle Paul in that Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. was not
treating who, or what Sex should Prophecy, and what not; but he was speaking
of that order and decency which such as Prophecy ought to observe; he was
treating of Spiritual Gifts, and of Speaking and Praying in an unknown Tongue,
and of the method that such should use; If any Man (says he) speak in an
unknown Tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course,
and let one interpret; but if there be no Interpreter let him keep silence in
the Church, and let him speak to himself, and to God; let the Prophets speak
two or three, and let the other judge; and if any thing be revealed to him that
sits by, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all Prophecy one by one,
etc. then he adds, Let your Women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not
permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the Law, and if they will learn any thing let them ask their
Husbands at home, for it is a shame for a Woman to speak in the Church. And so
he goes on, and concludes that Chapter with these Words, Let all things be done
decently and in order.

By all which it is very clear and plain, that the Apostles drift was to advise
them unto a decent, comely and orderly method in the Church, and that he did
not intend a general prohibition unto Women, howsoever they were called or
qualified, for then had he not only opposed their approved Practice in the
Church, but even his own Testimony in the very same Epistle, where he says,
Every Woman that Prays or Prophesies, with her Head uncovered, dishonors
her Head, chap. 11.5. Thus he is so far from disallowing of Women Praying or
Prophesing, that he advises how they shall be covered, and demean themselves
in the performance of such Services and Devotions. Again the Apostle says, Ye
may all Prophecy one by one, and if All, then Women as well as Men, forasmuch
as without any restriction he directs his Epistle to the Church of God at
Corinth, which no question consisted of Women as well as Men; if then these
words [Ye may all Prophesie] have relation unto them to whom the Apostle
directed that Epistle, as is certain; then Women may Prophecy as well as Men,
provided they be truly called and qualified by the Spirit of God, and that any
thing be revealed and enjoined upon them to declare and hold forth unto People
from him, who is and ought to be the sole orderer and disposer of the Hearts
and Spirits of all his People

And as for that saying of his unto Timothy, it is much to the same purpose,
for he was speaking how Women should adorn themselves, and how they should not
adorn themselves, then he subjoyns, Let the Woman learn in silence with all
subjection, but I suffer not a Woman to Teach, nor to usurp Authority over the
Man, but to be Silent, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10, 11, 12. There is no question but there
were such Women at Ephesus (where Timothy then was) who had need of this care
to be taken concerning them, and at Corinth too, such as were unlearned, proud
and tattling Women, not come to the true silence; and therefore he says, Let
the Women learn in silence with all subjection. Again its probable there might
be such as would be teaching and usurping authority over the Man, such had need
to be silent indeed, (that is without dispute) for if they were for usurping
authority over the man, they were very unfit to be Teachers of others.

But what of all this, although Proud, Vain, Tattling, Ignorant and Unlearned
Women are not to be permitted to Speak in the Church, nor to make disturbance
there, with their unseasonable and unlearned Questions and Discourses; but are
to learn in Silence with all Subjection, and to be under Obedience, as also
says the Law; yet it does not therefore: follow but that such Women as are
become Meek, Humble, Sober, Grave, Temperate, Wise and Discreet, and keep their
Place and Station in the blessed Truth, and have been content to learn in
silence with all subjection, may do and perform such Services and Devotions, in
the Church of Christ, as they may be called unto, and have a necessity from the
Lord laid upon them to be found in the practice of, whether it be in public
Declarations and Testimonies for God and his Truth, or in Prayers, Praises and
Thanksgivings unto him.

The Scriptures do afford us diverse Testimonies that Women as well as Men have
been concerned upon these accounts, to pass by diverse that might be mentioned,
whose Names are recorded in the writings of the Old Testament, in whom the
Spirit of the Lord has been so prevalent, that they have appeared Zealous for
the God of Israel; we shall only speak of those mentioned in the writings of
the New Testament, who have been concerned in the Work and Service of the
Gospel: We Read that Anna the Daughter of Phanuel was a Prophetess, and
Preached to the People in the Temple at Jerusalem the Clorious Day of Israel's
Redemption, Luke 2.36, 37, 38. The next is the Woman of Samaria, with whom
Christ himself Conversed, she was taught of Christ himself that he was the
Messiah, and then she went and Published the same in the City Sychar, John
4.26.28, 29. Again, we find that ridings of Christ's Resurrection was first
published by a Woman, viz. Mary Magdalen, and that she was commanded by Christ
himself to go to his Brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and
your Father, and to my God and your God, John 20.17, 18. And also Philip the
Evangelist, who was one of the seven mentioned Acts 6.5. had four Daughters
Virgins, which did Prophecy, Acts 21.8, 9. Moreover the Apostle Paul himself
was so far from discouraging Women upon these accounts, that he mentions
several being concerned with him in the Work and Service of Gospel, he begins
the 16 chapter to the Romnus thus, I commend unto you Phebe our Sister, which
is a Servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea. Again, Greet Priscilla and
Aquila my fellow helpers in Christ Jesus. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa who
labor in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which labored much in the Lord,
Romans 16.3, 12. All these were Women except Aquila. Also the same Apostle in his
Epistle to the Philippians writes thus, And I entreat thee also true
Yoke Fellow, help those Women that labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement
also, and other my fellow Laborers, whose Names are written in the Book of
Life, Phil. 4.3.

Thus it is manifest that serious, godly and wel-disposed Women, whom the Lord
by his Grace and Spirit stired up in former Ages to serve him, and to bear a
Testimony for his Name and Truth, were owned by the Apostle in their Service,
and accepted of in the Church of Christ, and indeed they ought to be so still;
wherein it is manifest, that their Exercise and Service stands in the Truth,
and in the fellowship of that Divine Spirit and Power wherein there is neither
Jew nor Greek, Bond nor Free, Male nor Female, but all are one even in Christ
Jesus, Gal. 3 28. who by the operation of his free Spirit may exercise whom he
pleases in Building up, Strengthening and Confirming his Church and People, as
also in bearing a Testimony unto his Blessed and Holy Name amongst the Sons and
Daughters of Men.

And yet nevertheless, as it has been so it is, and ought to be observed, that
such Women as are not truly called and qualified for such Services in the
Church, ought not to presume to Speak and Teach there, but to learn in Silence
with all due Subjection; and indeed it concerns all, both Men and Women, to be
very careful in these respects, and also to be cautious that under the pretense
of divine motion they be not found going into foolish Whimsies and Extremes,
out of the Liberties and Confines of Christian Prudence, Decency and
Moderation; but that all keep under the Guidance, Conduct, Government, Order
and Discipline of the blessed and holy Spirit and Power of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; otherwise it may be said of Men as well as Women, Let them keep
silence in the Church, for it is not permitted unto them to Speak in a
spiritual unpreparedness, and in disunion with God and his People, nor in any
rule, undecent or disorderly manner; For our God is not the author of
Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33.

Section VIII. Concerning the Rise of Gospel Performances, and the
Qualifications of Gospel Ministers, showing that they are not from Human
Learning, Worldly Wisdom and Natural Arts and Sciences, but from the Divine
Spirit.
FRom what has been said concerning the Christian Ministry it is clearly
manifest, that the Virtue and Power of the Divine Spirit is absolutely
necessary for the Qualifying, Calling and Constituting of a Gospel Minister,
and that it is by the secret help, motion and assistance thereof, that every
true Evangelist and Gospel Minister is to be acted and supplied in the
performance of their Duties and Services, otherwise it does no way appear that
they can either be acceptable unto God, or beneficial unto men, inasmuch as man
of himself, in his natural and unrenewed State (notwithstanding his outward
abilities, as to Human Learning) is (as it were) a Stranger unto God, and
really anacquainted with the Mysteries of his Heavenly Kingdom; for although
School Learning, Worldly Wisdom and Human Arts and Sciences, are much looked
upon and applauded, in this our Age, as Qualifications absolutely necessary for
the Gospel Ministry; yet we no where find any such ^ress laid upon the same in
the Scriptures, but on the contrary it rather appears from thence, that the
knowledge of Divine and Spiritual Mysteries are hid from the worldly Wise, and
is revealed unto those who by the virtue of the holy Spirit are born again, and
so are become Babes in Christ: Unto this our Lord Jesus has given a very plain
and ample Testimony, Luke 10.21, 22. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit and
said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even so
Father, for it seconed good in thy sight: All things are delivered to me of my
Father, and no mar knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Again, its observable, that although the Apostle Paul was learned
sufficiently, and brought up at Gamaliel's Feet, yet all his Learning and
Knowledge could not truly open his Understanding in Divine and Spriritual
Matters, for whilst he was acted by that Wisdom which was from below he was so
blind that he ran on in a fierce career to Persecute the People of God, Acts
11.29.
and was exceedingly Mad against them; yea, he confesses himself, that he was
a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
a Persecutor and injurious; and says, That beyond measure he Parsecuted the
Church of God and wasted it: Gal. 1.13.
But after it pleased God to meet with him, to call him by his Grace, and to
reveal his Son in him, he came to learn an other Lesson, he was so far from
applauding and exalting worldly Wisdom, and human Arts and Sciences as
Qualifications of absolute necessity for a Gospel Minister, that he rather
seems to oppose the same, saying, Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where
is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this
World? For after that in the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, etc.
the World by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that Believe: For the Jews require a Sign, and the
Greeks seek after Wisdom; but we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a
Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.
And also he says, verse the 27th, But God has chosen the foolish things of the
World to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the World to
confound the things that are mighty, and base things of the World, and things
that are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no Flesh should glory in his Presence. Thus we see
the Apostle does much endeavor to debase the Wisdom of the World, and to exalt
the Power and Wisdom of God, as yet still further appears in the following
Chapter, where he begins to speak concerning himself, and his manner of coming
unto the Corinthians, saying, 1 Cor. 2.
And I Brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of Speech or of
Wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God, for I determined not to know
any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, and I was with you
in Weakness, and in Fear, and in much Trembling, and my Speech, and my
Preaching was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in the demonstration
of the Spirit, and of Power; that your Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of
Men, but in the Power of God. From whence it is very plain, and clear that the
Apostle Paul was no way inclined to allow that place unto Worldly Wisdom, which
of right belongs unto Divine Wisdom; nor yet to attribute that unto natural
Arts and Sciences, which is only peculiar unto the holy Spirit; which thing is
also further confirmed in the sequel of the same Chapter, where the Apostle
says, Eye has not seen, chap. 2.9, 10, 11, 14.
nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man ( viz. man in the
Fall) the things which God has prepared for them that Love him; but God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God; for what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit
of a man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God; further adding, That the natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.

Moreover, if the Lord had intended human Learning, and Arts and Sciences to
have been absolutely necessary for the Qualification of a Gospel Minister, its
probable he would not only have recommended the same, and the necessity thereof
in those respects, by some of his Servants, but also would have chosen more of
the Learned Doctors and Rabbis of the times to have been publishers of his
Mind and Will unto the People in times past; but on the contrary, we find very
few of those great Doctors that went upon that Errand, neither under the
Prophetical nor Evangelical Dispensation, but rather the Lord was pleased to
make use of Honest, Plain (and often times) Illiterate People, upon these
accounts and to call several from their Vocations and Callings (as the
Scriptures bear witness) to bear Testimony for him, his Name and Truth, unto
the Sons and Daughters of Men; that so the Glory of God, and the excellency of
his Wisdom and Power might more appear in and through such weak Instruments.

Object. Now if any shall object, That although several of the Apostles were
unlearned, when Jesus called them, yet the Lord made them Learned by a Miracle,
before they went abroad to teach all Nations; and from thence would argue, That
Illiterate People are not fit to preach the Gospel, nor any but such who by the
help of human Learning can understand diverse Tongues and Languages.

Answ. In answer thereunto I say, That forasmuch as the Apostles were commanded
to go and Teach all Nations, the gift of Tongues was requisite at that time, and
upon that occasion, to enable them to express themselves in every Nations
proper Dialect, that so those People to whom they spoke might the better
understand what was spoken to them; yet it does not follow, that because the
gift of Tongues, was expedient for them at that time, in order to render them
capable of speaking to the understanding of other Nations; that therefore they
must be Learned in other Tongues, who speak only to People of their own
Language.

Yet nevertheless, it is not denied but that human Learning, and Art, and
Sciences are very useful, good and servicable in their places, as a right use
is made thereof, for that People are thereby made more capable of managing
temporal Affairs, both in respect of Merchandise, Trading and other matters; as
also it may so fall out that human Learning, and the knowledge of Tongues and
Languages may be useful upon some accounts, unto such as are or may be called
unto the Work and Service of the Gospel, but then it is in a blessed
Subordination and Conformity to the Teachings of the Divine Spirit, which is
that Golden-Key that opens the Mysteries of Truth, and inspires the Soul with a
right understanding of Spiritual matters, and those People whose understandings
are not opened thereby, be they never so Learned or Wise, in the Learning or
Wisdom of the World, yet by reason of the blindness of their Hearts, Luke 8.10.
Ephesians. 4.18.
Seeing they see not, and Hearing they understand not the Mysteries of Gods
Kingdom. Yet so it is, that when many People have by natural Education and
Study, acquired unto some knowledge in human Learning, Arts and Sciences, they
grow puffed up in Mind, wise in their own Conceit, and impatient of
Contradiction; and so are not willing that the use of natural Arts and Sciences
should be so kept within their proper Sphere, as to be limited unto natural
things, and held in a subserviency to the holy Spirit; but such will needs fall
a meddling in things of a higher nature, and by the help of human Learning and
wordly Wisdom (without the Revelation and Influence of the Divine Spirit) they
will put their meanings upon the Scriptures, and give Expositions and
Constructions upon Divine and Spiritual matters, and which is yet worse, they
will oftentimes attempt the imposing of their Notions upon others; and when the
Lord is pleased to raise up any to oppose them, then they fall into Passion,
Wrath, Cruelty, and Persecution, (the fruits of the Spirit of Error) and upon
this occasion it is that so many Contests, Disagreements, Jarrs and
Controversies have risen among the Professors of the Christian Religion, even
because Poople have over-valued worldly Wisdom, (which is servicable in its
place) and under-valued, slighted, opposed and disregarded the Teaching,
Direction, Counsel, Evidence and Revelation of the Light, Grace and Spirit of
Christ in themselves, which alone can truly open and discover the meaning of
that which has proceeded from the same Spirit in others; Luke 24.45.
and so instead of the gracious Influence of the Divine Spirit, they betake
themselves unto human Literature, Arts and Sciences, and by their Dark
Suggestions, Quaint Distinctions and Logical Terms, do render things more
Obscure, Intricate and Mysterious, then of themselves they are; so that the
World is even burdened with the Voluminous Tractates, long, tedious and
uncertain Discourses about Religious matters; therefore has it pleased God in
his infinite Wisdom and Counsel, in a great measure, to lay aside the Wise and
Prudent in the Wisdom of this World, and by his Eternal Spirit to fit and
qualify many weak, mean and contemptible Instruments, in the Eyes of men, and
make use of them for the publishing of his pure and naked Truth, that so it
might be freed of those Mists and Foggs wherewith those Linguists have clouded
it, and that People might be directed to wait for that universal Spirit which,
as it is received, does opperate in the Hearts and Souls of People, in order to
work out Sin and Iniquity, raise up into newness of Life, and to give People an
understanding in Divine and Spiritual matters; that so they may be thereby
fitted, prepared and qualified for performing that Pure and Spiritual Worship,
which is acceptable unto God in this Gospel day.

And further, such has been the good pleasure of our God in times past, as
also in this our day, not only, in a great measure, to lay aside the Wise and
Prudent of the World, upon these accounts, but also to set aside, as
unnecessary for the Gospel Ministry, those long tedious Books, Discourses and
Comments which have been and are the product of worldly Wisdom, and the fruit
of man's natural and unrenewed Mind and Spirit, and the Lord by his own Wisdom,
Spirit and Power does aid, furnish, assist and supply every true Gospel
Minister in the performance of his Duty and Service, both as to matter what,
the time when, and the Persons to whom; thus does he in his heavenly Counsel
order and dispose the Spirits of his People suitable for every Occasion and
Service that they are called unto, as there is a true dependence upon him: So
that the very rise of their Services is not simply from human Abilities, but
from the divine Gift; as the Apostle very well observed, As every man has
received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards
of the manifold Grace of God; if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of
God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives,
that God in all things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
Again the Apostle Paul, to the Romans, writes thus, Having then Gifts
differing according to the Grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us
Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry, les us wait on our
Ministering; or he that Teaches, on Teaching; or he that Exhorts, on
Exhortation, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. From whence it is yet further clearly manifest,
that the rise and foundation of true Gospel Performances, stands not in worldly
Wisdom, or human Arts and Sciences, but in the Gift and Grace of God, revealed
and manifested in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Section IX. Concerning outward Force and Violence in Religious matters, and
the unlawfulness of forceable resisting the temporal Magistracy.
AGain, as those who do truly minister from this divine Gift, endeavor not to
fill Peoples Ears and Minds with strange, uncertain and fore-prepared
Arguments, Loud Discourses, Dark Suggestions, Logical Terms, Philosophical
Notions and Conceptions about Divine and Spiritual matters: Neither do they
endeavor to force or enjoin People to receive them and their Testimony,
whether they will or no; but in all Christian Meekness, Plainness, Gentleness,
Forbearance and Sincerity they declare and hold forth the Truth of God, as they
have received it, and do recommend their Testimony unto every man's Conscience
in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. which thing is agreeable to the practice of
Jesus Christ, his Apostles and Servants in the Primitive times. We see with
what plainness in Speech and familiar Similies and Parables our Lord did
express himself to the People, as appears in the writings of the Evangelists,
and how tenderly he invited People to come unto him, and learn of him that was
meek and low in Heart, Mat. 11.28, 29.
promising they should find rest unto their Souls; yea, and when the Jews
(notwithstanding his great inclination to gather them) did continue in hardness
and rebellion against him, and his heavenly Message, yet he Wept over them, as
we read Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near he beheld the City, and Wept
over it, saying, if thou had known, even thou at the least, in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thy Eyes. And
yet as a further demonstration of the Love, Meekness and Gentleness of his
Spirit, we have an account that when something of sharpness appeared in some of
his Disciples, against those Samaritanes who received them not, we may perceive
how suddenly he rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are
of, Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
for the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Life's, but to save them. It is
also further manifest in the Scriptures, that the Apostles and Servants of
Christ did all along proceed, upon Truth's account, in much plainness of
Speech, Gentleness, Humility, Self-denial and Christian Forbearance toward all
People. The which said Practice of theirs, upon these accounts, may
sufficiently serve for a Confutation unto such as will needs pretend to the
Christian Faith, and to be Ministers, Servants and Followers of Christ, and are
strangely Leavened and Infected with many Peevish, Proud, Stingy; Insolent,
Covetous, Unmortified, Persecuting and Naughty Humors and Practices, no way
agreeable to the nature and tendency of the Gospel of Peace, nor to that pure,
holy and undefiled Religion which was Instituted by our Lord, and Practiced by
his Disciples and Followers.

As outward Force, Severity and Compulsion in Religious matters does no way
seem to be consistent with Christianity; so neither do we find any Precept or
President for it in the writings of the New Testament: That which some would
allege in vindication thereof, is the saying of the Lord Jesus, Luke 14.23. Go
out into the Highways and Hedges and compel them to come in, that my House may
be filled. But if this saying of his be rightly considered and compared with
other Texts of Scripture, there will no such thing appear, as that he intended
to propagate the Gospel of Peace by outward Force and Severity; as for the
words Compel and Constrain, they are much what Synonymous, and do not always
import outward Force, Violence or Compulsion, but many times in the Scriptures
friendly Invitations, kind Entreaties, undeniable and demonstrable Reasons, and
gentle Persuasions, which are most agreeable to the meekness and gentleness of
that Spirit by which the true Ministers, and Servants of Christ, have been,
are, and ought to be acted in all their proceedings upon the Truths account: We
read that when Jesus appeared unto those two Disciples, that were going to
Emmaus, When they drew nigh to the Village, he made as though he would have
gone further, but they constrained him, and he went in to tarry with them.
There is no question but this constraint was by fair means, even by a kind
entreaty, as the Text expresses, [Abide with Vs] and reason was also urged for
it, because it was toward Evening, and the Day was far spent, Luke 24.28, 29.
Again its said, Jesus constrained his Disciples to get into a Ship, Mat. 14.22.
And we read, that when Lydia's Heart was opened, she constrained Paul and his
Company to come into her House and abide there, Acts 16.15. Also the Apostle
Paul in his Speech to Peter says, Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Live as
do the Jews? Gal. 2.14. All which said Expressions, concerning Compulsion or
Constraint, do no way seem to hold out any thing of outward Force, Violence or
Severity; But rather earnest Entreaty, kind, gentle or strong Persuasions of
Reason, Love, etc.

And yet further if we consider the nature and tendency of that Discourse,
wherein the word Compel is made use of, Luke 14.23. there will no such thing
appear, as that any outward Force or Violence was intened by that Expression,
the Parable is of a certain man that made a Supper, and bad many Guests, and
they urge excuses, and come not; the Master of the House being angry, bids his
Servant go out into the Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in the Poor,
the Maimed, the Halt and the Blind; and that being done, and still room for
more; the Master sends again, saying, Go out into the Highways, and Hedges,
and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled. Now consider, if we
take the Parable literally, as it is, what manner of Force or Compulsion was
either needful or proper to be used to such Persons as are here mentioned? it
is not common to force Guests to a Feast, nor punish them if they come not;
neither is it likely that such Persons as had no better Provision then they
could get from the Highways and Hedges should need any outward Force, Violence
or Compulsion to bring them to a good Supper; if they were destitute of Succor
and Relief, a gentle and loving invitation to a Feast, and encouragements of
being kindly Entertained were sufficient reasons to compel them to go. And
also, if we consider it in aspiritual sense, the like reason will hold good any
way; for we can no way conceive that there is any occasion of using outward
Force of Compulsion to cause those that are spiritually poor, and in want, to
receive inward Help and Succor, their Necessities will sufficiently enduce
them to accept it, without any violent or forceable treating.

Further more as the Servants of Christ, and People of God, ought not by any
outward Compulsion to force People to receive their Testimony, and embrace
their Religion, whether they will or no: So on the other hand, if those in
public Authority, who are concerned in the Government of this World, shall
happen to Molest, Trouble and Persecute them, for and upon the account of the
exercise of their Consciences toward God, and thereby endeavor to force them
to deny their Religion, and to embrace another; although such Persecutors do
greatly Err in such practices, yet it does no way appear to be consistant with
Christianity for those who are Persecuted, upon that account, to make any
public Resistance by outward Force or Violence; but they ought patiently to
suffer what Afflictions the Lord is pleased to permit to come upon them in
those Cases: which thing is plainly manifest by the Example of our Lord Jesus,
as also by the Doctrine and Practice of his Apostles. We read that when our
Lord Jesus was apprehended by the Jews, one of those that were with him drew
his Sword, and smote a Servant of the high Priest, but Jesus was so far from
encouraging People in such actions that he had him put up his Sword in its
Place, saying, All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat.
26.51, 52, 53. There Is no question, but if our Lord had seen it requisite to
have made forceable Resistance, he might have prayed the Father and have had
Legions of Angels to have assisted him; but he was other wise disposed, When he
was Reviled, he Reviled not again; When he Suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges Righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. Also the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, gives an account how they
behaved themselves in these Cases; Being Reviled (says he) we Bless; being
Persecuted, we suffer it; being Defamed we Entreat; we are made as the filth of
the World, and are (accounted as) the off scouring of all things, unto this
day, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. Again the Apostle says, Avenge not your selves, but
rather give place unto Wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will
repay, says the Lord, Romans 12.19. The Weapons of the Saints warfare were not
Carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. Neither did they wrestle with Flesh and Blood, Ephesians.
6.12. But in all Christian Patience, Meekness and Self-denial they were willing
to bear the Reproaches and Contradictions of sinful men, and that for the sake
of him in whom they had believed; Preces and Lachrymae, Prayers and Tears were
the Arms they used upon these accounts; and those that suffer thus, according
to the will of God, were to commit the keeping of their Souls unto him, in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. and herein was their Peace
and Safety.

Section X. Concerning the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers.
FOrasmuch as those whose Ministry does proceed from the Grace and Spirit of
God, do not Force or Compel People to receive their Testimony, whether they
will or no; neither do they go about to Force or Compel any to Maintain them,
but as they are Gospel Ministers, they are content with a Gospel allowance. We
read, that when our Lord sent forth his Disciples to preach the Kingdom of
Heaven at hand, amongst other things that he gave them in charge, he says unto
them, Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. And into whatsoever City
ye enter, and they receive you, Eat such things as are set before you, Luke
10.8. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, when you depart
out of that House, or City, shake off the dust of your Feet, etc. Mat. 10.14.
From whence diverse things are to be observed, First, What the Disciples had to
Preach, they had freely received it. Secondly, They were not to require Wages
for Preaching, but to do it freely. Thirdly, They were to eat such things as
were set before them, only where they were received. Fourthly, They were to be
so far from being clamourous for Relief of them that did not receive them, that
they were not to suffer the dust of their City to cleave to them, but to wipe
it off against them. And as this was the way of Maintenance and Relief, that
was appointed by our Lord for such as were sent forth to preach the Gospel; so
we no where find that the Apostles or Servants of Christ did act contrary
thereunto, so as to force any, by outward Compulsion, to maintain them whether
they would or no; for that would have been quite contrary to the way of Christ,
and to the nature of that Religion which he Instituted.

And if so then it was unlawful for those whom Christ immediately sent to
preach the Gospel, outwardly to force or compel any either to receive their
Testimony, or Maintain them, I hope few will deny but that it is much more
unlawful for those, whom Christ never sent, to claim any such privilege.

As for Tithes, which many of those who now pretend to be Gospel Ministers will
needs claim, and which many of them do Sue, Trouble, Molest and Imprison their
peaceable Neighbors about; we do no where find them appointed in the writings
of the New Testament as due to the Gospel Ministry* It Is true, in the writings
of the Old Testament, Numb. 18.
we find that God did choose Aaron and his Sons for the office of the
Priesthood, and he did also choose the rest of the Tribe of Levi for the service
of the Tabernacle, and gave them the tenth in Israel for their Service; those
Levites were to offer up a Heave Offering to the Lord out of their Tithe, and
were to give it to Aaron the Priest, for himself and his Sons; and this was all
the share which we find the Legal Priest to have appointed him in Tithes, even
the tenth of the tenth, and that from the hand of the Levites; moreover, those
Tithes were only due and payable, by Gods appointment, from the Children of
Israel, unto the Levites of that Land, and that because the Tribe of Levi had
no other Inheritance allotted them there, among their Brethren.

But now it is to be observed that our Lord Jesus Christ has by offering up
himself, as a Lamb without spot unto God, put an end unto that Legal
Priesthood, and Service which received Tithes, and blotted out the handwriting
of Ordinances against us, Col. 2.14.
nailing it to his Cross; and has instituted a Worship and Service more pure
and spiritual then that which was performed under the Dispensation of the Law.
We do no where find that he has either limited Tithes, or any other stinted
maintenance for the Gospel Ministry, but has left that as a free and voluntary
Act of those that did own and receive his Messengers and Servants, urging this,
The Workman is worthy of his Meat. And truly so he is: Those who receive
Spirituals from the Servants of Christ, will no doubt be willing to communicate
Temporals unto them, (that is so much as is needful for them.) They are not to
mind high things, Romans (...) Heb. (...) 1 Timothy 6.8.
nor to (...) after great Places and Preferments, Annual Stipends, Sallaries
and Augmentations, nor yet desist, or let fall their Testimony, for want of a
settled Maintenance, but having Food and Raiment are there with to be content;
and so to proceed as the Lord shall make way for them, trusting him with the
care of their Bodies as well as of their Souls. And truly those who according
to the Exhortation of the Apostle do thus cast their care upon God upon these
accounts shall not want, 1 Pet. 5.10
because he cares for them, and will open the Hearts of those, unto whom they
Minister that so they may relieve them, according to their Necessities; and
thus the Lord is known and acknowledged to be the Author of their Maintenance,
as well as of their Ministry.

That which some would allege to prove a forced and stinted Maintenance for
the Gospel Ministry, is the saying of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 9.7, 9, 11, 13,
14. which being rightly considered, does no way hold out any such thing as a
forced, or stinted Maintenance; the Apostle in the 4th verse remembers the
Words of Christ, and says, Have we not power to Ear and to Drink? etc. and then
in the 7th verse he ands, Who goes a Warfare at any time at his own Charge?
Who planteth a Vineyard and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who feeds a
Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? etc. These Texts of Scripturce
do not at all encourage a forced Maintenance, nor altogether set forth what the
Maintenance is, but rather who they are from whom it is to be received;
consider at whose charge ought the Soldier to go a warfare, but at his or
theirs for whose defense he Fights? He that plants a Vineyard may eat of the
Fruit, but it must be of Fruit thereof: He that feeds a Flock may eat of the
Milk, but it must be of the Milk of the Flock which he feeds: The Ox that trod
out the Corn was not to be muzled, but to be feed by him whose Corn he trod
out; bet it was not agreeable to the equity of the Law, that while the Ox trod
out Corn for one man, another should be fore'd to keep him; If, says he, we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your
carnal things? 1 Cor. 9.11. No it is no great thing, for if he had sown unto
them, and they received of him, he might by Christ appointment expect to
receive of them.

Again he says, They which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Yes
they may so, and ought to be content with it; but then this does not argue,
that they shall live of the Law, or that any under the pretense of a Gospel
Maintenance should impose upon Christians the Bondage of a Mosaical
Institution, viz. the exaction of Tithes, or any other forced Maintenance; for
that although Tithes were due by the Law of Moses, yet they were terminated
with the Service they were given for, and there is no appearance of any ground
for any to claim them by virtue of any Gospel Authority. As for the Words of
the Apostle Paul, above recited, they do amount to no more then this, That
Gospel Ministers may receive a Gospel Maintenance, from such as receive them
and their Doctrine, but not from such as receive them not, nor do own their
Ministry; and what this Gospel Maintenance is we find it plainly set forth by
Christ himself, in his Speech to his Disciples, Eat such things as are set
before you: Eat and Drink such things as they give, for the Workman is worthy
of his Meat, Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.7. By which Expressions we may conceive that
the necessary conveniences of Life are intimated and to be understood.

And yet for a further confirmation of our Sense and Judgment in these
respects, we may consider what the practice of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ were in the primitive times, and what they exhorted others unto upon
these accounts: We find that when the Apostle Paul had told the Corinthians,
how that a necessity was laid upon him, yea woe was unto him if he preached not
the Gospel; he puts the Question, 1 Cor. 9.16, 18.
What is my Reward then? and answers it saying, Verily that when I preach the
Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without Charge. Also the same Apostle,
when he took his leave of the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, thus expresses
himself, I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel, ye your selves
know that these Hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were
with me; I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to
support the Weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, It is more
blessed to give then to receive. From whence we may observe, First, That he was
so far from any eager persuit after worldly Wealth, great Benefits and
Revenues, that he says, He coveted no man's Gold, Silver nor Apparel. Secondly,
His own Hands had ministered to his Necessities, and them that were with him: By
which it appears that he was not inclined to Idleness, in expectation to be
maintained out of other men's Labors, but he wrought with his own Hands, as he
intimates himself, and as also appears Acts 18.1, 2, 3. Being a Tent-maker by
Occupation. Thirdly, He does not at all encourage them in Idleness, but on the
contrary tells them, That so laboring ( viz. as he had done) they ought to
support the Weak, and to remember the words of Jesus, It is more blessed to
give then to receive. And again the same Apostle, 2 These. 3.7, 8. writes thus,
For your selves know, how ye ought to follow us; for we behaved not our selves
disorderly among you; neither did we eat any man's Bread for naught; but wrought
with Labor and Travel Night and Day, that we might not be chargable to any of
you. Likewise the Apostle Peter, in his Exhortation to the Elders, says unto
them, Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind;
neither as being Lords ever Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock, 1
Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. By all which recited Passages, it is plainly manifest, that the
Apostles had a great eat not to be burdensome to any, and that the Gospel of
Christ might be preserved without Charge; they were so far from compelling or
forcing a Maintenance, from such as did not own nor receive them, that they
forbore to make use of that Power which Christ allowed them, even among such as
did receive them. It seems the Apostle Paul wrought with his Hands (when he had
an opportunity) and exhorted the Brethren to be followers of him, and mark them
that walk so as they had them for an ensample, Phil. 3.17.
and there is small question but the rest of the Apostles were like-minded with
him: We see that Peter is so far from allowing the Elders to act by Constraint,
or to insist upon great Wages and Revenues for their Service, that he quite
opposes it in these words, Not by Constraint, not for filthy Lucre, observe the
Epithet that he bestows upon Lucre, nothing less then Filthy: It seems he
looked upon it as a filthy thing, for such as were to Feed and Nourish the
Flock of God, and to take the oversight thereof, that their Hearts and Minds
should be so bent upon worldly Preferments, and exercised in covetous
Practices, as to do what they did for filthy Lucre sake; therefore he does with
much sharpness enlarge upon that matter, in his second Chapter of his second
Epistle, as may be there seen at large.

Thus as it was the way of the Ministers and Servants of Christ in the
primitive times, to act according to the Precepts and Directions of our blessed
Lord, and to advise and exhort others thereunto, and also to bear 'Testimony
against such as tranfgress upon these accounts; so also it highly concerns all
those who pretend to be Ministers of Christ in this our day, to search and try
their ways, and in the Light of Christ seriously to weigh and examine the
matter, whether they be truly called, qualified and acted by the Spirit of
Christ yea or nay? if they be, no question but they will manifest the same in
Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, Christian-forbearance, Charity and Doctrine;
as also in acting according to the Directions of Christ, and Practice of his
People: But on the contrary, if any under that pretense be found in a Proud,
Lordly, Covetous and Persecuting Spirit, walking in the steps of those whom the
true Prophets and Servants of Christ have always testified against; it greatly
behooves all People to beware of them, according to the directions of our
blessed Lord, Mat. 7.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in
Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ^^^^ning Wolves; ye shall know them by
their ^^uits. Forasmuch as they have a show of Christianity, and so thereby are
clothed with Sheeps clothing, but being inwardly departed from the pure, holy,
meek and peaceable Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, they endeavor to
Persecute, Tear and Devour them that are not willing to Feed and Relieve them,
and so therein they are ravening Wolves. I do not hereby place any particular
charge upon any, but leave every one to see and know by their Fruits, desiring
that all those who are under those Circumstances and Qualities may come to
Repentance, and amendment of Life, whilst the day of their Visitation lasts;
otherwise all their pretenses to Christianity, or the ministerial Function,
will not rescue them in that day, when the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth,
does recompense every one according to their Deeds.

Section XI. Concerning PRAYER.
THat now which yet further remains to be considered, is those other Duties and
Services which are to be done and performed by true Believers, either in
private or in their public Assemblies; and upon this account shall mention
that of Prayer, which is very necessary for the People of God to be found in
the practice of, being a duty incumbent upon us, and frequently commanded and
exhorted unto in the holy Scriptures, and as it is necessary for all those who
are concerned in the Church of Christ, in public Testimonies and Declarations,
to be supplied and assisted in those Services by the Grace and Spirit of
Christ; even so, also it is by the help and influence of the same Spirit, that
the People of God are enabled to pray acceptably unto him, and without the help
thereof, in some degree or other, true Prayer cannot be performed.

That the Spirit of Christ is absolutely necessary upon this account is clear
even from the words of Christ, Without me ye can do nothing -- Also the Apostle
Paul says, The Spirit also helps our Infirmities, for we know not what me
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us,
with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered; and he that searches the Hearts
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because be makes Intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. Again, Praying always,
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto, with
all perseverance and Supplication for all Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. And also in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, I will pray with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. From whence several things are observable,
First, That Gods People can do nothing that is acceptable unto him, without
Christ, and the help of his Spirit. Secondly, That of themselves they know not
what to pray for as they ought. Thirdly, That it is the Spirit which helps
such Infirmities, and makes Intercession unto God for his People Fourthly, The
way and manner of the Spirits Intercession, with Sighs and Groans that cannot
be uttered. Fifthly, That God graciously receives the Prayers of such as are
offered and presented unto him by the Spirit, forasmuch as Intercession is
thereby made for them, according to the will of God. Sixthly, The Apostle,
being sensible of the acceptance, and prevalency of such Prayers, does exhort
the Ephesians to pray always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit,
and to watch thereunto withal Perseverance. Seventhly, He gives an account how
he himself will pray, saying, I will pray with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also.

Thus then, as the Prayers of such who wait for, and receive Divine Assistance,
do obtain Divine Acceptance; so on the contrary the Prayers of wicked and
ungodly men, who receive not, nor expect any such spiritual help, but are acted
by the Spirit of Error and Vanity, can no way be acceptable unto God, nor
beneficial to themselves. The Scriptures do afford us diverse Testimonies to
this purpose; David says, If I regard Iniquity in my Heart the Lord will not
hear me, Psalm. 66.18. Solomon says, The Sacrifice of the Wicked is abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. And again, He that turns his Ear from the Law, even
his Prayer shall be abomination. Also the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah, says to
the People of Israel, that had forsaken the Lord, and rebelled against his
Spirit, and so become a sinful Nation, (...) 2, 3.13.
When ye spread forth your Hands I will hide mine Eyes from you, yea when you
make many Prayers I will not hear, your Hands are full of Blood. Again, we read
John 9.31. We know that God hears not Sinners, but of any be a worshipper of
God, and does his will, him hears. And also 1. Pet. 3.12. The Eyes of the
Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Prayers, but the
Face of the Lord is against (...) that do Evil. Thus it is plain that the
Prayers and Sacrifices of Wicked and Sinful men have not been acceptable unto
God, (which they remained in that state) but rather an abomination unto him,
being not offered in sincerity of Heart, nor under a right disposition of Soul
and Spirit.

The Jews of old thought it sufficient for them if they did but pay their daily
Sacrifices, and offer their customary Oblations, etc. from thence concluding
all was well; but it proved not so, for the Lord by the Prophet asks them, To
what purpose was the multitude of their? Sacrifices? and bids them bring no
more vain Oblations: Incense (says he) is an abomination unto me, the new Moons
and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies is Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting.
And again, by the Prophet Amos he says, Though you offer me Burnt Offerings,
and Meat Offerings, I will not accept them; neither will I regard the Peace
Offerings of your fat Beasts. And what was the reason of all this dislike? Even
because the People were Wicked and Sinful; Therefore he says, Wash ye, make ye
Clean, put away the evil of your doings from before my Eyes, cease to do Evil,
learn to do Well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless,
and plead for the Widow. And then no question but they might be accepted.

As it was with the Jews in that state, so its probable the case may be with
many of those called Christians now, who think is sufficient for them to be
present at the reading over of Morning and Evening Prayers, etc. according to
the common Form and Custom; and yet do not rightly consider that their Hearts
are polluted and deiled with Sin and Iniquity, which no question will block up
their way from Divine acceptance, as well as it did unto Israel of old. As for
Sin it is a thing that cannot be Christened, neither will the Righteous God own
it in any, let their pretense be what it will. It has always been the cause of
man's Woe and Misery, and of his Separation from God in all Ages; and its the
same now where People remain in it, and continue Impenitent and in Rebellion
against the Reproofs and Counsel of the Light and Spirit of Christ in
themselves; Your Iniquities (says the Prophet) have separated between you and
your God; and your Sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear, Isa
59.2. They shall call upon me (says Wisdom) but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.28. It is not simply the
calling upon God, or making mention of his blessed Name that gains acceptance
with him, or draws down his blessings upon men; but it is a calling upon him in
Faith, and in a rightly ordered and well-disposed. Mind and Spirit, For unto
this m^n will I look (says the Lord), even to him (...) is Poor and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word, Isa 66.2. Again, The Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him in Truth, he will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him, he also will hear their cry and will save them; the Lord preserves all
them that Love him, but the Wicked will he Destroy, Psalm. 145, 18, 19, 20.

Howbeit still although the Prayers of Wicked and Sinful Men, whilst they
remain in Impenitency and Rebellion against God, are not acceptable unto him;
yet nevertheless such as are polluted with Sin and Iniquity, and do come to be
secretly touch, and awakened by the Light and Spirit of Christ, and are bowed
down under the sense of their own Sinfulness, unworthiness, Misery, Weakness
for Inability, such looking up to God, and inwardly breathing forth, secret
Desires and Aspirations, or uttering Words in Prayer and Supplication unto him
for help and deliverance from under the bondage of Sin and Corruption; the Lord
God in his own due time will undoubtedly hear and answer the desires of such:
But still this does no, way admit that wicked and ungodly men are capable of
praying acceptably, any otherwise then as they are touched, awakened and helped
by the Spirit of Christ, and being truly bowed down under the sense of God
goodness, and their own unworthness, are led to Repentance, and so by the grace
of God are drawn to supplicate his Name for Help and Deliverance. We read that
when the Apostle Peter, exhorted Simon the Sorcerer unto Prayer, h^^ places
Repentance before it, saying, Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thy Heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 8.22.
Again, Repent ye therefore, and be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord,
Acts 3.19. From whence it is observable, That as Repentance does go before
Prayer, so also does Repentance and Conversion go before blotting out of Sin.
Now as to the Prayers of those who are high and lofty in Mind and Spirit, and
take delight in Sin and Ungodliness, and to spend their precious time in
Vanity, Folly and Madness; and also of those who may seem outwardly to be more
demure, yet spiritually rest in the gall of Bitterness against the Truth, and
in the bond of Iniquity, there may seem to be little defference of their
Devotions in the ground as to Divine acceptance, so long as both sorts of
People remain in Impenitency; for the first can turn out of their vain
Conversation, or however suspend the outward act thereof for a little season;
and the other their worldly Discourse, and so fall to repeat some few words of
Prayer in a formal and customary way, and immediately again, even as soon as
ever the words to God are out of their Mouths (without any true regard to the
Greatness and Majesty of him to whom they have even been making Supplication)
they will fall on again upon their former Discourse, and many times (as has been
observed) upon Vain, Idle and Profane Talk; so that without any distinction or
waiting for divine help to perform their Duties to God, they appear to be acted
by one and the same Spirit upon both accounts: Certainly! If there be any such
thing as vain Oblations and Prayers that God regards not, (as no question but
there is) those Prayers and Devotions which are thus begun, carried on, and
concluded in man's own natural Will, Strength and Wisdom (without the help and
influence of the Grace and Spirit of Christ) are of that number.

Object. Its probable some may allege, That our Lord taught his Disciples to
Pray, and gave them a Form of Prayer.

Answ. In answer whereunto I say, That although he did so, yet they were in
some sort Disciples before he taught them, (not worldly men) and his teaching
them at that time is not an argument that every one, in their own will and
time, can say that Prayer acceptably, but we may rather infer from thence, That
as they then were not to pray as the Hypocrites and Heathen did, but according
as he taught them, being then outwardly present with them; even so his People
are not to pray now as the Hypocrites and Heathen do, but according as he
teaches them being spiritually presents with them; yet nevertheless that Prayer
which he taught them, as it was then, so it is now very good and useful unto
such as can express those Words, there set forth, in Truth and Righteousness:
Those who have received the adoption of Sons, by virtue of the holy Spirit,
have right to call God Father, and may say in Truth, Our Father which art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done, (...) Earth
as it is in Heaven, etc. But on the contrary, How can those who are Children of
Wrath, and subject to the power of Darkness, truly call God Father? How can
they who are altogether unholy hallow the Name of God? What will it avan such
to tell of the coming of Gods Kingdom, who daily rebel against that which would
give an entrance thereunto? How can those do the will of God in Earth, who
neither regard that which would enable them thereunto, nor will believe that
any such thing an be done? Thus al tho wicke ungodly men may tell of Prayer,
yet in that state they are quite out of order, and utterly incapable of
performing it acceptably, until they have received the Spirit, and have the
help and influence thereof, in some degree or other; which thing yet leads me
to this further observation, If no man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost, as the Apostle positively affirms, 1. Cor. 12.3. Then how can any truly
call God Father, but as they are in some measure acted by the Spirit of the Son.

Howbeit, I would have none to suspect that I do in the least intend hereby to
discourage People in being diligent in Prayer and Supplication unto God
Almighty, but I would Caution and Exhort them, in the Light of Christ, to wait
for the help and influence of his Grace and Spirit in such undertakings, that
so they may be enabled to perform those Duties acceptably, before words be
uttered unto the Lord, let it first be considered how the Heart is prepared,
and from what root the words do proceed, for it is not simply the words, but
the rise thereof that the Lord looks at in all our Services and Devotions
before him. And as those that fail in the Foundation do hazard the
Superstructure; even so where People fall wrong in the very ground of their
Devotions, their further proceedings therein will be in danger to prove
Insignificant and Unsuccessful. I do not say but that God, who is rich in Mercy
and waits to be gracious unto People, does and will pass by many Weaknesses and
Imperfections upon these accounts, yet none ought so to presume thereon, as to
make the particular acts of Gods Love and Condescension unto some, and upon
some accounts, to be a general rule for all, or to be an excuse or cover unto
any for Disobedience and Rebellion; it is certainly the duty of all to be
diligent in Prayer and Supplication unto God, and I cannot but exhort all
People thereunto; but then it does not follow that any shall attempt such
performances, or go about the same being unprepared by the Spirit of God, for
that thereby, if they have been negligent in Prayer before, they will be so far
from mending the matter, that they will incur a fresh censure; therefore let it
be the care of every one, that goes about to perform the duty of Prayer, to
watch and wait upon God diligently, for the help and concurrence of his blessed
and holy Spirit in all such undertakings; and also when they feel and witness
themselves to be rightly disposed in Spirit for approaching before the Lord in
Prayer and Supplication unto him, let them consider themselves in his presence,
and be careful to appear in an humble and reverent posture of Body, as well as
Soul, (that is) in a decent, orderly and comely manner, as much as well can be,
with bowed Knees, Ephe. 3.12. 1 Cor. 11.4.
and men with uncovered Heads, (according to the Practice and Direction of the
Apostle in those cases) thereby showing forth that holy Submission, Reverence
and Respect every way, which we all owe to the Divine Majestly, unto whom all
Honor, Glory and Praise is due, world without end.

Section XII. Concerning Singing of Pssalms, and Artisscial Music.
THe next thing to be considered is Singing of Pssalmes, which is confessed to be
a part of Gods Worship, and very acceptable as it proceeds from a true sense of
God Love in the Heart and arises from the influence of the holy Spirit, whereby
the Lords People are led to breath forth unto God in a sweet and spiritual
Harmony, or in Words suitable to their present Condition; but then on the
contrary, when vain minded People do go about to (...) in their own will and
time (...) a for^al, seigned and customary way, (...) having the knowledge of
the motion and concurrence of the Divine Spirit, and Word of Life in the Heart,
such Singing can no way be acceptable unto God, nor beneficial unto those that
use it; for as it was in the case of Preaching and Praying so it is in this of
Singing, the holy Spirit is to be the chief and principal Author, Mover and
Actor in these respect.

Which thing will yet further appear, if we consider the Words of the Apostle
Paul upon this account, Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but be
filled with the Spirit, Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody unto the Lord, Ephesians 5. 18, 19. And
again, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, Teaching and
Admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing with
Grace in your Hearts to the Lord, Col. 3.16. From whence it is manifest, That
those Songs, and that Melody, which the Saints and Children of God are to be
sound in the practice of, are to spring and arise from that which is pure and
holy; therefore it is to be observed, that he tells them of being filled with
the Spirit, and of the Word of Christ dwelling richly in them, before he
mentions Singing, or making Melody to the Lord; and also the same Apostle gives
an account what he himself will do upon this account, saying, I will sing with
the Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15.

As for the Songs of wicked, vain and ungodly People, who daily rebel against
the Light and Spirit of the Lord, and the pure motions and conceptions thereof
in themselves; we do no where find that such have ever obtained divine
acceptance, in their exercise therein, whilst they have continued in Vanity
and Wickedness, for the Lord by his Servants has still testified against them:
Concerning Israel he says, Take thou away from me the noise of thy Songs, for
I will not hear the melody of thy Viols, Amos 5.23. Also, I will turn your
Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentation, Amos 8.10. And of
Tyrus he says, I will cause the noise of thy Songs to cease, and the sound of
thy Harps shall no more be heard, Ezekiel. 26.13. And what was the reason of all
this? Even Sin and Iniquity, for that has always been the cause of Disunion
and Separation between God and man.

Object. Its probable some may allege the saying of the Apostle James, Is any
among you Afflicted? let him Pray. Is any Merry? let him sing Psalms. And
would infer from thence, That if any be inclined to Mirth they may Sing by the
Apostles Directions.

Answ. In answer thereunto I say, That there are two sorts of Mirth: The one is
a Mirth or Joy that springs up in the Hearts and Souls of Gods People, being
touched and overcome with the Love and Presence of God, as David said, In thy
Presence is fullness of Joy; at thy right hand are Pleasures for evermore,
Psalm. 16.11. Also in Isaiah, Behold my Servants shall sing for joy of Heart,
Isa. 65.14. And Christ says, I will see you again, and your Hearts shall
rejoice, and your Joy no man takes from you; John 16.22.

The other sort of Mirth or Joy is the Joy of wicked and sinful Men, or that
Mirth which arises from a vain, foolish and wanton Mind. The Apostle James is
so far from directing such to sing Psalms, that in the same Epistle he tells
them of Mourning and Heaviness, saying, Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners, and
purify your Hearts ye double minded; be Afflisted and Mourn; let your Laughter
be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness, James 4.8, 9. Also
Solomon spoke of this Mirth and said, In Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and
the end of that Mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14.13. Again he says, The Heart of
Fools is in the House of Mirth, Eccles. 7.4. Also the Prophet speaking
concerning Israel that was Apostatized and gone from the Lord, and the counsel
of his Spirit, amongst other things says, I will also cause her mirth to cease,
Hosea 2.11. Thus then as it is manifest, that there is two sorts of Mirth or
Joy, and that the Mirth or Joy of the Wicked is but Vanity; therefore we may
conclude, that the Mirth spoken of by the Apostle, was that true Mirth or Joy
that arises in the Hearts of Gods People, being secretly touched and overcome
with the Love and Goodness of God, and those who are witnesses of this true
Mirth and Joy, may sing Psalms according to the Apostles directions upon that
account.

Object, Some may object and say, That although the Lord disowns vain Mirth,
yet David 's Psalms are very good and useful, and may be sung by those
professing Christianity.

Answ. Although David's Psalms are very good and useful, yet it does not
therefore follow that any can sing them acceptably, unless they be in some
measure endued with that Spirit of God David was endued with, and be under the
fence and exercise of what they speak: It is not only the repeating or singing
over of good Words that the Lord looks at, (as has been before observed) but
it is the frame and disposition of their Souls and Spirits, from whom those
words do actually proceed: There Is no question but the Singers of Israel could
express themselves with great Curiosity, and draw out their Notes very exactly;
but what signified all that, so long as it was not real, but only formal, and
that their Hearts were adulterated from the Lord? To what purpose can any
rationally suppose it to be for People to sing David's Psalms in Readiness
Spirit? or for those who spend their precious time in Wickedness, Folly and
Vanity (and do very seldom think of Divine and Spiritual matters, or of the
Eternal and Irrevocable decree that must in one day be past upon them) to sing
thus; I am weary with my Groanings. All the Night make I my Bed to Swim. I
water my Couch with Tears. My Heart is like Wax, it is melted in the midst of
my Bowels. My Heart is not haughty, nor my Eyes lofty. My Soul is even as a
weaned Child. I have hated the Congregation of Ev l-Doers, and will not sit
with the Wicked. I have set the Lord always before me. My Heart is endicting a
good matter. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, and have kept thy Law. Thy
Statutes have been my Songs in the House of my Pilgrimage. Thy Testimonies have
I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my Heart. Lord I
have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine Honor
dwells. These were David's Words, and its very likely that he was a Witness
of what he spoke in these respects; but then for any to undertake to sing them
before the Lord, because David spoke them, and not because they are witnesses
of such things in themselves, nor of the Work and Influence of the Grace and
Spirit of Christ, by which these things are effected; such Singers will not
meet with divine acceptance in such performances, nor is Singing in the least
suitable to their State and Condition, but rather Mourning and Lamentation
because of Sin and Transgression.

Howbeit still, although the Songs of the Wicked shall be turned into
Lamentation, and their Mirth into Heaviness in one day, (if they report not)
yet the Righteous shall Rejoice and be exceeding Glad in the Lord, and shall
sing to his Praise and Glory, in the Congregations of his People; as David
said, Sing unto the Lord (O ye Saints of his) and give thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness, Psalm. 30.4. Again, Sing unto the Lord a new Song,
and his Praise in the Congregation of Saints, Psalm. 149. 1. Its only those who
by the Power and Spirit of Christ are gathered and redeemed out of the
Defilements and Vanities of this World, that can truly sing this new Song, as
John said, No man could learn that Song, but the hundred and forty four
thousand which were redeemed from the Earth, Rev. 14.3. Such can sing the Songs
of Sion, and the Songs of Deliverance in the Land of the Living, and can truly
Magnify and Extol that great and powerful Name by which they have known
Salvation.

As for artificial Music although it was practiced in the Jewish Church, yet
we do neither find any Precept or President for it in the writings of the new
Testament: We read that David had Singers, and appointed men to make use of
Musical Instruments, (yea and sometimes made use thereof himself) yet we have
cause to believe that what he appointed to be done upon these accounts, was not
intended by him for gratifying vain, foolish and wanton Minds, but the more to
influence and affect the People, at that time, with that Worship and Service of
God, and to sing Praises to his holy Name; therefore says he, Awake, up my
Glory, awake Psaltery and Harp; I my self will awake early. I will praise thee,
O Lord, among the People; I will sing unto thee among the Nations, Psalm. 57.8,
9. Again, Make a joyful noise unto God all ye Lands, sing forth the honor of
his Name, make his Praise Glorious, Psalm 66.1, 2.

But then, although David's intent might be good in making use of those Musical
Instruments at that time, yet we read that when Israel was departed from the
Lord, and the Counsel of his Spirit, and made use of those things in a Formal
and Customary way, the Lord declared against them saying, Take thou away from
me the noise of thy Songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy Viols, Amos
5.23. And again, Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the Mountain
of Samaria -- That Chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves
Instruments of Music like David: That drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chiefest Ointments, but they are not grieved for the
Afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.1, 5, 6. From whence it is manifest, That it was
then so far from being acceptable unto God, for Vain, Wicked and Sinful men to
Chant to the sound of the Viol, and to invent unto themselves Instruments of
Music like David, that the Lord declares he will not hear their melody, and
also pronounces a Woe against them that are in the practice of such things; and
inasmuch as it was so then that the Lord was pleased to declare and testify
against the Songs and Melody of the Jews, under that Dispensation; it certainly
behooves those who are called Christians seriously to consider what ground there
is in true Christianity for the use of artificial Music upon any account
whatsoever, and especially in the performance of their Devotions to God
Almighty; for as has been before observed, we do no where find that either
Christ or his Apostles did at any time either command or recommend any such
thing to be used among Christians; not does it in the least appear that the
practice thereof is any way consistant with the Purity and Spirituality of that
Religion and Worship which was Instituted by our blessed Lord, and Practiced by
his Disciples and Followers in the primitive times.

The Conclusion.
SInce then it is clearly manifest, by what has been said, that it is the Lord
Jesus Christ, by his Grace and Spirit, that is (and ought to be) the chief and
principal mover and actor in the Hearts and Souls of his People, in order to
call and gather them out of the Vanities and Pollutions of this present World,
and to fit, prepare and qualife them for performing that pure and spiritual
Worship and Service which is acceptable unto God in this Gospel day, whether it
be in public Preaching, Testimonies and Declarations, or in Prayers, Praises
and Thanksgivings unto him; and that all men in their natural and unconverted
State (notwithstanding human Abilities) until they be converted to God, and
have the help (...) all such undertakings, shall certainly feel and witness the
returns of Divine Love, Life, Peace and Satisfaction, from the hand of the
Lord, unto their Immortal Souls; and shall be secretly uphelp, supplied and
supported by the blessed and holy power of God in all Straits and Difficulties
that shall attend them upon the account of their service to God and his Truth,
and shall also be enabled, thereby, to persever in Faith and Patience unto the
end of their Course, until such time as it shall please the Lord God, of
Eternal Glory, to call, gather and remove them hence into an heavenly
Habitation of Rest and Peace, with him forever: So that when the Wicked and
Rebellious shall be seized upon with perpetual Sorrow and Anguish, those who
have thus received the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his blessed and powerful hand
have been conducted to their Eternal Mansion, shall together with all the
Saints and Children of God, that are gone before them, Everlastingly Praise,
Magnify and Adore the Divine Majesty, who alone is worthy of all Honor,
Glory, Praise, Magnitude and Dominion, at this time, henceforth and for
evermore, Amen.

ERATA.
In the Title Page, line 12. read revealed in men, in the Preface page 2. line
4. for Religions, read Religious. p. 4. l. 3. f. anology, r. anology. p. 5. l.
13. f. saw the, r. saw that the. p. 17. l. 14. f. hollow, r. hallow. p. 20. l.
2. f. meet, r. met. p. 38. l. 18. f. silent, r. in silence. p. 43. lines 3, 4,
5, 6. not to be ^alick Letter. p. 51. l. 2. dele unto. p. 59. l. 18. f.
intened, r. intended. p. 68. l. 16. f. feed, r. fed. l. 25. f. Christ, r.
Christ's. p. 88. l. 11. f. God, r. Gods.

THE END.

